INATA Ah IS 4155 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Tatar athe fafenror wart sik 
Gath Tart A Haera rir 
eara 


(TETI FAQAT ) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 
Chemical and Radiation Hazards and 
Hazardous Chemicals 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.01 
©BIS 2025 
mAAR SAT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR A, 9 FEME SLAT, ag fewett - 110002 
S MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2023 Price Group 17 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


‘This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council’. 


Realizing the rapid pace of industrialization within the country it was considered expedient to take up formulation of 
standards on definition and classification of chemical hazards; laboratory and industrial chemical hazards including air 
pollution. The concerned committee, while formulating standards on different aspects covered under its scope felt that 
formulation of a standard glossary of technical terms relating to chemical and radiation hazards and hazardous chemicals 
was necessary. Commonly used scientific terms may have a different import when specifically used in relation to 
different types of chemical hazards. That such a need for standardization of terminology for avoiding ambiguity and 
confusion in the use of the terms is vitally called for has been amply borne out through experience gained in the 
formulation of Indian Standards relating to laboratory, industrial and air pollution hazards. 


This standard was originally published in 1966. Due to the changes in the respective fields such as Industry, Science and 
Technology that have happened, it has become necessary to review and update the existing glossary of terms. 
Consequently, this first revision has been prepared to keep all the definitions up to date with the latest definitions given 
in various publications such as International Standards, national regulations etc. as well as incorporating few additional 
terms and deleting some terms depending on their usage and meaning in the present context. In this revision amendment 
1 and 2 have been also incorporated. 


Should any difference exist between the definitions in this standard and those in the individual standards, the latter shall 
prevail. This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical definitions of terms, and it may not necessarily include 
all the legal interpretations of terms. 


This standard covers terms relating to chemical and radiation hazards and hazardous chemicals. Terms relating to air 
pollution have been covered separately. Terms relating to the principal chemical hazards, such as corrosive, explosive, 


flammable, oxidizing, poisonous and radioactive substances, have been include in this standard. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


Indian Standard 


IS 4155 : 2023 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO CHEMICAL AND 
RADIATION HAZARDS AND HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard defines technical terms relating to 
chemical and radiation hazards and hazardous 
chemicals. 


1.2 It does not include terms relating to air pollution. 
2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publications, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
IS 14352 Miner‘s Safety Goggles — Specification 
1996 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Chemical hazards 


A 


3.1.1 Abate — To eliminate a hazard to comply with a 
regulatory standard that is being violated. 


3.1.2 Abatement — Abatement is defined as an action 
by an employer to comply with a cited standard or 
regulation or to eliminate a recognized safety or health 
hazard identified by a regulatory board during an 
inspection. Examples of methods commonly used to 
abate cited hazards include the use of engineering 
controls, correction of deficiency in a program, or the 
use of permissible equipment to avoid a hazard. 


3.1.3 Abel Heat Test — The principle of the test is to 
note the time required to produce a standard tint on a 
potassium iodide-starch paper when the explosive is 
heated under specified conditions. 


3.1.4 Abiotic — This is a term used to describe anything 
which is characterized by the absence of life or 
incompatible with life. In toxicology and ecotoxicology 
it refers to physical (e.g. heat, sunlight) or chemical 
processes (e.g. hydrolysis) that are capable of 
modifying chemical structures. 


3.1.5 Abiotic Transformation — Any process in which 


a chemical in the environment is modified by non- 
biological mechanisms. 


3.1.6 Absorbed Dose (in toxicology) — The amount of 
a chemical absorbed into the body or into organs and 
tissues of interest. 


3.1.7 Absolute Application (Of CPQRA) — The 
application of CPQRA in which the results of the 
analysis are compared against predetermined risk 
targets. 


3.1.8 Absorbing Medium — A collection medium that 
allows for the penetration of airborne chemicals into the 
material where the chemicals will either physically 
dissolve or chemically react with the collection 
medium. 


3.1.9 Absorption — As applied to chemical hazards, 
refers to the process of penetration of a position intothe 
body. A material is said to be absorbed only when it has 
gained entry into the blood stream and consequently 
may be carried to all parts of the body. This requires 
that substances pass through the skin, mucous 
membrane or air sacs of the lungs. 


As applied to radiation hazards, refers to processes by 
which radiation imparts some or all of its energy toany 
material through which it passes. 


3.1.10 Absorbed Dose — The fundamental dosimetric 
quantity, D defined as D = de/dm, where, de is the mean 
energy imparted by ionizing radiation to matter in a 
volume element, and dm is the mass of matter in the 
volume element. The energy can be averaged over any 
defined volume, the average dose being equal to the 
total energy imparted in the volume divided by the mass 
in the volume. The SI unit of absorbed dose is joule per 
kilogram (J/Kg) termed as gray (Gy). 


3.1.11 Activity — The quantity A for an amount of 
radionuclide in a given energy state at a given time is 
defined as: 

A =(dN/dt) 
where 


dN is the expectation value of the number of 
spontaneous nuclear transformations from the 
given energy state in a time interval dt. The SI unit 
of activity is the reciprocal of seconds (st), termed 
the Becquerel (Bq) 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.12 Accelerating Rate Calorimetry (ARC) — A 
technique in which a substance is heated in stages until 
very slow decomposition [or other reaction] is detected. 
The substance is then held under adiabatic conditions 
and the course of the decomposition or other reaction is 
monitored. (Also the name of a commercial test 
apparatus). 


3.1.13 Acceptable Air Quality — Air in which there are 
no known contaminants at harmful levels as determined 
by occupational hygienists, and air with which 80 
percent to 90 percent of the people do not express 
dissatisfaction based on comfort criteria: temperature, 
relative humidity, non-hazardous odors, and air 
movement. 


3.1.14 Acceptable Daily Intake (Pesticide Residues) — 
The acceptable daily intake of a chemical is the daily 
intake which, during an entire life time, appears to be 
without appreciable risk to the health of the consumer 
on the basis of all the known facts at the time when a 
toxicological assessment is carried out. It is expressed 
in milligrams of the chemical per kilogram of body 
weight. 


3.1.15 Acceptable Risk — Risk level deemed 
acceptable by an individual, organization, or society as 
a whole. 


3.1.16 Acceptance Sampling — The procedures by 
which decisions to accept or reject a sampled lot or 
population are made based on the results of a sample 
inspection. In air pollution work, acceptance sampling 
could be used when checking a sample of filters for 
certain measurable characteristics such as pH, tensile 
strength, or collection efficiency to determine 
acceptance or rejection of a shipment of filters, or when 
checking the chemical content of a sample of vials of 
standard solutions from a lot of vials to be used in an 
inter-laboratory test. 


3.1.17 Acceptance Testing — A systematic procedure 
to test as received materials before use to determine 
whether they are contaminated. 


3.1.18 Accident — An unplanned event or sequence of 
events that results in undesirable consequences. An 
incident with specific safety consequences or impacts. 
The term accident is defined as any incident which is 
accompanied by actual negative consequences. 


3.1.19 Accident and Sickness Benefits (Non 
Occupational) — Periodic payments to workers who 
are absent from work due to off-the-job disabilities 
through accident or sickness. 


3.1.20 Accidental Cause (Causal Factor) — One or 
more factors associated with an incident or a potential 
incident. Causal factors may be identified as time- 
sequenced events or may be categorized as being 
related to human or environmental (e.g., equipment, 
machinery, atmospheric contaminant, temperature etc.) 
influences and their interactions. 


3.1.21 Accident Chain — The term referring to the 
concept that many contributing factors typically lead to 
an incident, rather than one single event. Every incident 
as a result of a hazard is preventable by breaking the 
accident chain before the last link. Breaking the chain 
is known as intervention, which is reactive, whereas 
reducing the potential for an accident chain occurring is 
mitigation, which is proactive. 


3.1.22 Accident Costs — Monetary losses associated 
with an incident. These costs include direct and indirect 
costs. 


3.1.23 Accidental Chemical Release — An unintended, 
sudden release of chemical(s) from manufacturing, 
processing, handling or onsite storage facilities to the 
air, water, or land. 


3.1.24 Accident Experience — One or more indices 
describing incident performance according to various 
units of measurement (e.g., disabling injury frequency 
rate, number of lost-time accidents, disabling injury 
severity-rate, number of first aid cases, or dollar loss). 
It may also refer to a summary statement describing 
incident performance. 


3.1.25 Accident-Free — A record of no incidents, 
sometimes of specified types, relating to an operation, 
activity or worker performance during a specified time 
period. 


3.1.26 Accident Investigation — A detailed, defined, 
and recorded review of an incident undertaken to 
identify and record the causes and contributing factors 
and their relationships, which led up to and caused the 
incident. Accident Investigation is a technique that 
allows an organization to learn from its experience. 
The intent of an incident investigation is for 
employers to learn from past experiences andthus 
avoid repeating past mistakes. 


3.1.27 Accident Location — The exact position of the 
key event that produced an incident. 


3.1.28 Accident Potential — A behavior(s) or 
condition(s) having a likelihood of producing an 
incident, which therefore require a review and 
improvement of hazard control measures. 

3.1.29 Accident Prevention — The application of 
programs and counter measures, e.g., behaviors and 
conditions, designed to reduce incidents or incident 
potential within a system or organization. 


3.1.30 Accident Prevention Tag — Tags used to 
identify hazardous conditions and provide a message to 
employees with respect to hazardous conditions. They 
contain a signal word, i.e., Danger, Caution, Warning 
and indicate the specific hazardous condition or the 
instruction to be communicated to the employee such 
as —High Voltage, —Close Clearance, —Do Not 
Start, or —Do Not Use, or a corresponding 


pictograph used with written text or alone. They are 
used as a means to prevent injury or illness to 
employees who are exposed to hazardous or potentially 
hazardous conditions, equipment, or operations that are 
out of the ordinary, unexpected, or not readily apparent. 
The tags are to be used until the identified hazard is 
eliminated or the hazardous operation is completed. 


3.1.31 Accident Probability — The likelihood of a 
worker, operation, or item of equipment becoming 
involved in an incident. The probability of a set of 
unsafe conditions and/or unsafe acts producing an 
incident. 


3.1.32 Accident Rate — Incident experience in relation 
to a base unit of measure (e.g., number of disabling 
injuries per 1 000 000 employee/h exposure, 
number of incidents per 1 000 000 miles traveled, total 
number of incidents per 1 00 000 employee-days 
worked, number of incidents per 100 employees, etc.). 


3.1.33 Accident Records — Reports and other recorded 
information concerning employee incident experience. 


3.1.34 Accident Report — A document containing the 
information and facts about an individual incident put 
in chronological order to provide a complete picture as 
to what happened. The report is useful for the 
investigation to help establish the root cause of the 
incident. 


3.1.35 Accident Reporting — Collecting information 
for, and/or preparing and submitting to a designated 
individual or agency, an official report of an incident. 


3.1.36 Accident Severity — The extent of a loss caused 
by an incident. It is used by insurers in predictingthe 
number of losses upon which the insurance premium is 
based. 


3.1.37 Accident Site — The location of an unexpected 
occurrence, failure, or loss, either at a plant or along a 
transportation route, resulting in a release of hazardous 
materials. 


3.1.38 Accident Statistics — Descriptive or inferential 
data that provide information about incident 
occurrences. 

3.1.39 Accident Triangle — A statistical ratio of 
incidents, which highlights the frequency and severity. 
The relationship is depicted in a graphical form of a 
triangle, sometimes depicted as a loss pyramid, with 
frequencies on one side and severities on the adjacent 
side. 


3.1.40 Accident Type — A description of the 
occurrences directly related to the source of injury 
classification and explaining how that source produced 
the injury. Accident type answers the question: How did 
the injured person come in contact with the object, 
substance, or exposure named as the sourceof injury, 


IS 4155 : 2023 


or during what personal movement did the bodily 
injury occur? 


3.1.41 Accidental Death and Dismemberment — 
A term used to describe an insurance policy that 
pays additional benefits to the beneficiary if the 
cause of death is due to a non-work-related incident. 
Fractional amounts of the policy will be paid out if 
the covered employee loses a bodily appendage or 
sight because of an incident. 


3.1.42 Action Error Analysis (AEA) — A type of 
safety identification review that methodically 
analyzes the interactions between individuals and 
machines. It reviews the operation phase to 
operational phase, while considering the consequences 
of operator-system faults at each operating step within 
each phase. This analysis allows for the recognition 
of threats from equipment faults that may coexist 
with operator errors. It is considered similar to a 
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), but 
with increased emphasis on the steps in human 
procedures rather than viewing hardware 
exclusively. See also Failure Mode and Effects 
Analysis (FMEA); Job Safety Analysis (JSA). 


3.1.43 Action Level — Terminology to state the level 
of toxicant that requires medical surveillance and 
training to further protect employees. It is usually one- 
half the level of the permissible exposure limit. 
Action levels exist for only a few air contaminants, 
such as lead, cadmium, and benzene. 


3.1.44 Accumulation — The pressure increase over the 
maximum allowable working pressure of a vessel 
during discharge through the pressure relief device, 
expressed in pressure units or as a percent. Maximum 
allowable accumulations are established by 
applicable codes for operating and fire contingencies. 


3.1.45 Acid Rain — The deposition of acids (sulphuric 
and nitric) in rain. An environmental problem 
resulting from certain industrial activities and the 
burning of petroleum based fuels (traffic exhaust 
gases). 


3.1.46 Activity Sampling — A measurement 
technique for evaluating potential incident-producing 
behavior. It involves the observation of worker and 
organizational behavior at random intervals and the 
instantaneous classification of these behaviors 
according to whether they are safe of unsafe. 


3.1.47 Actual Exposure Hours — Employee-hours of 
exposure to workplace hazards taken from payroll or 
time clock records, wherever possible, and including 
only actual straight time worked (in hours) and actual 
overtime hours worked. 


3.1.48 Activated Carbon (Charcoal) — Used to adsorb 
components of gas mixtures or impurities from liquids 
as they permeate across its surface. 


3.1.49 Activation Energy — The constant E in 
the exponential part of the Arrhenius equation, 


IS 4155 : 2023 


associated with the minimum energy difference 
between the reactants and an activated complex 
(transition state), which has a structure intermediate to 
those of the reactants and the products, or with the 
minimum collision energy between molecules that is 
required to enable a reaction to occur. It is a constant 
that defines the effect of temperature on reaction rate. 


3.1.50 Acute — Having a rapid onset and progression. 


3.1.51 Action Level — The level of dose rate or activity 
concentration above which remedial actions or 
protective actions should be carried out in chronic 
exposure or emergency exposure. 


3.1.52 Acuity — The sharpness of a sense. Pertaining to 
the sensitivity of hearing, vision, smell, or touch. 


3.1.53 Acute Effects — Effects that occur rapidly 
following exposure and are of short duration. 


3.1.54 Acute Hazard — A single exposure that may 
cause harm, but which is unlikely to lead to 
permanent damage. 


3.1.55 Acute Risk — A risk associated with immediate 
effects of episodic events such as fire, explosion, and 
toxic material releases. 


3.1.56 Additive Effect — An additive effect is the 
overall consequence which is the result of two 
chemicals acting together and which is the simple sum 
of the effects of the chemicals acting independently. 
See also antagonistic effect, synergistic effect. 


3.1.57 Adiabatic Lapse Rate (ALR) — see Dry adiabatic 
lapse rate. 


3.1.58 Administrative Controls — Methods of 
controlling employee exposures. These controls include 
administrative procedures, location and proximity, time 
periods away from the hazard, training in work 
practices to avoid the hazard, work assignments, etc. 


3.1.59 Aerosol — A colloidal system in which the 
dispersion medium is a gas. 


3.1.60 Aerosol Fraction — The fraction of liquid phase 
which, when flushed to the atmosphere, remains 
suspended as an aerosol. 

3.1.61 Alarm — A signal indicating an emergency 
requiring an immediate action, such as an alarm for fire 
from a manual fire alarm box, a fire sprinkler system 
water flow alarm, toxic or combustible gas detection, or 
an alarm from an automatic detection system. Alarms 
can be visual (flashing or strobe light/beacon), audible 
(bells, horns, buzzers, etc.), or both. 


3.1.62 Alarm Condition — A predefined change in the 
state or condition of equipment, or the failure of the 
equipment to respond correctly. Such an indication may 
be audible or visual or both. 


3.1.63 Aliphatic — Usually applied to petroleum 
products derived from a paraffin base and having a 
straight or branched chain, or saturated or unsaturated 
molecular structure. 


3.1.64 Alkali — A compound that has the ability to 
neutralize an acid and form a salt. Turns litmus paper 
blue and has pH values of 8 to 14. (Also known as base, 
caustic). 


3.1.65 Alumina-Activated-Sieve — Adsorbent in pellet 
form used to purify gases and liquids. 


3.1.66 Alcohol Foam — A type of foam developed to 
suppress ignitable vapors on polar solvents (those 
miscible in water). Examples of polar flammable 
liquids are alcohols and ketones. 


3.1.67 Allergen — This descriptor may be used to any 
substance which produces an allergic reaction. 


3.1.68 All Risks Insurance — Insurance provided 
against loss of or damage to property arising from any 
fortuitous cause except those that are specifically 
excluded in the insurance contract. An All Risk 
Insurance is termed to be an All Risks policy. 


3.1.69 Amelioration — Improvement of conditions 
immediately after an accident; treatment of injuries and 
conditions which endanger people and property. 


3.1.70 Ampoule — A small sealed glass vial filled with 
liquid. 


3.1.71 Ampoule Detector Tube — A detector tube 
consisting of one or more filling layers and a reagent 
ampoule. The ampoule contains part of the reagent 
system, which for reasons of stability cannot be placed 
in a single tube. During use, the ampoule is broken and 
the contents liberated. 


3.1.72 Analogue — Compound of the same structural 
type. 


3.1.73 Analytical Blank — A blank used as a baseline 
for the analytical portion of a method. For example, a 
blank consisting of a sample from a batch of absorbing 
solution used for normal samples but processed through 
the analytical system only, and used to adjust or correct 
routine analytical results(Also known as reagent 
blank) 


3.1.74 Analytical Methods — Detailed laboratory 
procedures that specify how to measure the amount of 
chemicals collected on the sampling media. 


3.1.75 Antagonistic Effect — This is the consequence 
of one chemical (or a group of chemicals) interacting: 
the situation in which the combined effect of two or 
more chemicals is less than the simple sum of their 
independent effects. In bioassay, the term may be used 
to refer to the situation when a specified response is 
produced by exposure to either of two factors but not by 
exposure to both together. 


3.1.76 Antidote — A material administered to an 
individual who has been exposed to a poison in order to 
counteract its toxic effects. 


3.1.77 Antiparticle — A particle with the same mass 
and spin with opposite charge and magnetic field. 


3.1.78 Antistatic Wrist Strap — An antistatic device 
worn by an individual on the wrist to prevent the 
accumulation and discharge of static electricity to 
static-sensitive electronic equipment by safely 
grounding the individual. 


3.1.79 Arc — A luminous, high-intensity electrical 
discharge in a gas or a vapor. It occurs when the voltage 
in a conductor is great enough to create a path between 
itself and another conductor that is at a lower voltage. 
The arc created is capable of crossing or jumping the air 
gap in insulation that separates the two conductors. 
Arcing may be a source of ignition for a fire if it is of 
sufficient energy. It also generates ultraviolet radiation, 
which can burn the retina of the eye along with the skin. 
It may also be called spark discharge. see also Arc 
Blast; Arc Flash; Spark. 


3.1.80 Arc Blast — Arc Blast is a result of the arc flash, 
and its force is dependent on the amount of short-circuit 
current available and the distance from the arc source. 
When copper super heats, as is thecase when an arc 
flash occurs, the copper can expand up to 67 000 times. 
This expansion causes molten copper to be spewed 
away from the source in a very forceful manner. This 
force or pressure can cause injury to body parts, or the 
body can be injured from a resultant fall or from being 
thrown into a nearby object. 


3.1.81 Arc Flash — A fire flash, or arc, that can be 
produced during an electrical failure or fault. It can 
reach temperatures of 19 982 °C (36 000 °F). The 
temperature of the arc is a function of short-circuit 
current availability and distance from the arc source. 


3.1.82 Arc Flash Hazard Analysis — A review of the 
potential exposure of an individual to arc flash energy 
to prevent its occurrence or injury to personnel and 
determine appropriate safe work practices, arc flash 
protection boundary, and the necessary levels of 
personal protective equipment. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.83 Arc Flash Protection Boundary — The approach 
limit at a distance from a prospective arc source or arc 
flash hazard within which an individual could receive a 
second-degree burn if an electrical arc flash incident 
occurs. 


3.1.84 Arc Flash Suit — Flame-resistant clothing and 
equipment that encapsulates the entire body, exceptfor 
the hands and feet. It includes pants, jacket, and hood 
with a face shield. 


3.1.85 Arc Resistant Switchgear — Equipment that is 
designed to withstand an internal arcing fault and 
directs the internally released energy away from an 
individual. 


3.1.86 Area Hazard Analysis (AHA) — A process for 
analyzing hazards, focused on the hazards an individual 
faces in their work area as opposed to hazards of 
individual work activities. 


3.1.87 Area Sampling — The collection of airborne 
chemicals at a fixed position in the work area. 


3.1.88 Arson — The burning of buildings or property 
with malicious or criminal design, generally utilizing 
highly flammable materials or explosives to spread the 
fire quickly, or deliberately placed obstructions to 
impede fire fighting. This action may be performed by 
the owner or others and is by law a crime subject to 
federal jurisdiction. 


3.1.89 Asphyxia — Suffocation from lack of oxygen. 
Chemical asphyxia is produced by a substance, such as 
carbon monoxide, that combines with hemoglobin to 
reduce the blood‘s capacity to transport oxygen. Simple 
asphyxia is the result of exposure to a substance, such 
as carbon dioxide, that displaces oxygen. 


3.1.90 Asphyxiant 


3.1.90.1 A vapor or gas that can cause unconsciousness 
or death by suffocation (lack of oxygen). Most of the 
simple asphyxiants are harmful to the body only when 
they become so concentrated that they reduce oxygen 
in the air (normally about 21 percent) to dangerous 
levels (18 percent or lower). Asphyxian is one of the 
principal potential hazards of working in confined and 
enclosed spaces. 


3.1.90.2 A chemical that displaces oxygen in air, 
potentially resulting in insufficient oxygen to sustain 
life, especially in poorly ventilated areas. A chemical 
Asphyxiant chemically interferes with the body’s 
ability to take up and transport oxygen; a physical 
Asphyxiant displaces oxygen in the environment. 
3.1.91 Assay — The quantitative or qualitative 
evaluation of a hazardous substance; the results of such 
anevaluation. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.92 Assigned Risk — Many states have unsatisfied 
judgment or financial responsibility laws that make the 
purchase of insurance mandatory. Some motorists 
cannot buy insurance for some reason, such as poor 
accident experience. To make it possible for them to be 
insured, there are assigned risk plans in which such 
risks are insured. These risks are rotated among the 
subscribing companies in proportion tothe amount of 
automobile liability insurance each writes in the state. 
All companies writing this class of insurance are 
required to participate in this activity. A comparable 
system operates in some states with respect to worker’s 
compensation. 


3.1.93 Assumption of Risk —The legal theory that a 
person who is aware of a danger and its extent and 
knowingly exposes him- or herself to it assumes all 
risks and cannot recover damages, even though the 
person is injured through no fault of his or her own. 


3.1.94 Atmospheric Dispersion — The low momentum 
mixing of a gas or vapor with air. The mixing is the 
result of turbulent energy exchange, which is a 
function of wind (mechanical eddy formation) and 
atmospheric temperature profile (thermal eddy 
formation). 


3.1.95 Atmospheric Stability — Measure of the degree 
of atmospheric turbulence and resulting gas dispersion. 
The stability classes are defined in terms of the wind 
speed and thermal input from the sun. 


3.1.96 Audit, Safety — A management tool used to 
measure the effectiveness and efficiency of the 
implementation of safety policy, programs, and 
procedures by subjecting each area of an activity to a 
systematic critical examination with the purposes of 
minimizing loss and providing a quantified assessment 
of performance and actions needed to render identified 
hazards harmless. 


3.1.97 Autocatalysis — The increase of the rate of 
reaction due to the catalyzing effect of the reaction 
products. 


3.1.98 Auto Decomposition — The sustained 
decomposition of a substance without introduction of 
any other apparent ignition sources besides thermal 
energy and without air or other oxidant present. Auto 
decomposition is a result of a thermal self- 
decomposition reaction for given initial conditions 
(temperature, pressure, volume) at which the rate of 
heat evolution exceeds the rate of heat loss from the 
reacting system thus resulting in an increasing reaction 
temperature and reaction rate. 


3.1.99 Auto Decomposition Temperature — The 
minimum temperature for a specified test method, test 
apparatus (including material of construction and test 
volume) and initial pressure required to initiate self- 
sustained decomposition of a solid, liquid or gaseous 


substance without any other apparent source of ignition 
and without air or other oxidant present. 


3.1.100 Auto Ignition — The ignition and sustained 
combustion of a substance without introduction of any 
other apparent ignition source besides thermal energy. 
Auto ignition is a result of oxidation for given initial 
conditions, (temperature, pressure, volume) at which 
the rate of heat gain exceeds the rate of heat loss from 
the reacting system thus resulting in an increasing 
reaction temperature and reaction rate. 


3.1.101 Auto Oxidation — Slow reaction with air. 


3.1.102 Automatic Fire Alarm System — A system of 
controls, initiating devices, and alarm signals in which 
all or some of the initiating circuits are activated by 
automatic devices, such as smoke detectors. 


3.1.103 Automatic Guard — A protective device (e.g. 
barrier) that is associated with and dependent upon the 
mechanism of the machinery. It operates to physically 
remove from the danger area any part of an individual 
exposed to harm. 


3.1.104 Automatic Safe Load Indicator — A device 
fitted to a crane to provide the operator with automatic 
warning of approach to an overload situation. 


3.1.105 Automatic Seat Belt System — A protective 
system fitted to a vehicle that automatically moves the 
seat belt restraint system from its storage location to 
its protection location, i.e., over the shoulder ofan 
individual, to ensure that the seat beat is worn and assist 
in protecting the individual from injury if a crash 
occurs. Upon leaving the vehicle the belt automatically 
moves to its storage position. 


3.1.106 Average Individual Risk 


3.1.106.1 Average individual risk (exposed population) 
— The individual risk averaged over the population 
which is exposed to risk from the facility. 


3.1.106.2 Average individual risk (total population) — 
The individual risk averaged over a predetermined 
population, without regard to whether or not all people 
in that population are actually exposed to the risk. 


3.1.106.3 Average individual risk (exposed 
hours/worked hours) — The individual risk for an 
activity may be calculated for the duration of the 
activity or may be averaged over the working day. 


3.1.107 Average Rate of Death (ROD) — The average 
number of fatalities that might be expected per unit time 
from all possible incidents. 


3.1.108 Avoidable Accident — An incident that could 
have been prevented by proper behavior, or by 
environmental modifications or controls. All incidents 
are considered preventable. 


3.1.109 Awareness Level Trained — First responders at 
the awareness level are those persons who, in thecourse 
of their normal duties may be the first on the scene of 
an emergency involving hazardous materials. First 
responders at the awareness level are expected to 
recognize hazardous materials presence, protect 
themselves, call for trained personnel, and secure the 
area. 


B 


3.1.110 Backup Alarm — An automatic audible 
sounding alarm fitted to designated vehicles to warn 
whenever the vehicle is engaged to move in the reverse 
direction. It is commonly used on construction sites for 
equipment or other similar locations, where workers 
may not be cognizant of the various operations of 
vehicles in their environment, other equipment masks 
the normal sound of the vehicle approaching in reverse, 
or their hearing level may not be the norm. 


3.1.111 Backup Layer — The secondary layer of 
sorbent material in a sorbent tube that adsorbschemicals 
that are not effectively trapped onto the primary 
collection layer. 


3.1.112 Balanced Safety Relief Valve — A balanced 
safety relief valve incorporates means of minimizing 
the effect of back pressure on the operational 
characteristics (opening pressure, closing pressure, and 
relieving capacity). 


3.1.113 Barometric Hazard — From the occupational 
hygiene perspective, barometric hazards can be 
categorized as: 1) hypobaric (low pressure) hazards; 2) 
hyperbaric (high pressure) hazards; and 3) hazardsfrom 
changes in pressure, predominantly-but not 
exclusively-decreases in pressure. 


3.1.114 Barricade (Armoured Hood) — Protective 
hood that will shield the operator against flames or 
explosive particles. 


3.1.115 Barrier Analysis — An investigative safety 
review based on the premise that an energy flow is 
associated with all incidents. Barriers are developed and 
integrated into a system or work process to protect 
personnel and equipment from unwanted energy flows. 
For an incident to occur there must be a hazard that 
comes into contact with a target, because barriers or 
controls were unused or failed. It may be called a barrier 
and control analysis or energy trace and barrier 
analysis. Barriers can be Physical (guarding, shields, 
protective clothing), Administrative (engineering 
design, work procedures, work processes), or 
Supervisory/Management (training, knowledge, 
supervision, management oversight). 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.116 Barrier Guard — A protection device for 
operators and other individuals from hazard points on 
machinery and equipment. There are several types of 
barrier guards: adjustable, fixed, movable, and 
interlocking. Adjustable barrier guards have an 
enclosure attached to the frame of the machinery or 
equipment, with front and side sections that can be 
adjusted. Fixed barrier guards are a point of operation 
enclosure attached to the machine or equipment. The 
gate or movable barrier guard is a device designed to 
enclose the point of operation completely before the 
clutch can be engaged. An interlocking guard is 
connected to a switch so that the operation of the 
machine or equipment cannot be started unless the 
guardis in place. It may also stop the machine or 
equipment if the guard is moved while it is in operation. 


3.1.117 Barrier Tape — A temporary delineation 
measure used to quickly and effectively highlight 
restricted areas, particularly for hazard avoidance or 
emergencies. It is composed of a high visibility 
polyethylene plastic tape that is used to surround or 
section-off hazard areas, danger zones, and 
construction sites. Barrier tapes typically have a clear, 
bold warning message that is continuously repeatedthe 
length of the roll. They provide a visual warning 
message to keep out of restricted areas. It is also ideal 
for crowd and traffic control purposes. Commercially 
available tape rolls are 7.6 cm (3 inch) wide and are 2 
540 cm (1 000 inch) in length. It also can be called 
Perimeter Tape or Safety Tape. 


3.1.118 Basic Event — A fault tree event that is 
sufficiently basic that no further development is 
necessary (e.g., equipment item failure, human failure, 
or external event). See also Undeveloped event. 


3.1.119 Basic Process Control Equipment (BPCS) — 
The control equipment which is installed to support 
normal production functions. 


3.1.120 Batch Method — A static generation method 
for preparing a known mixture of gas or vapor for 
verification testing of detector tubes. The method uses 
a volatile liquid to produce a known concentration in a 
container of known volume. A pure gas, or vapor of 
known volume and concentration, could be used also. 


3.1.121 Batch Reactor — Reactor in which all reactants 
and solvents are introduced prior to setting the 
operating conditions (e.g., temperature and pressure). 


3.1.122 Bentonite Clay — Highly adsorbent Fuller‘s 
earth clay used in particle form for containing chemical 
spills (available to the public as cat litter). 


3.1.123 Biochemical Mechanism — This is the general 
term for any chemical reaction or series of reactions, 
usually enzyme catalyzed, which produces a given 
physiological effect in a living organism. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.124 Bio-concentration — A process leading to a 
higher concentration of a chemical in the organism 
relative to its environment. 


3.1.125 Biodegradation-Biodegraded — Breakdown of 
chemicals, plastics, polymers etc., by the reaction of 
light, heat, water, bacteria, fungi, each on its own or in 
concert. 


3.1.126 Biotransformation — A process in which a 
chemical is modified by a living organism. 


3.1.127 BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) — This is 
defined as the mass of dissolved oxygen required by a 
specific volume of solution of the substance for process 
of biochemical oxidation under prescribed conditions. 
The measurement of BOD indicates the ability of 
micro-organisms to metabolize an organic substance in 
the presence of oxygen and thus indicates the potential 
for depletion of oxygen by the substance. Refers to 
degradation. 


3.1.128 Blast — A transient change in gas density, 
pressure (both positive and negative), and velocity of 
the air surrounding an explosive point. The most 
common sources of blasts are from the ignition of semi- 
or unconfined vapor cloud explosions, detonation of 
high explosives, or the rupture of high-pressure vessels. 
The initial change can be either gradual or 
discontinuous. A discontinuous change is commonly 
referred to as a shockwave, and a gradual change as a 
pressure wave. 


3.1.129 BLEVE — see Boiling Liquid Expanding Vapor 
Explosion 


3.1.130 Blow Down — The difference between actual 
popping pressure of a pressure relief valve and actual 
reseating pressure expressed as a percentage of set 
pressure or in pressure units. 


3.1.131 Blowout — An uncontrolled flow of gas or oil, 
and combination of these or other well fluids from a 
wellbore at the well head or into the petroleum 
formation during a drilling operation. It is caused by 
formation pressure exceeding the drilling fluid pressure. 


3.1.132 Blowout Preventer (BOP) — A mechanism to 
rapidly close and seal off a well borehole, which is used 
to prevent a well blowout from occurring. It consists of 
rams and shear rams, usually hydraulically operated, 
which are fitted at the top of the well being drilled. It is 
activated if well pressures are encountered that cannot 
be controlled by the drilling process systems (i.e., 
drilling mud injection) and could lead to a blowout of 
the well. 

3.1.133 Blood Asphyxiant — A chemical that is 
absorbed by the blood and changes or prevents the 
blood from flowing or carrying oxygen to cells. An 
example is carbon monoxide poisoning. 


3.1.134 Boil — To change from a liquid state to a 
gaseous state. 


3.1.135 Boilover — A boiling liquid eruption in a 
hydrocarbon or chemical storage tank. Usually 
described as an event in the burning of the contents of 
the tank, where after a long period of time, there is a 
sudden increase in fire intensity with the expulsion of 
the contents of the tank, due to water at the bottom of 
the tank being heated to vaporization and causing a 
boiling eruption. 


3.1.136 Boiling Liquid Expanding Vapor Explosion 
(BLEVE) — A type of rapid phase transition in whicha 
liquid contained above its atmospheric boiling point is 
rapidly depressurized, causing a nearly instantaneous 
transition from liquid to vapor with a corresponding 
energy release. A BLEVE is often accompanied by a 
large fireball if a flammable liquid is involved, since an 
external fire impinging on the vapor space of a pressure 
vessel is a common BLEVE scenario. However, it is not 
necessary for the liquidto be flammable to have a 
BLEVE occur. 


3.1.137 Bonding — The permanent joining of metallic 
parts to form an electrically conductive path which will 
assure electrical continuity and the capacity to safely 
conduct any current likely to be imposed. 


3.1.138 Bounding Group (of Incidents) — A small 
number of incidents selected to bracket the spectrum of 
possible incidents, which may include those 
catastrophic incidents sometimes, referred to as the 
Worst Credible Incident and Worst Possible Incident. 


3.1.139 Breakthrough time — The time taken in 
standard tests for permeation of a chemical through a 
protective barrier (such as a rubber glove) to be 
detected. 


3.1.140 Bunsen Tube — A pressure release device. 
C 


3.1.141 Calibrate — To check, adjust, or systematically 
standardize the graduations of a quantitative measuring 
instrument. 


3.1.142 Calibration — Establishment of a relationship 
between various calibration standards and the 
measurements of them obtained by a measurement 
system, or portions thereof. The levels of the calibration 
standards should bracket the range of levels for which 
actual measurements are to be made. 


3.1.143 Calibration Standard — A standard used to 
quantitate the relationship between the output of a 
sensor and a property to be measured. Calibration 
standards should be traceable to a standard reference 
material (SRM), certified reference material (CRM), or 
a primary standard. 


3.1.144 Calorie — Heat required to raise the 
temperature of 1 gram of water 1 °C, specifically from 
4 °C to 5 °C. Mean calorie = 1/100 part of the heat 
required to raise 1 gram of water from 0 °C to 100 °C. 
Great calorie or kilocalorie = 1 000 calories. 


3.1.145 Calorimeter 


3.1.145.1 A device for measuring heat quantities, such 
as machine capacity, combustion heat, specific heat, 
vital heat, heat leakage, etc. 


3.1.145.2 A device for measuring quality (or moisture 
content) of stream or other vapor. 


3.1.145.3 Equipment for measuring emitted or absorbed 
heat quantities 


3.1.146 Canister (Air-Purifying) — A container filled 
with sorbents and catalysts that remove gases and 
vapors from air drawn through the unit. The canister 
may also contain an aerosol (particulate) filter to 
remove solid or liquid particles. 


3.1.147 Canister Respirator — A form of gas 
respirator, which generally incorporates goggles and a 
visor, with an exhalation valve connected to a chemical 
canister filter. It normally provides protection against 
low concentrations of designated toxic gases and 
vapors. 


3.1.148 Carabiner — A self-closing, self-locking steel 
connector used to attach to an anchorage point. Used 
with a personal fall protection system. 


3.1.149 Cap — That part of a cartridge or shell which 
is filled with a detonative composition and is fired by a 
percussion strike. It ignites the propellant charge in gun 
and small arm ammunition. 


3.1.150 Carbon dioxide Toxicity — Carbon dioxide 
becomes toxic when it suppresses respiration. The 
combination of the accumulation of exhaled carbon 
dioxide at increased pressure (either in the breathing 
system‘s dead space or due to a malfunction) can 
rapidly cause toxic effects. 


3.1.151 Carcinogen — An agent, chemical, physical or 
biological, that can act on living tissue in such a way as 
to cause a malignant neoplasm. 


3.1.152 Carcinogenesis — The induction by chemical, 
physical, or biological agents, of neoplasms thatare 
usually not observed, an earlier induction of neoplasms 
that are usually observed, and/or the inductionof more 
neoplasms than are usually found although fundamental 
differences in the mechanisms may be involved. 


3.1.153 Catalyst — A process developed by the Electric 
Power Research Institute for conducting payoff matrix 
analyses with a group of participants. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.154 Catastrophic — A loss of extraordinary 
magnitude in physical harm to people, with damage and 
destruction to property, and/or to the environment. 


3.1.155 Catastrophic Incident — An incident 
involving a major uncontrolled emission, fire or 
explosion with an outcome effect zone that might 
extend offsite into the surrounding community. 


3.1.156 Catch Pot — A container to retain liquid or 
slurry discharged from an overflow or pressure-relief 
device. 


3.1.157 Cartridge, Air Purifying — A container with a 
filter, sorbent, or catalyst, or combination of these 
items, that removes specific contaminants from the air 
passed through the container. 


3.1.158 Cartridge Respirator — A respirator that has a 
chemical cartridge filter and is effective for low 
concentrations of relatively non-toxic gases or vapors. 


3.1.159 Causal Factor (CF) — The immediate major 
contributor to the occurrence of an incident. A 
combination of simultaneous or sequential 
circumstances directly or indirectly contributing to an 
incident that if they were removed would have either 
prevented the incident or reduced its consequences. For 
a typical incident event there are multiple causal 
factors. Causal factors were formerly called direct 
causes, key causes, observable causes, and assignable 
causes. Can be modified to identify several kinds of 
causes such as direct, early, mediate, proximate, distal, 
etc. 


3.1.160 Cause — An event, situation, or condition 
which results, or could result (Potential Cause), directly 
or indirectly in an accident or incident. 


3.1.161 Cause Consequence Diagrams — A method for 
illustrating the possible outcomes arising from the 
logical combination of selected input events or states. 


3.1.162 Caustic — Something alkaline that strongly 
irritates, corrodes, or destroys living tissue. 


3.1.163 Charles-Gay-Lussac-Law — Gases increase in 
volume for each | °C rise in temperature. This increase 
is equal to approximately 1/273.15 of the volume of the 
gas at 0 °C. 


3.1.164 Chatter — Chatter is abnormal rapid 
reciprocating motion of the movable parts of a pressure 
relief valve in which the disk contacts the seat. 

3.1.165 Chemo-biokinetics — The process of the 
uptake of chemical substances by the body, the 
biotransformation they undergo, the distribution of the 
substances and their metabolites in the tissues, and the 
elimination of the substances and their metabolites from 
the body. Both the amounts and the concentrations of 
the substances and their metabolites are studied. The 
term has essentially the same meaning as pharmaco- 


IS 4155 : 2023 


kinetics, but the latter term should be restricted to the 
study of pharmaceutical substances. 


3.1.166 Chemical — Any element, chemical compound 
or mixture of elements and/or compounds. 


3.1.167 Chemical Agent — Dust, gas vapor, or fume 
that acts on or reacts with the human physiologic 
system. 


3.1.168 Chemical Allergy — Allergy caused by a 
specific chemical or group of chemicals. 


3.1.169 Chemical Asphyxiant — see asphyxiant (2.89) 


3.1.170 Chemical Asphyxiation —Toxic reaction 
wherein chemicals reaching the bloodstream react in 
such a way as to deprive the body of oxygen. 


3.1.171 Chemical Burn — A burn that occurs when the 
skin comes into contact with strong acids, strong alkalis 
or other corrosive materials. This agents literally eat 
through the skin and in many cases continueto do 
damage as long as they remain in contact with the skin. 


3.1.172 Chemical Cartridge — A filtering mechanism 
used with a respirator for the removal of low 
concentrations of specific vapors and gases. It is 
constructed mechanically as a cartridge for ease of 
replacement after use or expiry date. 


3.1.173 Chemical Cartridge Respirator — A 
respirator that uses various chemical substances to 
purify the inhaled air of certain vapors and gases. 


3.1.174 Chemically Contaminated Biological Waste — 
Biological waste that contains pollutant or toxic 
chemicals. 


3.1.175 Chemical Decontamination — The process of 
removing residual amounts of harmful chemicals from 
glassware or other equipment so as to facilitate their 
safe use or repair. The process should be based on the 
knowledge of the properties of the contaminant(s), so 
as to effectively remove or destroy such substances by 
appropriate chemical or physical treatment. 


3.1.176 Chemical Family — A group of single elements 
or compounds with a common general name. 


3.1.177 Chemical Hazard — Exposure to any chemical 
which, in acute concentrations, has a toxic effect. 


3.1.178 Chemical Incompatibility — Any interaction of 
a chemical and an environmental factor (e.g., water, 
light, air), or between two or more chemicals, that may 
give rise to a chemical reaction or produce an enhanced 
hazard. 


3.1.179 Chemical Name — The name given to a 
chemical in the nomenclature system developed by the 
International union of pure and applied chemistry 
(IUPAC) or the CAS. The scientific designation of a 
chemical or a name that will clearly identify the 
chemical for hazard evaluation process. 


3.1.180 Chemical Pneumonitis — Inflammation of the 
lungs resulting from inhalation of chemical vapors and 
characterized by an outpouring of fluid in the lungs. 


3.1.181 Chemical Spills Prevention — A planned way 
of dealing with or preventing chemical spills. e.g.,a 
systematic method for the containment of the chemicals 
that includes small volumes of stock containers, 
closures that facilitate safe transfer of materials, break 
resistant containers, or working over trays lined with 
absorbent material. 


3.1.182 Chemical Waste — Chemical waste is either 
organic (hydrocarbons or substituted hydrocarbons)or 
inorganic (metallic or nonmetallic elements). The 
hydrocarbons are composed solely of carbon and 
hydrogen; substituted hydrocarbons also include 
functional groups composed of elements such as 
chlorine, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulphur or oxygen. 
Inorganic waste materials are typically in the form of 
salts, hydrides and oxides. The hazards associated with 
organic compounds in the environment depend mainly 
on their chemical compositions and associated physical 
properties.\ 


3.1.183 Chemicals of Potential Concern (CoPC) — 
Chemicals that are potential site-related and whose data 
are of sufficient quality for use in the quantitative risk 
assessment. 


3.1.184 Chemical Properties — A property of matter 
that describes how it reacts with other substances. 


3.1.185 Chemical Protective Clothing — Items such as 
clothing, hood, boots and gloves (fully- encapsulating 
suit) made from chemical-resistant materials that are 
designed and configured to protect the wearer from 
hazardous materials. 


3.1.186 Chemical Reactivity — The tendency of 
substances to undergo chemical change. 


3.1.187 Chemical Reactivity Hazard — A situation 
with the potential for an uncontrolled chemical reaction 
that can result directly or indirectly in serious harm to 
people, property or the environment. The uncontrolled 


chemical reaction might be accompanied by a 
temperature increase, pressure increase, gas evolution 
or other form of energy release. 


3.1.188 COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand) —The 
amount of oxygen required to oxidize the substance 
chemically. Refers to degradation. 


3.1.189 Choked Flow — A condition that occurs when 
the flow of a compressible fluid through a pressure 
relief device, piping or other equipment does not 
respond to a decrease in downstream or back pressure 
on the device. The mass flow rate then depends only 
on upstream conditions. This can occurwith gas/vapor 
or with two-phase fluid systems. Also referred as 
maximum or critical flow. 


3.1.190 Chronic Effects — Effects that develop slowly 
and have a long duration. They are often, but not 
always, irreversible. Some irreversible effects may 
appear a long time after the chemical substance was 
present in the sensitive tissue. For such delayed or late 
effects, the latent period (or the “time to occurrence” of 
an observable effect) may be very long, particularly if 
the level of exposure is low. 


3.1.191 Chronic Exposure — Repeated dose or 
exposure to a material over a relatively prolonged 
period of time. 


3.1.192 Chronic Hazard — Chemical which has the 
potential to cause long-term damage to health, often as 
a consequence of repeated or prolonged exposure to it. 


3.1.193 Chronically Toxic Substance — A chemical 
that causes damage after exposure of repeated or long- 
duration, usually in low concentration. 


3.1.194 Chrysiasis — Development of a blue-gray 
pigmentation in skin and mucous membranes. May be 
caused by exposure to gold compounds. 


3.1.195 Circuit Breaker — A safety device for 
electrical circuits designed to open the circuit, i.e., from 
on to off position, when abnormal conditions occur 
(i.e. over current, abnormal voltage, high 
temperature, grounding, etc.) to prevent damage or 
overheating to the system and the possible occurrence 
of a fire. They are usually designed to permit opening 
and closing of the circuits manually but will 
automatically open the circuit during the occurrence of 
an abnormal condition. Circuit breakers should be of 
the type and rating for the circuit or appliance it is 
intended to protect. 


3.1.196 Circumstances (of an Accident)—The set of 
conditions that surround an incident or led to it. 


3.1.197 Cis — refers to a particular arrangement of 
elements with a chemical molecule. 


3.1.198 Cleveland Open Cap Method — A method for 
determining the flash point of a liquid. In this the 
vapour being experimented upon has free access to air 
and thus is slightly less concentrated than the onein the 


11 


IS 4155 : 2023 


Closed Cup Method (see also ‘Closed Cup Method’). 


3.1.199 Clean-Up Reporting — Action taken following 
a spillage or contamination which documents 
containment, disposal and decontamination procedures, 
together with suggestions to prevent similaraccidents. 


3.1.200 Closed Cup Method — One of the methods for 
determining the flash point of a liquid. In this method, 
measurements are made on a saturated vapour air 
mixture obtained in a closed cup. 


3.1.201 Code of Safe Practices — Workplace rules on 
how to perform duties safely and keep the worksite safe; 
must be specific to the employer’s operations and 
posted at each job site. 


3.1.202 Cold Work — Work activities that do not 
produce sufficient energy to ignite flammable 
atmospheres or combustible materials, but could 
contribute to an incident where an injury may occur. 
Common examples of cold work activities include 
demolition; removal of asbestos-containing materials; 
work involving cryogenic materials; movement of 
oversized loads on roads; maintenance work at steam, 
sewage, utility plants not involving open flames; seal or 
gland replacement; and repairs on pumps or 
compressors. 


3.1.203 Cold Work Permit — A safety process control 
for cold work activity to ensure proper initiation, 
review, and execution. see also Hot Work; Work 
Permit. 


3.1.204 Collection Efficiency — The percentage of a 
specific substance removed and retained from the air by 
an air cleaning or sampling device. It is a measure of 
the performance of the cleaner or sampling device. 


3.1.205 Coefficient of Discharge — The ratio of the 
measured relieving capacity to the theoretical relieving 
capacity. 


3.1.206 Compatibility — The ability of materials to 
exist in contact without specified (usually hazardous) 
consequences under a defined scenario. 


3.1.207 Conservative Result, Model, or Design — A 
procedure where small or large values are assigned to 
unknowns during consequence modeling. This insures 
that the resulting engineering design to mitigate or 
remove the hazard is over designed. 


3.1.208 Cold Trap — A sampling vessel that has been 
immersed in a cooling system, such as dry ice or liquid 
nitrogen, to extract the contaminants from the airstream 
for subsequent analysis. 


3.1.209 Color Density Tube — A detector tube that uses 
color intensity (or density) to determine the amount of 
compound present. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.210 Calorimetric (calorimetry) — A measuring 
method that uses a change in color as an indicationof 
the concentration of a compound. 


3.1.211 Combination Capacity Factor — The ratio of 
average flow capacity determined by tests of a pressure 
relief valve in combination with a rupture disk device 
to the flow capacity of the pressure relief valve alone. 


3.1.212 Combustible — Any material capable of 
combustion. 


3.1.213 Combustible Dust — Particulate material that 
when mixed in air, will burn or explode. 


3.1.214 Combustible Liquid — Term commonly used 
for liquids that emit burnable vapors or mists. 
Technically, a liquid whose vapors will ignite at a 
temperature of 100 °F or above. 


3.1.215 Combustible Gas Indicator — A general survey 
instrument capable of measuring a wide range ofair 
contaminants but cannot distinguish among them. They 
are usually used as area samplers to measure 
concentrations that are immediately dangerous to life 
and health, and concentrations that are within 
occupational exposure limits, in the ppm range. 


3.1.216 Combustion — The action or the process of 
burning, usually associated with the development of 
light, heat and chemical combination. 


3.1.217 Common Cause Failure — Failure of two or 
more structures, systems, and components due to a 
single specific event or cause. Typical examples include 
a design deficiency, a manufacturing deficiency, 
operation and maintenance errors, a natural 
phenomenon, a human-induced event, saturation of 
signals, oran unintended cascading effect from any 
other operation or failure within the plant or from a 
change in ambient conditions. 


3.1.218 Common Mode Failure — An event having a 
single external cause with multiple failure effects which 
are not consequences of each other. 


3.1.219 Compensable Injury — An occupational injury 
or illness resulting in sufficient disability to require the 
payment of compensation as prescribed by law. A work 
injury or illness for which compensation benefits are 
payable to the worker or beneficiary under worker 
compensation laws. 


3.1.220 Compound — A substance composed of two or 
more elements joined according to the laws of chemical 
combination. Each compound has its own characteristic 
properties different from those of its constituent 
elements. 


3.1.221 Compound Hood — A hood that has two or 
more points of significant energy (i.e., static pressure) 
loss. 


3.1.222 Compressed Gas — A gas which exerts a 
pressure of at least 41 psi in the container in which it is 
stored. 


3.1.223 Compressibility — The relative variation of 
volume with pressure; depends on the process to which 
a gas is subjected. 


3.1.224 Concentration 


3.1.224.1 The amount of given substance in a stated 
unit of measure. Common methods of stating 
concentration are percent by weight or by volume; 
weight per unit volume; normality, etc. 


3.1.224.2 The quantity of a chemical per unit volume; 
10000 ppm = 1 percent. In air, the relationship between 


ppm and mg/m? is as follows: 


Vx MW = 24.45 x mg/m? 


where 
V = volume ratio of a chemical in air, in parts 
per million; 
MW =the chemical’s molecular weight; 


24.45 = number of liters occupied by 1 mole of 
any gas at STP (i.e. 298 K or 25 °C [77 
°F] and760 mmHg or | atm; mg/m? = the 
chemical’s concentration in air expressed 
in milligrams of chemical per cubicmeter 
of air. 


3.1.225 Concentration-time (C-T) — Two factors on 
which dosage is based. 


3.1.226 Condensation — Act or process of reducing 
from one form to another denser form such as steamto 
water. 


3.1.227 Conduction 


3.1.227.1 Transmission of energy by a medium that 
does not involve movement of the medium itself. 


3.1.227.2 Conductive heat transfer when there is direct 
contact between a hotter and a colder substance. 


3.1.228 Conflagration — A fire extending over a 
considerable area, and destroying numbers of buildings 
and/or substantial amounts of property. 


3.1.229 Congener — Compound with related but not 
identical structure. 


3.1.230 Conjugate — The product of reaction of an 
exposing single chemical or a single metabolite withthe 
endogenous biochemical pathways of the body. 


3.1.231 Constraint — A restriction or a compelling 
force affecting freedom or action. Forcing into a 
holding within close bounds. An operational condition 
that may necessitate work performance in a less than 
ideal, potentially unsafe environment (e.g., building 
construction) and that therefore requires the provision 
of special safeguards. 


3.1.232 Consequence — The cumulative, undesirable 
result of an incident, usually measured in health/safety 
effects, environmental impacts, loss of property, and 
business interruption cost. 


3.1.233 Consequence Analysis — The analysis of the 
expected effects of incident outcome casesindependent 
of frequency or probability. 


3.1.234 Conservation of Mass — In all ordinary 
chemical changes, the total mass of the reactants is 
always equal to the total mass of the products. 


3.1.235 Constant Flow — A feature available on air 
sampling pumps whereby the flow rate will 
automatically compensate for flow restrictions, 
thereby ensuring that the flow rate is held constant 
throughout the sampling period. 


3.1.236 Constant Volume Pump — A sampling pump 
designed to draw a fixed volume of air with each full 
pump stroke. 


3.1.237 Contact Hazard — A potential injury source 
arising from exposure to a machine, equipment, or a 
process system that contains sharp surfaces, sharp 
projections, heat, or extreme cold. 


3.1.238 Container — Anything that holds material, 
including storage tanks, pipelines and packaging 
(drums, carboys, etc). 


3.1.239 Contaminated — Containing potentially 
harmful material. 


3.1.240 Contamination — A release of hazardous 
material from its source to people, animals, the 
environment or equipment. 


3.1.241 Containment — A system condition in which 
under no condition reactants or products are exchanged 
between the chemical system and its external 
environment. 


3.1.242 Contingency Plan — A document setting out an 
organized, planned, and coordinated course of action to 
be followed in case of a fire, explosion, or other 
incident that releases toxic chemicals, hazardous waste, 


13 


IS 4155 : 2023 


or radioactive materials that threaten human health or 
the environment. 


3.1.243 Continuous Reactors — Reactors that are 
characterized by a continuous flow of reactants into and 
a continuous flow of products from the reaction system. 
Examples are the Plug Flow Reactor and the 
Continuous-flow Stirred Tank Reactor. 


3.1.244 Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) — an 
agitated tank reactor with a continuous flow of reactants 
into and products from the agitated reactor system; 
ideally, composition and temperature of the reaction 
mass is at all times identical to the composition and 
temperature of the product stream. 


3.1.245 Controlled Area — A specific area that is 
restricted due to an identified hazard. 


3.1.246 Control Measures — The overall strategy for 
controlling the environment as well as the specific 
components that make up that strategy. These include 
local exhaust and general ventilation, process isolation 
or enclosure, shielding from heat, ionizing radiation, 
ultraviolet light, or any other forms of radiant energy, 
protective clothing, and respiratory protective devices 
and other controls. 


3.1.247 Controlled Flame Combustion — The 
combustion of waste in conditions such that only fully 
oxidized volatile products are produced, together with 
ash. 


3.1.248 Convection 


3.1.248.1 The transfer of heat by the flow of some liquid 
or gas. 


3.1.248.2 Motion resulting in a fluid from the difference 
in density and the action of gravity; heat loss or gain by 
the body to the surrounding atmosphere. 


3.1.249 Conventional Safety Relief Valve — A 
conventional safety relief valve has its spring housing 
vented to the discharge side of the valve. The operating 
characteristics (opening pressure, closing pressure, and 
relieving capacity) are directly affected by changes of 
the back pressure on the valve. 


3.1.250 Cooling Probe — A probe used in high 
temperature applications to cool the sample before 
entry into the detector tube. It sometimes is called a hot 
air probe. 


3.1.251 Cool Flame Ignition — A relatively slow self- 
sustaining barely luminous gas phase reaction of the 
sample or its decomposition products with an oxidant. 
Cool flames are visible only in a darkened area. They 
are self-sustaining exothermic ignition reactions that 
under proper circumstances may act as the initiator of 
more energetic hot flame reactions. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.252 Corrosive — Chemicals which readily tend to 
attack materials in contact. 


3.1.253 CPQRA — The acronym for Chemical Process 
Quantitative Risk Analysis. It is the quantitative 
(numerical) evaluation of incident consequences and 
frequencies and their combination into an overall 
measure of risk when applied to the chemical 
process industry. It is particularly applied to episodic 
events. The CPQRA process is always preceded by a 
qualitative systematic identification of process hazards. 


3.1.254 Cradle-to-Grave or Manifest System —A 
procedure in which hazardous wastes are identified as 
they are produced and are followed through further 
treatment, transportation, and disposal by a series of 
permanent, linkable, descriptive documents. 


3.1.255 Crash Safety — A system characteristic that 
allows the system occupants to survive the impactof a 
crash and to evacuate the system after potentially 
survivable incidents. 


3.1.256 Crashworthiness — The capacity of a vehicle 
to act as a protective container and energy absorber 
during impact conditions. 


3.1.257 Credible Event — A scenario or event that has 
reasonable and sufficient likelihood of occurrencethat it 
should be considered in selecting the design basis for an 
emergency relief system. This should be based on a risk 
analysis that includes a careful and thorough review of 
process characteristics, experience with similar 
systems, hazardous nature of the materials handled and 
consequences of an incident. 


3.1.258 Critical Function — An operation or activity 
that is essential to the continuing survival of a system. 
Those functions that have a major impact on system 
performance and safety. 


3.1.259 Critical Incident Technique — A set of 
procedures for collecting direct observations of human 
behavior in such a way as to facilitate their potential 
usefulness in solving practical problems and 
developing broad psychological principles. The critical 
incident technique outlines procedures for collecting 
observed incidents having special significance and 
meeting systematically defined criteria. A randomly 
selected sample of critical incidents should permit an 
inference to be made concerning the existence of 
similar incidents within the population from which the 
sample was taken. 


3.1.260 Critical Half Thickness — An estimation of the 
half thickness of a sample in an unstirred container, in 


14 


which the heat losses to the environment are less than 
the retained heat. This buildup of internal temperature 
leads to a thermal run away reaction. 


3.1.261 Critical Coolant Temperature — The 
maximum temperature of coolant, either gas or liquid, 
at which all heat generated by a chemical reaction can 
still be transferred to the coolant. 


3.1.262 Critical Mass — The minimum mass required 
to enable the occurrence of an explosion under specified 
conditions. 


3.1.263 Critical Pressure — The pressure required to 
liquefy a gas at its critical temperature. 


3.1.264 Critical Temperature — Saturation 
temperature corresponding to the critical state of the 
substance at which the properties of the liquid and 
vapor are identical; the temperature above which a gas 
cannot be liquefied by pressure alone. 


3.1.265 Critical Steady-State Temperature (CSST) — 
The highest ambient temperature at which self-heating 
of a material as handled (in a package, container, tank, 
etc.) does not result in a runaway but remains in a 
stationary condition (see Self-Accelerating 
Decomposition Temperature). 


3.1.266 Cross Sensitivity — The tendency of detector 
tubes to respond to more than one compound. 


3.1.267 Cryogenic — A material at a very low 
temperature. 


3.1.268 Cryogenic Liquid — A refrigerated liquefied 
gas having a boiling point less than —90 °C (—130 °F) at 
101.3 kPa (14.7 psi). It is a hazard due to its freezing 
temperature, and the evaporation of the liquid at 
ambient temperatures may be an asphyxiant, especially 
in low-lying areas. 


3.1.269 Cumulative Injury — An injury caused by 
repeated events or repeated exposures at work, such as 
the loss of hearing due to constant loud noise. 


3.1.270 Cumulative Risk — The risk of a common toxic 
effect associated with concurrent exposure by all 
relevant pathways and routes of exposure to a group of 
chemicals that share a common mechanism of toxicity. 


3.1.271 Curtain Area — The area of the cylindrical or 
conical discharge opening between the seating surfaces 
created by the lift of the disk above the seat. Refers to 
the flow area of a pressure relief valve. 


3.1.272 Cutaneous Hazards — Chemicals that irritate 
or otherwise damage the skin. 


D 


3.1.273 Dalton’s Law — Also known as Dalton’s law 
of partial pressure. According to this law, at constant 
temperature, the total pressure exerted by a mixture of 
gases in a definite volume is equal to the sum of the 
individual pressures that each gas would exert if 
occupying the same total volume above. Each 
constituent of a mixture of gases behaves 
thermodynamically as if it alone occupied the space. 
The sum ofthe individual pressures of the constituents 
equals the total pressure of the mixture. 


3.1.274 Damage — Loss in value, usefulness, etc., to 
property or things. Harm causing any material loss. 
Severity of injury or the physical, functional, or 
monetary loss that could result if hazard is not 
controlled. 


3.1.275 Damage Control — A term used in the 
maritime industry and navies for the emergency control 
of situations that may cause the sinking of a vessel or 
other serious harm to its operation. 


3.1.276 Danger — A general term denoting liability or 
potential of injury, illness, damage, loss, or pain. 


3.1.277 Danger Analysis — A qualitative safety review 
methodology, primarily utilized in project 
management, to identify hazards in activities or 
systems, their probability of occurrence, and determine 
if protection measures are adequate. It is similar to a Job 
Safety Analysis. It is sometimes called a Danger 
Analysis, Safety Verification, or Preliminary Danger 
Analysis. 


3.1.278 Danger Label or Sign — A sign or label that 
indicates a hazardous situation that if not avoided, 
could result in death or serious injury. 


3.1.279 Danger Tag — (5), The tag used in major 
hazard situations where an immediate hazard presents a 
threat of death or serious injury to employees. 


3.1.280 Danger Tree — In the logging industry it refers 
to a standing tree that presents a hazard to employees 
due to certain conditions including, but not limited to, 
deterioration or physical damage to theroot system, 
trunk, stem or limbs, and the direction and lean of the 
tree. 


3.1.281 Danger Zone — A physical area or location 
within which a danger exists. It is typically identified 
with warning signs, painted ground lines, or through 
barriers either permanent or temporary. 


3.1.282 Dangerous — Attended with risk; hazardous; 
unsafe. Something that if in normal use, danger orinjury 
can be anticipated by the user. Something without 
adequate protection. 


15 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.283 Dangerous, Imminently — Something, by 
reason of defective construction, that causes an 
impending or threatening dangerous situation, which 
could be expected to cause death or serious injury to 
persons in the immediate future unless corrective 
measures are taken. 


3.1.284 Dangerous, Inherently — Something that is 
usually dangerous even in its normal or non- defective 
state, such as explosives or poisons, and requires special 
precautions and warnings so as to prevent injury. 


3.1.285 Dangerous Failure — A failure of a component 
in a safety instrumented function that prevents that 
function from achieving a safe state when it is required 
to do so. 


3.1.286 Dangerous Goods — Also referred to as 
hazardous materials. Any solid, liquid, or gas that can 
harm people, other living organisms, property, or the 
environment. 


3.1.287 Dangerous when Wet — Materials that when 
exposed to water allow a chemical reaction to take place 
and often produce flammable or poisonous gases, 
heat and a caustic solution. An example is sodium. 


3.1.288 Decision Tree — A flow chart designed to 
assist detector tube users in determining sampling 
strategies and interpreting results. 


3.1.289 Decompose — Breaking apart into smaller 
different chemicals. 


3.1.290 Decomposition — To undergo chemical 
breakdown, separating into constituent parts or 
elementsor into simpler compounds. 


3.1.291 Decomposition Energy — The maximum 
amount of energy which can be released upon 
decomposition. The product of decomposition energy 
and total mass is an important parameter for 
determining the effects of a sudden energy release — 
for example, in an explosion. The decomposition 
energy can occasionally be obtained from the literature 
or calculated theoretically. 


3.1.292 Decomposition Temperature — see auto 
decomposition temperature. 


3.1.293 Decontamination — Removal of noxious 
chemicals, harmful bacteria or other organisms from 
exposed individuals, rooms and furnishings in 
buildings, or the exterior environment. 


3.1.294 Degradation — A deleterious change in one or 
more physical properties of a protective material caused 
by contact with a chemical. 


3.1.295 Delayed Hazard — An adverse effect that has 
the potential to occur after an extended period of time. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


Particularly featured in harmful health effects. 


3.1.296 Dense Gas — A gas with density exceeding that 
of air at ambient temperature. 


3.1.297 Dependent Failure — A failure of multiple 
devices due to some common cause. Ex: The failure of 
all temperature sensors in a system due to mis 
calibration during maintenance. 


3.1.298 Depressurization — The release of unwanted 
gas pressure from a vessel or piping system to an 
effective disposal system to prevent the rupture of 
equipment or for the quick managed disposal of gas to 
prevent its uncontrolled release. 


3.1.299 Defensive Measures — Measures taken to 
reduce or mitigate the consequences of a runaway to an 
acceptable level. 


3.1.300 Derivitization — The process of trapping an 
airborne chemical onto a sorbent material or filter that 
has been pretreated with a chemical reagent, thereby 
causing a chemical reaction that produces a stable 
compound for analysis. 


3.1.301 Design Basis — The basis for sizing equipment 
and associated piping used for process or emergency 
relief services. This might include the flow rate, 
composition, pressure and temperature of streams 
handled under the most severe conditions reasonably 
expected to occur. 


3.1.302 Design Pressure — The design pressure of a 
vessel is at least the most severe condition of coincident 
temperature and gauge pressure expected during 
operation. The design pressure is the pressure used in 
the design of a vessel to determine the minimum 
permissible thickness or other physical characteristics 
of the different parts of a vessel (see also maximum 
allowable working pressure). 


3.1.303 Desorption — Removal of a substance from 
the surface at which it is absorbed. 


3.1.304 Desorption Efficiency — A measure of how 
much of a specific analyte can be recovered from a 
sorbent; typically expressed as a percent of analyte 
spiked onto the sorbent. 


3.1.305 Detector Tube — A hermetically sealed glass 
tube containing an inert solid or granular material such 
as silica gel, alumina, pumice or ground glass. 


3.1.306 Detector Tube System — A measuring device 
that consists of a pump and a detector tube. Accessories 
such as stroke counters, hoses, and probes also might be 
included. The exception of this is a passive dosimeter, 
which does not use a pump. 


16 


3.1.307 Dew point temperature (Tap) 


3.1.307.1 The temperature and pressure at which a gas 
begins to condense to a liquid. 


3.1.307.2 The temperature at which air becomes 
saturated when cooled without addition of moisture or 
change of pressure; any further cooling causes 
condensation. 


3.1.308 Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) — 
A technique in which the difference in energy inputs 
into a substance and a reference material is measured 
as a function of temperature, while the substance and 
the reference material are subjected to a controlled 
temperature program. 


3.1.309 Differential Set Pressure — The difference 
between the set pressure and the superimposed back 
pressure in the valve bonnet (pressure acting on the top 
of the valve disk) at the time the valve is called upon to 
operate. 


3.1.310 Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA) — A 
technique in which the temperature difference between 
a substance and reference material is measured as a 
function of temperature while the substance and the 
reference material are subjected to a controlled 
temperature program. 


3.1.311 Diffusion — Aerosol particles in a gaseous 
medium are bombarded by collisions with individual 
gas molecules that are in Brownian motion. This causes 
the particles to undergo random displacements known 
as diffusion. The particle parameter that describes this 
process is the particle diffusivity (or diffusion 
coefficient), DB. 


3.1.312 Diffusion System — A flow-metering system 
based on diffusion through a defined space. 


3.1.313 Diffusive Sampling — Passive samplers that 
rely on the movement of contaminant molecules across 
a concentration gradient that for steady-state conditions 
can be defined by Fick’s first law of diffusion. 


3.1.314 Dimensions of Risk — Attributes of risk that 
affect perception of risk. 


3.1.315 Directional Incident Outcome — An incident 
outcome whose consequences produce an effect zone 
determined by a given wind direction. 


3.1.316 Discharge Rate Model — Models used to 
estimate the mass release rate or total quantity released 
during the discharge of material from a process. 


3.1.317 Dispersion — The mixing and dilution of 
contaminate in the ambient environment. 


3.1.318 Dispersion Coefficient — The standard 
deviation in a specified direction of the Gaussian 
distribution model used in atmospheric dispersion. The 
dispersion coefficient is normally expressed as a 
function of distance for a given weather stability. 


3.1.319 Dispersion Model — A mathematical model 
describing how material is transported and dispersed 
down wind of a release. 


3.1.320 Displacement 


3.1.320.1 The linear distance from the initial to the final 
position of an object moved from one place to another, 
regardless of length of path followed. 


3.1.320.2 The distance of an oscillating particle from its 
equilibrium position. 


3.1.321 Disposal — Final placement or destruction of 
toxic or other wastes; surplus or banned pesticides or 
other chemicals; polluted oils; and drums containing 
hazardous materials from removal actions or accidental 
releases. Disposal may be accomplished through use of 
approved secure landfills, surface impoundments, land 
farming, deep-well injection, ocean dumping or 
incineration. 


3.1.322 Disproportionation — A chemical reaction in 
which a single compound serves as both oxidizing and 
reducing agent and is thereby converted into a more 
oxidized and more reduced derivative. For example, a 
hypochlorite upon appropriate heating yields a chlorite 
or a chloride, and ethyl radicals formedas intermediates 
are converted into ethane and ethylene. 


3.1.323 Disk (valve) — A disk is the pressure 
containing movable element of a pressure relief valve 
which effects closure. 


3.1.324 Distribution — Once a chemical has entered the 
body, it might need to be transported to other sites to 
induce toxic effects. 


3.1.325 Domino Effects — The triggering of secondary 
events, such as toxic releases, by a primary event, such 
as an explosion, such that the result is an increase in 
consequences or area of an effect zone. Generally only 
considered when a significant escalation of the original 
incident results. 


3.1.326 Dose — The amount 
administered to an organism. 


of a chemical 


3.1.327 Double Contingency Principle — The 
simultaneous failure of two components. Most risk 
analyses do not consider the simultaneous failure of two 
components a high probability, unless the system under 
review is of very high criticality, and therefore its 
reliability is of concern. 


17 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.328 Dry Chemical — One of the many types of fire 
extinguishers. The composition depends on the type of 
fire being fought against. The usual ones encountered 
are sand, sodium chloride, sodium bicarbonate, 
graphite, magnesium carbonate, magnesium oxide or a 
mixture of any or all of these. 


3.1.329 Dry Chemical Extinguisher — An extinguisher 
containing a chemical that extinguishes fire by 
interrupting the chain reaction, wherein the chemicals 
used prevent the union of free radical particles in the 
combustion process so that combustion does not 
continue when the flame front is completely covered 
with the agent. 


3.1.330 Dry Powder Extinguisher — A fire 
extinguisher designed for use on combustible metals 
fires, such as sodium, titanium, uranium, zirconium, 
lithium, magnesium, and sodium-potassium alloys. 


3.1.331 Dry Adiabatic Lapse Rate (DALR) — The 
negative of the temperature gradient established as dry 
air ascending in the atmosphere. For air with a 
molecular weight of 29 and a specific heat ration of 1.41 
the DALR = 0.995 °C/100 m. 


3.1.332 Dry Bulb Temperature (Ta,) — Temperature of 
air as determined by a standard thermometer. 
Temperature units are expressed in degrees Celcius 
(°C), Kelvin (K) (K = °C + 273), or degrees Fahrenheit 
(°F) (F = 9/5 °C + 32). 


3.1.333 Drying Train — A device used to dry a flow of 
or liquid by chemical absorption. 


3.1.334 Duplicate Sample — A sample collected in the 
same location and manner as an actual sample and used 
to evaluate the entire sampling/analysis method. 


3.1.335 Duration — The time required for the blast over 
pressure pulse to return to ambient pressure. 


E 


3.1.336 Effective Discharge Area — A nominal or 
computed area of flow through a pressure relief valve, 
differing from the actual discharge area, for use in 
recognized flow formulas to determine the capacity of 
a pressure relief valve. 

NOTE Also termed the —orfice area. 


3.1.337 Ejection Hazard — A form of machinery 
exposure, whereby particles or items are emitted or 
thrown off by a machine, which may lead to an injury. 
A shield or barrier is a protective device to guard 
against this immediate hazard. 


3.1.338 Electrical Hazard — A condition that exists 
where contact or equipment failure can result in electric 
shock, arc flash burn, thermal burn, or blast. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.339 Electrically Safe Work Condition — A state 
where an electrical conductor or circuit part has to be 
disconnected from energized parts, locked and tagged 
in accordance with established standards, tested to 
ensure the absence of voltage, and, if necessary, 
grounded. 


3.1.340 = Electrochemical Detector — An 
electrochemical detector responds to compounds (such 
as phenols, aromatic amines, ketones, aldehydes, and 
mercaptans) that can be readily oxidized or reduced. 
Electrode systems use working and reference electrodes 
to quantify analytes over a range of six orders of 
magnitude. 


3.1.341 Electrochemical Sensors — Sensors used by a 
variety of instruments dedicated to monitoring specific 
single gas and vapor contaminants. Electrochemical 
sensors are available for up to 50 different individual 
gases, including oxygen, carbon monoxide, nitric oxide, 
nitrogen dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen cyanide 
and sulfur dioxide. 


3.1.342 Electrolyte — A chemical compound that when 
molten or dissolved in certain solvents, usually water, 
will conduct an electric current. 


3.1.343 Electromagnetic Radiation — The 
propagation, or transfer, of energy through space and 
matter by time-varying electric and magnetic fields. 


3.1.344 Electromagnetic Spectrum — The total range 
of wavelengths or frequencies of electromagnetic 
radiation, extending from the longest radio waves to the 
shortest known cosmic rays. Any location on the 
spectrum may be characterized by wavelength, 
frequency and photon energy. 


3.1.345 Electromagnetic Susceptibility — A problem 
experienced with sampling equipment due to 
electromagnetic fields in the environment that might 
result in errors or malfunctions in operation. 


3.1.346 Electron Capture Detector (ECD) — 
Extremely sensitive gas chromatography detector that 
is a modification of the argon ionization detector, with 
conditions adjusted to favor the formation of negative 
ions. 


3.1.347 Electron Equilibrium — A point or area in a 
radiation detector in which the number of electrons 
entering equals the number of electrons leaving the 
local point volume. 


3.1.348 Electronic Gas Detector — A device for 
detecting and measuring flammable gases based on 
their reaction with an electric filament. The resulting 
combustion and rise in temperature can be detected 
electronically and displayed as a concentration in air. 


18 


3.1.349 Electrostatic Precipitator — An air-cleaning 
device that involves the following steps: electrical 
charging of suspended particulate matter; collection of 
charged particles on a grounded surface; and removal 
of particulates from the collecting surface by 
mechanical vibration or flushing with liquid. 


3.1.350 Element — Solid, liquid or gaseous matter that 
cannot be further decomposed into simpler substances 
by chemical means. 


3.1.351 Electron Volt (eV) — A unit of energy 
equivalent to the amount gained by an electron in 
passing through a potential difference of one volt. Large 
multiple units of the electron volt are frequently used, 
such as KeV for kilo electron volts (1 000 eV). 
MeV for million electron volts (106 eV), and BeV for 
billion electron volts (109 eV). 


3.1.352 Emergency — A non-routine situation that 
necessitates prompt remedial action, primarily to 
mitigate a hazard or adverse consequences for human 
health and safety, quality of life, property, or the 
environment. This includes conventional emergencies 
such as fires, release of hazardous chemicals, storms, or 
earthquakes. It also includes situations for which 
prompt action is warranted to mitigate the effects of a 
perceived hazard. 


3.1.353 Emergency Action — An action performed to 
mitigate the impact of an emergency on human health 
and safety, property, or the environment. 


3.1.354 Emergency Alarm — A warning device, usually 
visual or auditory, that indicates the existence ofan 
emergency situation requiring immediate action. 


3.1.355 Emergency Exposure Limit (EEL) — The 
maximum amount of a toxic agent to which an 
individual can be exposed for a very brief (emergency) 
period of time and still maintain physical safety. 


3.1.356 Emergency Isolation Valve (EIV) — A valve 
that, in event of fire, rupture, or loss of containment, is 
used to stop the release of flammable or combustible 
liquids, combustible gas, or potentially toxic material. 
An EIV can be either hand operated or power operated 
(air, hydraulic, or electrical actuation). EIVs can be 
actuated either by an emergency shutdown (ESD) 
system or by a local or remote actuating button, 
depending on the design of the facility. 


3.1.357 Emergency Management Agency — The state 
and local agencies responsible for emergency 
operations, planning, mitigation, preparedness, 
response, and recovery for all hazards. 


3.1.358 Emergency Operations Plan — The steady- 
state plan maintained by various jurisdictional levels 
for responding to a wide variety of potential hazards. 


3.1.359 Emission 


3.1.359.1 Material released into the air either by a 
primary source or a secondary source, as a result of a 
photochemical reaction or chain reactions. 


3.1.359.2 Any radiation of energy by means of 
electromagnetic waves, as from a_ radioactive 
transmitter. 


3.1.360 Emission or Exposure Control — The technical 
and administrative procedures applied for the reduction 
or elimination of emissions from the source or of 
exposure to the target. 


3.1.361 Emission Standard — This regulatory value is 
a quantitative limit on the emission or discharge 
potentially toxic substance from a source. see limit 
values 


3.1.362 Emergency Shutdown (ESD) System — The 
safety control system which overrides the action of the 
basic control system when predetermined conditions 
are violated. 


3.1.363 Emergency Vent — A vent designed to respond 
to an overpressure or temperature excursion in 
protected equipment by opening and discharging 
materials from the equipment to relieve excessive 
pressure. This is commonly a pressure relief device. 


3.1.364 Emergency Services — The local off-site 
response organizations that are generally available and 
that perform emergency response functions. These may 
include police, fire fighters and rescue brigades, 
ambulance services, and control teams for hazardous 
materials. 


3.1.365 Emergency Shutdown (ESD) — A control 
feature to safely stop a process. An emergency 
shutdown generally consists of stopping equipment, 
closing isolation valves on the supply or discharge lines 
from the process, or causing the system to be 
depressurized. The emergency shutdown features 
chosen for a particular process are dependent on the 
hazards of the process materials, quantities involved, 
arrangement of equipment, and exposures. 


3.1.366 Emergency Shutdown Button — An operator 
control, usually a push-button with a large, red, 
protruding mushroom head, that when actuated initiates 
an emergency stop. 


3.1.367 Emergency Shutdown System — A system 
composed of sensors, logic solvers, and final control 
elements for the purpose of taking the process, or 
specific equipment in the process, to a safe state when 
predetermined conditions are violated. The system is 
designed to isolate, de-energize, shut down, or de- 
pressure equipment in a process unit. 


19 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.368 Emergency Shut-off — A switch placed in a 
convenient position for cutting off the supply of 
electricity to a piece of equipment or to a building, in 
case of emergency. 


3.1.369 Emergency Stop — Arrest of dangerous 
machine motion resulting from actuation of an 
emergency stop switch. The switch may be in the form 
of a safety switch, button, trip cable, or foot barer other 
mechanical device used in conjunction with an 
emergency stop safety module. 


3.1.370 Emission Control — Engineering measures, 
including devices, used to prevent worker exposure to 
contaminants that are released within the workplace. 
The term also refers to measures used on internal 
combustion engines, exhaust stacks, and other emission 
sources that are used to protect the general public. 


3.1.371 Employee Exposure Records — Information 
results or records concerning employee exposures to 
harmful substances or agents in the workplace, such as 
inventories of chemicals, material safety data sheets, 
and work area sampling results. 


3.1.372 Endothermic — A physical or chemical change 
that requires or is accompanied by the absorption of 
heat. 


3.1.373 Energy 
3.1.373.1 Capacity to do work. 


3.1.373.2 Having several forms that may be 
transformed from one to another such as thermal (heat), 
mechanical (work), electrical and chemical. 


3.1.374 Energy Spectrum — The orderly separation of 
the components of a beam of radiation according to 
their wavelengths, frequencies for quantum energies. 


3.1.375 Entrainment — The suspension of liquid as an 
aerosol in the atmospheric dispersion of a two-phase 
release or the aspiration of air into a jet discharge. 


3.1.376 Enthalpy of Reaction — The net difference in 
the enthalpies of formation of all of the products and the 
enthalpies of all of the reactants; heat is released if the 
net difference is negative. 


3.1.377 Environmental Conditions — Natural or 
controlled conditions of air and radiation prevailing 
around a person, an object, a substance etc. 


3.1.378 Environmental Monitoring — Program in 
which samples of air contaminants or energy 
measurements are taken and which establishes the level 
of worker exposure to such agents. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.379 Environmental Transformation — Once 
emitted into the environment, a chemical substance may 
be transported in the biosphere and undergo various 
types of chemical changes. 


3.1.380 Environmental Quality — Any standard 
specifying lower limits for contaminants, chemical or 
physical agents, and/or resulting stresses to the human 
body in order to maintain a particular, healthful, and 
safe environment in which to work. 


3.1.381 Episodic Release — A release of limited 
duration, usually associated with an accident. 


3.1.382 Equation of State — An equation that relates 
the pressure (P), volume (V), and thermodynamic 
temperature (T), and an amount of substance (n). The 
simplest form is the Ideal Gas Law: PV = nRT. 


3.1.383 Equilibrium — Condition in which a particle, 
or all the constituent particles of a body at rest orin 
unaccelerated motion in an inertial reference frame. 


3.1.384 Equipment Reliability — The probability that, 
when operating under stated environment conditions, 
process equipment will perform its intended function 
adequately for a specified exposure period. 


3.1.385 Equivalent Ideal Nozzle Area — The product of 
the nozzle area and the coefficient of discharge. 


3.1.386 Ergonomic Hazard Prevention and Control — 
Elimination or minimizing the ergonomic hazards 
identified in a worksite analysis through reduction of 
the frequency, duration, and severity of the exposureto 
the hazard. It includes work methods training, job 
rotation, gradual work introduction, and changes in the 
workstation, tools, or environment to fit the individual. 


3.1.387 Es of Safety, the Three (3Es) — The 
supervisory duties of maintaining and improving safety 
through Engineering, Education, and Enforcement. 
Engineer hazards out of the workplace, educate 
employees in safe work practices and procedures, and 
enforce all safety rules and policies. 


3.1.388 Evaporation Rate 


3.1.388.1 The ratio of the time required to evaporate a 
measured volume of a liquid to the time required to 
evaporate the same volume of a reference liquid under 
ideal test conditions. The higher the ratio, the slower the 
evaporation rate. 


3.1.388.2 The rate at which a material is converted from 
the liquid or solid state to the vapor state; may be 
expressed relative to the evaporation rate of a known 
material, usually n-Butyl acetate (with an evaporation 
rate of 1.0 by definition). Faster evaporation rates are 
> 1, and slower evaporation rates are < 1. 


20 


3.1.389 Exhaust (General) — Diluting the general 
room atmosphere with outdoor air fast enough to keep 
the concentration of toxic vapor in the room air within 
safe limits. It may also be known as General Ventilation 
or Dilution Ventilation. 


3.1.390 Exhaust (Local) — A local exhaust system is 
used to collect air contaminants at the source, as 
contrasted with general ventilation, which allows the 
contaminant to spread throughout the workroom, later 
to be diluted by exhausting quantities of air from the 
room. Local exhaust may be achieved using an 
enclosure, a receiving hood, or an exterior hood. 


3.1.391 Exhaust Ventilation — The removal of air or 
other gas from any work space, usually by mechanical 
means. 


3.1.392 Exit — The portion of an exit route that is 
generally separated from other areas to provide a 
protected way of travel to the exit discharge from the 
effects of an incident. An example of an exit is a 2 hour 
fire-resistance-rated enclosed stairway that leads from 
the fifth floor of an office building to the outside of the 
building. Exits include exterior exit doors, exit 
passageways, horizontal exits, and separatedexit stairs 
or ramps. 


3.1.393 Exit Sign — A designated identification label 
provided at or near an exit that is clearlyrecognizable 
and visible and identifies the exit or the path to an exit. 
Some codes require red exit signs and others green. 
Red is usually associated with fire and exit lights and 
green for safety. 


3.1.394 Exothermic — A process or chemical reaction 
that is accompanied by release of heat. 


3.1.395 Expected Number of Failures (ENF) — The 
average number of occurrences of the fault event during 
a specified time interval. 


3.1.396 Explode — The rapid expansion of a material 
or container with the release of energy, heat or pressure. 


3.1.397 Explosive — Any substance designed to 
produce an explosion (i.e. an extremely rapid release of 
gas and heat) or capable of producing an explosion by 
reacting with itself. 


3.1.398 Exposure — Contact between a chemical, 
physical, or biological agent and the outer surfaces of 
an organism. Exposure to an agent does not imply that 
it will be absorbed or that it will produce an effect. 


3.1.399 Exposure, Casualty — Proximity to a condition 
that may produce injury, death, or damage from dusts, 
chemicals, high pressure, explosives, etc. 


3.1.400 Exposure, Occupational — The quantity of 
time involved, and the level (quantity) and nature 
(quality) of employee involvement with certain types of 
environments possessing various degrees or types of 
hazards in the course of their work. 


3.1.401 Exposed or Non-Exposed — Qualitative terms 
defining the existence of or lack of a hazard in the 
environment of individuals. 


3.1.402 Exposure Assessment — The quantification of 
the amount of exposure to a hazard for an individual or 


group. 


3.1.403 Exposure Level — The level or concentration 
of a physical or chemical hazard to which an employee 
is exposed. 


3.1.404 Exposure Limit — A general term implying the 
level of exposure that should not be exceeded. 


3.1.405 Exposure Records — The records kept by an 
employer, or company doctor or nurse of an employee’s 
exposure to a hazardous material or physical agent in 
the workplace. These records show the time, level, and 
length of exposure for each substance or agent involved. 


3.1.406 Extinguisher — Any agent used to fight fire 
with a view to put it out. 


3.1.407 Extinguishing Agent — Material or substance 
that performs a fire extinguishing function. Common 
extinguishing agents are water, carbon dioxide, dry 
chemical, alcohol foam, and halogenated gases 
(Halons). It is important to know which extinguishers 
can be used so they can be made available at the 
worksite. It is also important to know which agents 
cannot be used since an incorrect extinguisher may not 
work or may create a more hazardous situation. If 
several materials are involved in a fire, an extinguisher 
effective for all of the materials should be used. 
Sometimes referred to as Extinguishing Media. 


3.1.408 Extrapolation — The calculation, based on 
quantitative observations in exposed test species, of 
predicted dose-effect and dose-response relationships 
for a chemical in humans and other environmental 
biota. 


F 


3.1.409 Face Shield — A protective device designed to 
prevent hazardous substances, dust particles, sharp 
objects, and other materials from contacting the face or 
eyes. It may be worn over safety glasses or goggles. 


3.1.410 Facepiece — The portion of a respirator that 
covers the user’s nose and mouth in a half-mask 
facepiece, or the nose, mouth, and eyes in a full 
facepiece. It is designed to make a gas-tight or dust- 


21 


IS 4155 : 2023 


tight fit with the face and includes the headband, 
exhalation valves, band connections for an air purifying 
device or respirable gas source or both. 


3.1.411 Facility Layout — The act or process of laying 
out, or planning in detail, to show the arrangement of 
equipment and other elements of a facility to establish a 
safe working environment. 


3.1.412 Factor of Safety — Ratio of a normal working 
condition to which the ultimate conditions, such as, in 
strength of materials, ratio of working stress to ultimate 
strength. 


3.1.413 Fail-Safe — Design features which provide for 
the maintenance of safe operating conditions in the 
event of a malfunction of control devices or an 
interruption of an energy source (e.g., direction of 
failure of a motor operated valve on loss of motive 
power). Features incorporated for automatically 
counteracting the effect of an anticipated possible 
source of failure. A system is fail-safe of failure of a 
component, signal or utility initiates action that return 
the system to a safe condition. 


3.1.414 Fail Steady (FS) — A condition wherein the 
component stays in its last position when the actuating 
energy source fails. It may also be called Fail-in-Place. 


3.1.415 Fail to Danger — A system design or condition 
such that the failure of a component, subsystem, or 
system or input to it, will automatically revert to an 
unsafe condition or state of highest critical consequence 
for the component, subsystem, or system. 


3.1.416 Failure — An unacceptable difference between 
expected and observed performance. 


3.1.417 Failure, Critical — A failure that could result 
in major injury or fatality to people or major damage to 
any system or loss of a critical function. 


3.1.418 Failure Mode — A symptom, condition, or 
fashion in which hardware fails. A mode might be 
identified as a loss of function; premature function 
(function without demand); and out-of-tolerance 
condition; or a simple physical characteristic such as a 
leak (incipient failure mode) observed during 
inspection. 


3.1.419 Failure, Primary — The failure that is 
responsible for a system malfunction. 


3.1.420 Failure, Secondary — A failure that occurs as 
the consequence of another failure. 


3.1.421 Failure Analysis — The logical systematic 
examination of an item to identify and analyze the 
cause, mode, and consequence of a real failure. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.422 Failure Assessment — The process by which 
the cause, effect, responsibility, and cost of any 
reported problem in the system is determined and 
reported. 


3.1.423 Failure Management — Decisions, policies, 
and planning that identify and eliminate or control 
potential failures and implement corrective or control 
procedures following real failures. 


3.1.424 Failure Mechanism — The chemistry of the 
failure event, i.e., the cause of the failure. 


3.1.425 Failure Mode and Effects Analysis — A hazard 
identification technique in which all known failure 
modes of components or features of a system are 
considered in turn and undesired outcomes are noted. 


3.1.426 Failure Probability — The probability-a value 
from 0 to 1 that a piece of equipment will fail on 
demand (not to be confused with fractional dead time) 
or will fail in a given time interval. 


3.1.427 Failure Rate — The number of failure events 
that occur divided by the total elapsed operating time 
during which these events occur or by the total number 
of demands, as applicable. 


3.1.428 Failure Severity — The degree of function 
degradation of equipment usually noted through 
deficient performance; categorized by the terms 
"Catastrophic," "Degraded," and "Incipient." 


3.1.429 Fatal Accident Rate (FAR) — The estimated 
number of fatalities per 108 exposure hours (roughly 1 
000 employee working lifetimes). 


3.1.430 Fault Hazard Analysis — The analysis of 
hazards or hazard potential situations using fault tree 
methodology. see also Fault Tree Analysis (FTA). 


3.1.431 Fault Tree — A method for representing the 
logical combinations of various system states that lead 
to a particular outcome (top event). 


3.1.432 Fault Tree Analysis — Estimation of the 
hazardous incident (top event) frequency from the 
logical model of the failure mechanisms of a system. 


3.1.433 Fault Tolerant — A control system 
configuration that inherently provides auto selection 
of alternate or redundant signal paths to effect 
uninterrupted operations. 


3.1.434 Fibre Pack — A leak resistant container made 
of flammable material that is used to collect, storeand 
transport chemicals before they are incinerated. 


3.1.435 Fire — The chemical combination of oxygen 
with fuel accompanied by evolution of thermal energy, 
indicated by incandescence or flame. 


22 


3.1.436 Fire Alarm — A device or system (visual, 
auditory, local, or transmitted to other locations, etc.) 
that signals the presence of a fire to occupants and those 
who will provide assistance. 


3.1.437 Fire Alarm Control Panel (FACP) — A control 
system for receiving fire alarm signals and initiating 
actions to highlight conditions (alarms and beacons) or 
institute actions to automatically activatefire protective 
systems (i.e., fire pump startup, HVAC shutdown, etc.). 
The fire alarm control panel also provides an indication 
of the fire detection activation point through an 
annunciator panel or area and zone indicator lights, 
which highlight the specific location in a facility from 
where an alarm has been initiated. The FACP is 
required to meet specific performance requirements for 
reliability. 


3.1.438 Fire Class — A simple letter designation given 
to a particular fire category for the purposes of 
generally classifying (severity and hazard) the fire 
according to the type of fuel and possible spread of the 
fire and type of extinguisher agent to use for it. A is used 
for ordinary combustibles (wood, cloth, paper, rubber, 
and many plastics), B for flammable liquids and gases 
(oils, liquid fuels, lubrication oils, hydraulic fluids, 
greases, tars, oil-based paints, lacquers, aerosols, 
cleaning compounds, and cutting orfuel gases), C for 
energized electrical fires, and D for combustible metal 
fires (magnesium, titanium, zirconium, sodium, or 
potassium). 


3.1.439 Fire Code — A regulatory document for the 
implementation of measures to prevent theoccurrence, 
spread, and institute suppression capability for 
unwanted fires. Enforcement is maintained by state Fire 
Inspectors and Fire Marshals. Most codes are 
determined by consensus agreement and thereforemay 
not represent the highest or lowest level of protection 
that may be available, but what has been determined as 
appropriate by the experienced members determining 
the fire code specifications. Most firecodes have been 
prescriptive in nature, i.e specifying exact 
requirements; however, the trend has been to provide 
performance-based codes that require a specific 
outcome and allow the detailed requirements to be 
determined by the premises owner as long as they meet 
the performance requirements. 


3.1.440 Fire Detection — A device for the detection 
and notification of a fire event. Fire alarms can be 
activated by people or automatic devices that can detect 
the presence of fire. These include heat-sensitive 
devices, which are activated if a specific temperature is 
reached; a rate-of-rise heat detector, which is triggered 
either by a quick or a gradual escalation of temperature; 
and smoke detectors, which sense changes caused by 
the presence of smoke, in the intensity of light, in the 
refraction of light, or in the ionization of air. The 
arrangement and type of fire detectors for optimum 
performance is usually specified by fire codes or 
industry guidelines. 


3.1.441 Fire Door — Doors that are rated and tested for 
resistance to various degrees of fire exposure and 
utilized to prevent the spread of fire through horizontal 
and vertical openings. The doors must remain closed 
normally or be closed automatically in the presence of 
fire. The degree of resistance required is determined by 
the type of occupancy, the anticipated fire exposure, 
and the resistance of the structure in which it is 
installed. 


3.1.442 Fire Drill — A planned or unplanned 
evacuation of a building, facility, or location in order to 
familiarize and train the occupants in the means of 
escape to a safe location. 


3.1.443 Fire Ball — A burning fuel-air cloud whose 
energy is emitted primarily in the form of radiant heat. 
The inner core of the cloud consists almost completely 
of fuel, whereas the outer layer (where ignition first 
occurs) consists of a flammable fuel-air mixture. As the 
buoyancy forces of hot gases increase, the burning 
cloud tends to rise, expand and assume a spherical 
shape. 


3.1.444 Fire Hazard — A term that connotes all the 
implied risks associated with the start and spread of fire. 


3.1.445 Fire Point — The temperature at which a 
material continues to burn when the ignition source is 
removed. 


3.1.446 Fire (Flame) Proof — Material incapable of 
burning. The term fire proof is considered false. No 
material is immune to the effects of a fire possessing 
sufficient intensity and duration. It is commonly, 
although erroneously, used synonymously with the 
term — fire resistive. Use of the term is discouraged 
since it is misleading. 


3.1.447 Fire Protection — In general terminology this 
refers to the prevention, detection, and extinguishment 
office and reduction or avoidance of losses in human 
terms, assets, business activities, environmental impact, 
and prestige. In a specific application, it is the providing 
of fire control orextinguishment. It may also be used to 
signify the degree to which protection from fire is 
applied. 


3.1.448 Fire Protection Engineering — The discipline 
of engineering that applies scientific and technical 
principles to safeguard life, property, loss of income, 
and threat to the environment from the effects of fires, 
explosions, and related hazards. It is associated with the 
design and layout of buildings, industrial properties, 
structures, equipment, processes, and supporting 
systems. It is concerned with fire prevention, control, 
suppression, and extinguishment and provides for 
consideration of functional, operational, economic, 
aesthetic and regulatory requirements. 


23 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.449 Fire Protection System — An integrated 
system that affords protection against fire and its 
effects. It may be composed of either active or passive 
fire protection measures. The fire protectionsystem 
should be commensurate with the level of hazard it is 
protecting. 


3.1.450 Fire Pump — A pump specifically designed, 
designated, and installed to provide adequate and 
sufficient water supplies for controlling and 
suppressing unwanted fires. A fire water pump may be 
drivenby an electric motor, diesel engine, or steam 
turbine. Gasoline engines are not recommended due to 
their reduced reliability and inherent fire hazard. Fire 
pumps may be mobile or stationary. Mobile pumps used 
by fire departments and mounted on trucks are referred 
to as fire pumpers. 


3.1.451 Fire Resistive — Refers to properties of 
materials or designs to resist the effects of any fire to 
which the material or structure may be expected to be 
subject. A building constructed of fire-resistive 
materials can withstand a burnout of its contents 
without subsequent structural collapse. Fire resistive 
implies a higher degree of fire resistance than 
noncombustible. 


3.1.452 Fire Retardant — In general this denotes a 
substantially lower degree of fire resistance than fire 
resistive. The term is frequently used to refer to 
materials or structures that are combustible but have 
been subjected to treatments or surface coverages to 
prevent or retard ignition or the spread of fire. 


3.1.453 Fire Square — A graphical symbolic 
representation of the four factors needed for the 
propagation of combustion or fire. Each side of the 
square is representative of a factor. The four factors 


include fuel, oxidizer, ignition source, and chain 
reaction. Removal or blockage of one of the elements 
prevents the combustion process from occurring or 
continuing. 


3.1.454 Fire Tetrahedron — A graphical symbolic 
representation of the four factors needed for the 
propagation of combustion or fire. Each side of the 
tetrahedron is representative of a factor. The four 
factors include fuel, oxidizer, ignition source, and chain 
reaction. Removal or blockage of one of the elements 
prevents the combustion process from occurring or 
continuing. 


3.1.455 Fire Triangle — Geometric symbolic 
representation of the combustion process whereby each 
side of the triangle is one independent element of the 
process, namely fuel (usually in vapor form), oxidizer, 
and ignition source (of sufficient energy and high 


IS 4155 : 2023 


temperature to initiate a combustion process). Removal 
of one element of the triangle stops the combustion 
process. The chain reaction of fire is sometimes 
indicated in combustion. Liquid mist and finely divided 
particles that are readily converted to vapor have 
combustion characteristics much the same as vapors. 
Carbon and some metals and dusts arean exception in 
that fuel must be in a vapor form for a combustion 
process. 


3.1.456 Fire Wall — A fire-resistant wall designed to 
prevent the horizontal spread of fire into adjacent areas 
that is generally self-supporting and designed to 
maintain its integrity if the structure on either side 
completely collapses. If a wood roof is involved, the 
wall must extend through and above the roof. 


3.1.457 First in First Out System — A method used in 
chemicals storage and distribution so that there is least 
chance of accumulating old stocks that may deteriorate 
or build up hazardous materials. 


3.1.458 Flame (Flash) Arrestor — Devices utilized on 
vents for flammable liquid or gas tanks, storage 
containers, cans, gas lines, or flammable liquid 
pipelines to prevent flash-back (movement of flame) 
through the line or into the container when a flammable 
or explosive mixture is ignited. 


3.1.459 Flame Propagation — The spread of flame 
throughout a combustible vapor area, which may be in 
a container or across a surface, independent of the 
ignition source. Generally used in connection with the 
capability and rate of such movement. 


3.1.460 Flameout — The unexpected loss of a burner 
flame during furnace operations, which can create 
potentially explosive conditions due to buildup of 
combustible vapors. 


3.1.461 Flammable — Broadly, a flammable material 
is any solid, liquid or gas that will ignite easily andburn 
in air rapidly. 


3.1.462 Flammable Gas — A gas that at ambient 
temperature and pressure forms a flammable mixture 
with air at a concentration of 13 percent by volume or 
less; or a gas that at ambient temperature and pressure 
forms a range of flammable mixtures with air greater 
than 12 percent by volume, regardless of the lower 
explosive limit. 


3.1.463 Flammable Liquid — A liquid with a flash 
point less than 100°F (37.8 °C) as specified by NFPA 
321 (1991). Class IA flammable liquids have flash 
points below 73 °F (22.8 °C) and boiling points below 
100 °F (37.8 °C). Class IB flammable liquids have flash 
points below 73°F (22.8 °C) and boiling points at or 
above 100 °F (37.8 °C). Class IC flammable liquids 
have flash points at or above 73 °F (22.8 °C) and below 
100 °F (37.8 °C). 


24 


3.1.464 Flammable Vapor — A concentration, by 
volume, of vapors in air from a flammable liquid within 
the lower and upper flammable limits. 


3.1.465 Flammability Limit — A flame can 
propagate in a mixture of combustible gas and air 
(or oxygen) only if the concentration of the gas is 
between two limits known as the lower and upper 
flammable (exposure) limits. 


3.1.466 Flammable Mass — The mass of flammable 
vapor within a vapor cloud that will burn on ignition. 


3.1.467 Flammable Range — The percentage of fuel 
vapors in air where ignition can occur. Flammable 
range has an upper and lower limit. 


3.1.468 Flammable-Storage Cupboard or Container — 
A device specially designed for the safe storage of 
solvents or other flammable materials to avoid their 
combustion even if they are involved in a fire. 


3.1.469 Flame Ionization Detector (FID) — A device 
in which the measured change in conductivity of a 
standard flame (usually hydrogen) due to the insertion 
of another gas or vapor is used to detect the gas or 
vapor. 


3.1.470 Flame Photometric Detector (FPD) — The 
flame photometric detector is used to measure 
phosphorus and sulfur containing compounds such as 
organophosphate pesticides and mercaptans. The FPD 
measures phosphorus or sulfur-containing compounds 
by burning the column effluent in a hydrogen air-flame 
with an excess of hydrogen. Sulfur and phosphorus 
compounds emit light above the flame; a filter 
optimized to pass light at 393 nm is used to detect 
phosphorus compounds. A photomultiplier tube is then 
used to quantify the amount of light passing through the 
selective filter. 


3.1.471 Flare — The flame condition of a fire in which 
burning occurs with an unsteady flame. In the process 
industries (i.e., chemical and petroleum) a flare refers 
to a primary fire safety system used for the safe remote 
disposal of gases by burning from normal processes or 
emergency conditions. Process gases that cannot be 
safely disposed of may contribute to fire 
destructiveness or cause a vessel rupture or BLEVE 
(Boiling Liquid Expanding Vapor Explosion). 


3.1.472 Flash Back — The ignition of vapors and the 
travel of the flame back to the liquid/vapor release 
source. 


3.1.473 Flashpoint Temperature — The temperature at 
which a liquid is capable of producing enough 
flammable vapor to ignite. 


3.1.474 Flash Point — The lowest temperature of a 
liquid at which a flame can be propagated across the 
surface of the liquid when a standard ignition source is 
applied. 


3.1.475 Flash Fire — The combustion of a flammable 
gas or vapor and air mixture in which the flame 
propagates through that mixture in a manner such that 
negligible or no damaging over pressure is generated. 


3.1.476 Flux — In nucleonics, the product of the 
number of particles per unit volume and their velocity. 


3.1.477 Flow-dilution System — A system that 
continuously mixes accurately metered flows of a test 
component with a diluent. 


3.1.478 Fluids — A state of matter that flows under 
pressure (i.e., gas and liquid states) 


3.1.479 F-N Curve — A plot of cumulative frequency 
versus consequences (expressed as number of 
fatalities). 


3.1.480 Foam — A suspension, often colloidal, of a gas 
in a liquid. In fire-fighting terminology, a type of 
extinguisher, produced by bubbling carbon dioxide or 
some other gas (which is not a supporter of combustion) 
through a liquid containing foam producing material. 


3.1.481 Fog — Liquid particles dispersed in air. 


3.1.482 Food Laboratory Safety Programme — The 
strict observance of the precept that food and drink are 
not to be consumed in a chemical laboratory, nor stored 
in the same place as chemicals for laboratory use. This 
is especially important with regard to refrigerators, deep 
freezers and ice-making machines. 


3.1.483 Force — An interaction of two objects that 
produces a change in state of motion of an object. A 
force may cause an object to move, accelerate or 
decelerate it, change its direction or stop it from 
moving. 

3.1.484 Force Couple — The pair of forces arranged to 
produce pure rotation (angular motion). 


3.1.485 Foreseability — The legal theory that a person 
may be held liable for actions that result in injury or 
damage only where the person was able to foresee 
dangers and risks that could reasonably beanticipated. 


3.1.486 Foreseeable Emergency — Potential 
occurrence such as equipment failure, rupture of 
containers,or failure of control equipment, which could 
result in an uncontrolled release of a hazardous 
chemical. 


3.1.487 Fractional Dead Time (FDT) — The mean 
fraction of time in which a component or system is 
unable to operate on demand. (Also known as 
Unavailability). 


25 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.488 Frequency — Number of occurrences of an 
event per unit of time. 


3.1.489 Freeze — To change from a liquid state to a 
solid state. 


3.1.490 Freeboard — The clear, vertical space above a 
liquid or a foam in a vessel. 


3.1.491 Free Radical — A chemical intermediate 
having one unpaired electron that can initiate a chain 
reaction; such a reaction may be self-sustaining or liable 
to quenching by a scavenger. 


3.1.492 Freezing Point — For a particular pressure, the 
temperature at which a given substance will solidify or 
freeze upon removal of heat. The freezing point of 
water is 32 °F (0 °C). 


3.1.493 Frequency — The number of occurrences per 
unit time at which observed events occur or are 
predicted to occur. 


3.1.494 Frothover — When water is present or enters a 
tank containing hot viscous oil, the sudden conversion 
of water to steam causes a portion of the tank contents 
to overflow. 


3.1.495 Frozen — A term to describe a mixture of 
vapor and liquid in which the ratio of phases does not 
change as the mixture moves through a pipe (i.e., 
neither flashing nor condensation occur). 


3.1.496 Fuel — Material which either by a process of 
combustion or nuclear chain reaction is capable of 
liberating utilizable thermal energy. 


3.1.497 Fume 


3.1.497.1 Minute solid particles generated by 
condensation from the gaseous state, generally after 
volatization (evaporation) from melted substances, 
such as welding and often accompanied by a chemical 
reaction, such as oxidation. 


3.1.497.2 Very small, air borne particles commonly 
formed by condensing vapors from burning or melting 
materials. 


3.1.498 Fume Fever — An acute condition caused by a 
brief high exposure to the freshly generated fumes of 
metals. 


3.1.499 Fungicide — A substance used to kill fungi. 


3.1.500 Function Check — A function check, or bump 
test, means using simple tests (such as exposing sensors 
to calibration gas or exhaling into the oxygen sensor) to 
show that the instrument will respond to the chemical(s) 
of concern and that all alarms operate as they were 
designed. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.501 Functional Safety Assessment — Activity 
performed by a competent senior engineer to determine 
if the safety system meets the specification and actually 
achieves functional safety (freedom from unacceptable 
risk). This assessment is an important part of reducing 
systematic failures. It must be performed at least after 
commissioning and validation but before the hazard is 
present. 


3.1.502 Fuse, Electrical — A form of electrical circuit 
protection that comprises a strip of metal of such size to 
melt at a predetermined value of current flow. It is 
placed in the electrical circuit, and upon melting, due 
to excessive current flow, prevents the flow of 
electricity supply to the circuit. 


3.1.533 Fusible Link — A release device that is 
activated by the heat effects of a fire. It typically 
consists of two pieces of metal joined by a low-melting- 
point solder. They are manufactured in various 
temperatures and with varying amounts of applied 
tension. When installed and the rated temperature is 
reached, the solder melts and the two metal parts 
separate, initiating the desired fire safety function. 


3.1.504 Fusible Plug — A hollowed threaded plug 
having the hollowed portion filled with a low- melting- 
point material. This element is often used to provide a 
mechanical relief device triggered by temperature 
causing the process fluid to vent when the plug material 
melts. It is typically used in a pneumatic fire detection 
system or sprinkler system to indicate the presence of a 
fire condition and disperse the gas or fluid in the 
contained system. 


3.1.505 Fusible Link Device — A non-reclosing 
pressure relief device designed to function by the 
yielding or melting of a plug of suitable melting 
temperature material. 


G 


3.1.506 Gas Chromatograph (GC) — GC is an 
instrument that separates molecular mixtures in the 
gaseous phase. It is used to detect number of chemicals 
and their concentration in the given sample (it is not 


known as = mass spectrometer). The mass 
spectrometer can be used as a detector to GC. 
3.1.507 Gas Chromatography — A separation 


technique involving passage of a gaseous moving phase 
through a column containing a fixed adsorbent phase; it 
is used principally as a quantitative analytical technique 
for volatile compounds. 


3.1.508 Gas Constant (R) — The coefficient (R) in the 
Ideal Gas Law equation given by PV= nRT; the 
constant factor in the equation of state for ideal gases. 
In the SI system the units, R= 0.082 05 1 atm/mole 
(K). 


26 


3.1.509 Gas Detector — A device that detects the 
presence of various gases within an area, usually as part 
of a system to warn about gases that might be harmful 
to humans or animals. Various types of gas detectors 
are used to detect primarily combustible, toxic, and 
oxygen levels (i.e., deficiency), and carbon monoxide 
and carbon dioxide gases. They are typically used in 
confined spaces, utilities and chemical plants, industrial 
hygiene applications, and air quality testing. They can 
be fixed devices or portable devices worn by an 
individual. 


3.1.510 Gas Mask — A face covering connected to its 
own purifying device, which filters harmful gases or 
pollutants from the air so uncontaminated air may be 
inhaled. Gas masks do not add oxygen to air and cannot 
be used where there is oxygen deficiency. 


3.1.511 Gas Narcosis — Gas narcosis is caused by 
nitrogen in normal air during dives of more than 120 
feet. Helium, substituted for nitrogen in —mixed gas 
divingl, can cause an effect called —high pressure 
nervous syndrome, beyond 500 fsw. 


3.1.512 Gas Solubility — The extent that a gas dissolves 
in a liquid to produce a homogeneous system. 


3.1.513 Gauge Pressure — The difference between two 
absolute pressures, one of which is usually atmospheric 
pressure. 


3.1.514 Genotoxic Chemical — An electrophilic 
(i.e.,electron-deficient) compound that has an affinity 
for genetic information, specifically the electron —dense 
(i.e., nucleophilic)DNA. 


3.1.515 Goggles, Safety — They seal the entire eye area 
to protect the eyes against dust, impacting objects, 
chemical splashes, strong light, sparks, or other harmful 
environmental influences. They are contoured for full 
facial contact and held in place by a head-band or other 
suitable means, and are required to meet see IS 14352 
and be clearly marked with the manufacturer‘s name. 


3.1.516 Good Laboratory Practice — A desirable or 
mandatory system of laboratory working, incorporating 
basic safety instructions and appropriate experimental 
design features. 


3.1.517 Gram Mole — The amount of substance 
represented by one gram molecular weight or one gram 
molecular volume (mole). 


3.1.518 Gram Molecular Weight — The sum of the 
individual atomic weights of all the atoms in a 
molecule. 


3.1.519 Gravimetric Analysis — A process in which a 
known volume of aerosol-laden air is drawn through a 
filter of known initial weight, then reweighing the filter 
to determine the mass captured. 


3.1.520 Green Cross — Commonly a symbolic 
reference to safety or commercially a symbol for 
pharmacies. 


3.1.521 Grounding — The procedure or method used to 
carry an electrical charge to ground through a 
conductive path to avoid an electrical buildup that may 
eventually harm individuals from a shock hazard or 
initiate a fire or explosion as an ignition source. A 
typical ground may be connected directly to a 
conductive pipe or to a grounding bus and ground rod. 


3.1.522 Ground State — The state of a nucleus, an atom 
or a molecule, of the lowest energy. All other states are 
termed =excited‘. 


3.1.523 Guarded — Protection afforded by being 
covered, shielded, fenced, enclosed, or otherwise 
protected by means of suitable enclosures, covers, 
casings, shields, troughs, railings, screens, mats, or 
platforms, or by location, to prevent injury. 


H 


3.1.524 Half-time (Pseudo first order) — tos = 0.693/k 
where k is the pseudo first-order process rate constant 
in units of time. 


3.1.525 Halon — Halogenated hydrocarbons (contain 
the elements F, Cl, Br or I) used to suppress or prevent 
combustion. 


3.1.526 Hand Protection — The protection of hands 
from injuries that may result from cuts, abrasions, 
burns, and from manual handling operations and 
extremes of temperature. The protection commonly 
usedincludes gloves and gauntlets. 

3.1.527 Harm — Injury (physical or mental) or physical 
damage. 


3.1.528 Harmful — Causing or capable of causing 
harm. 


3.1.529 Hazard — A chemical or physical condition 
that has the potential for causing damage to people, 
property, or the environment. 


3.1.530 Hazard Analysis — The identification of 
undesired events that lead to the materialization of a 
hazard, the analysis of the mechanisms by which these 
undesired events could occur and usually the estimation 
of the consequences. 


3.1.531 Hazard Classification — A designation of 
relative incident potential based on probability of 
incident occurrence. 


3.1.532 Hazard Communication (HAZCOM) — 
Primarily refers to evaluating the hazard of chemicals 
used in the workplace and communicating the 


27 


IS 4155 : 2023 


information concerning the hazard of chemicals and 
appropriate protective measures to employees. 


3.1.533 Hazard Control — That function in an 
organization directed toward the recognition, 
evaluation, and reduction or elimination of the 
destructive effects of hazards emanating from human 
acts of commission and omission, and from the physical 
and environmental aspects of the workplace to prevent 
their re-occurrence. 


3.1.534 Hazard Distance — The linear distance from 
the antenna at which the field intensity is reduced tothe 
exposure limit. 


3.1.535 Hazard Elimination — To remove the 
probability of an incident occurring, and the chance of 
individuals being injured or harmed. 


3.1.536 Hazard Evaluation — Evaluation based on data 
concerning concentration of a contaminant and duration 
of exposure. 


3.1.537 Hazard Failure — An unacceptable difference 
between expected and observed performance. A 
chemical, physical or changing condition that has the 
potential for causing damage to human life, property, 
or the environment. 


3.1.538 Hazard Identification — Determining whether 
the chemical can cause adverse health effects in humans 
or damage to property or the environment and what 
those effects might be. 


3.1.539 Hazard Identification Plan (HIP) — A 
thorough, qualitative review of potential hazards for 
construction work activities that should include a list of 
all hazards, their assessment (considering severityand 
probability), and corrective actions to mitigate or 
prevent worker injuries or illness, and is prepared prior 
to work activities. 


3.1.540 Hazard Index — Sum of more than one hazard 
quotient for multiple substances and/or multiple 
exposure pathways. Calculated separately for chronic, 
sub chronic and shorter duration exposures. 


3.1.541 Hazard Point — The closest reachable point of 
the hazardous area. 


3.1.542 Hazard Recognition — The act or process of 
identifying, recognizing or condition of being 
recognized, the probability of being injured or harmed 
and its acceptance or acknowledgment. 


3.1.543 Hazard Sign — A sign with symbols or 
wording to indicate a risk to individuals. The 
arrangement and colors of signs that concern hazards 
are defined by American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI) Z 535.2 and Z 535.3 to ensure consistency and 
understanding by society. see also Hazard Symbols. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.544 Hazard Symbols — Easily recognizable icons 
designed to warn about hazardous materials or 
locations. The use of hazard symbols is usually 
regulated by law and directed by standards 
organizations. Hazard symbols may appear with 
different colors, backgrounds, borders, and 
supplemental information inorder to signify the type of 
hazard. 


3.1.545 Hazard Prevention and Control — Hazard 
prevention and control applies the following measures. 


3.1.545.1 Engineering techniques are used when 
feasible and appropriate; 


3.1.545.2 Procedures for safe work are established, 
understood, and followed by all affected parties and; 


3.1.545.3 Provisions are made for personal protective 
equipment and administrative controls. 


3.1.546 Hazard Quotient — Ratio of a single 
substance exposure level over a specified period to 
areference dose (RFD) for that substance derived from 
a similar exposure period. 


3.1.547 Hazard Rate — Also known as the Time- 
Related equipment Failure Rate, is an Instantaneous 
Failure Rate function of time. 


3.1.548 Hazard Ratio — A number obtained by 
dividing the airborne concentration of a contaminant by 
its exposure limit. 


3.1.549 Hazardous Area — An area that poses an 
immediate or impending physical hazard. 


3.1.550 Hazardous Atmosphere — An atmosphere that, 
by reason of being explosive, flammable, poisonous, 
corrosive, oxidizing, irritating, oxygen deficient, toxic, 
or otherwise harmful, may cause death, illness, or 
injury. 


3.1.551 Hazardous Chemical — Any chemical which 
is a physical hazard or a health hazard. 


3.1.552 Hazardous Chemical Reactivity — Property of 
a chemical substance that can react yielding increases 
in temperature and/or pressure too large to be absorbed 
by the environment surrounding the system. 


3.1.553 Hazardous Condition — The physical 
condition or circumstance that is causally related to 
incident occurrence. The hazardous condition is related 
directly to both the incident type and the agency of the 
incident. 


3.1.554 Hazardous Decomposition Products — 
Formed when a material decomposes (breaks down) 


28 


because it is unstable, or reacts with materials such as 
water or oxygen in air. 


3.1.555 Hazardous Liquid — A hazardous liquid is a 
liquid that is dangerous to human health or safety orthe 
environment if used incorrectly or if not properly stored 
or contained. 


3.1.556 Hazardous Material (HAZMAT) Response 
Team — An organized group of employees, designated 
by the employer, who are expected to perform work to 
handle and control actual or potential leaks or spills of 
hazardous substances requiring possible close approach 
to the substance. The team members perform responses 
to releases or potential releases of hazardous substances 
for the purpose of control or stabilization of the 
incident. 


3.1.557 Hazardous Material — In a broad sense, any 
substance or mixture of substances having properties 
capable of producing adverse effects on the health or 
safety of human beings. Materialpresenting dangers 
beyond the fire problems relating to flash point and 
boiling point. These dangers may arise from but are not 
limited to toxicity, reactivity, instability, or corrosivity. 


3.1.558 Hazardous Polymerization — Polymerization 
is a process of forming a polymer by combining large 
numbers of chemical units or monomers into long 
chains (polyethylene from ethylene or polystyrene 
from styrene). Uncontrolled polymerization can be 
extremely hazardous. Some polymerization processes 
can release considerable heat or can be explosive. 


3.1.559 Hazardous Substance — Any material that 
poses a threat to human health and/or the environment. 
Typical hazardous substances are toxic, corrosive, 
ignitable, explosive, or chemically reactive. It may also 
refer to any substance designated by the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) to be reported if a designated 
quantity of the substance is spilled in the waters of the 
United States or is otherwise released into the 
environment. 


3.1.560 Hazardous Waste — As defined under the 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), any 
solid or combination of solid wastes that, because of its 
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may 
pose a hazard when improperly disposed of. Possesses 
at least one of four characteristics (ignitability, 
corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity), or appears on 
special Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) lists. 


3.1.561 Hazardous Waste Coordinator — The person 
who has the responsibility for training laboratory or 
workplace personnel to deal with the most probable 
incidents, such as the plugging of a leak in a large 
container, clean-up of spillage, or transfer of a liquid 
from one container to another. 


3.1.562 Hazardous Waste Plan — A document which 
sets out all aspects of safe waste collection and disposal, 
and anticipates a variety of high risk situations (such as 
leaking drum, flash fire, or splashing ofa chemical) 
based on a knowledge of the type of waste. The 
document should specify an appropriate range of 
equipment, protective clothing, respiratory protection, 
and absorbent material to be available, so as to deal with 
such situations. 


3.1.563 Haz Mat Foam — A special vapor suppressing 
mix that can be applied to liquids or solids to prevent 
off-gassing. 


3.1.564 Hazmat Incident — Actual or potential 
unplanned release of a hazardous material. 


3.1.565 HAZOP — Hazard and Operability Study: A 
systematic qualitative technique to identify and 
evaluate process hazards and potential operating 
problems using a series of guidewords to examine 
deviations from normal process conditions. 


3.1.566 Hazard Scenario Identification — The process 
whereby possible malfunctions are reviewed to permit 
the identification of realistic hazard scenarios. These 
can then be modelled. 


3.1.567 Hazard Warning Structure — A modified form 
of fault tree highlighting event mitigating feature pairs. 
These are often pairings of incident precursors and 
protective devices or event terminating features which 
are combined through and and gate. 


3.1.568 Health Hazard — A chemical for which there 
is statistically significant evidence based on at leastone 
study conducted in accordance with established 
scientific principles that acute or chronic health effects 
may occur in exposed employees. 


3.1.569 Heat — Energy transferred by a thermal 
process. 


3.1.570 Heat Balance — A statement that shows the 
changes in a system from heat and work input to output 
losses. 


3.1.571 Heat Capacity — The amount of heat necessary 
to raise the temperature of a given mass 1 degree; 
numerically, the mass multiplied by the specific heat. 


3.1.572 Heat Pyrexia (Heat Stroke) — A very serious 
and often fatal condition resulting from breakdown of 
thermo regulatory mechanisms during exposure to high 
temperature environments. It is characterized by 
extremely high deep-body temperature and an absence 
of sweating. Treatment consists of rapid cooling in an 
ice bath. 


29 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.573 Heat of Reaction — The total quantity of 
thermal energy liberated or absorbed during a chemical 
reaction. 


3.1.574 Heat Stress 


3.1.574.1 The external heat load placed on the body due 
to the characteristics of environment 


3.1.574.2 The burden, or load of heat, that must be 
dissipated if the body is to remain in thermal 
equilibrium. 


3.1.575 Heat Stress Index (HIS) — A composite 
mixture used for the quantitative assessment of heat 
stress. 


3.1.576 Hematopoietic Agent — Chemical which 
interferes with the blood system by decreasing the 
oxygen-carrying ability of hemoglobin. This can lead to 
cyanosis and unconsciousness. Carbon monoxideis one 
such agent, familiar to smokers. 


3.1.577 Hepatoxin — A chemical that is injurious to 
liver. 


3.1.578 Herbicide — The descriptor applied to a 
chemical used to kill plants. 


3.1.579 Hidden Hazard — Typically refers to unseen 
electrical lines, gas lines, waste lines, water lines, or 
other lines that, if disturbed during an excavation, may 
injure personnel or damage equipment. 


3.1.580 High Efficiency Scrubbers —The use of baffles 
to alter the flow of a gas or vapor to facilitate its 
purification by condensation, washing, etc. 


3.1.581 High Integrity Protective Systems (HIPS) — 
High availability, fail-safe, safety integrity level (SIL)- 
3 emergency shutdown(ESD) systems, designed to 
augment safety relief devices or mitigate worst- case 
relieving loads, or that function in lieu of over-pressure 
protective devices in wellhead, flare, or off- site 
pipelines. see also Emergency Shutdown System 
(ESD); Safety Integrity Level (SIL). 


3.1.582 Highly Protected Risk (HPR) — Term used 
within the insurance industry to describe a property risk 
that has a high degree of care taken for safety and 
protection (e.g., provision of fire sprinklers in a 
building) and is considered a superior facility from a 
loss viewpoint (i.e., low probability of loss); therefore, 
it has a very low insurance rate compared to other 
industrial risks. 


3.1.583 High Order Explosion — Materials that require 
moderate heat and reducing agents to initiate 
combustion. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.584 High Performance Liquid Chromatography 
(HPLC) — Laboratory method used to separate organic 
molecules using a liquid phase. 


3.1.585 Historical Incident Data — Data collected and 
recorded from past incidents. 


3.1.586 Hot Zone — The area immediately around the 
incident site. Appropriate protective clothing and 
equipment must be worn by all personnel in the hot 
zone. Awareness level and operational level trained 
personnel are not permitted in the Hot Zone. 


3.1.587 Hot Flame Ignition — A rapid, self sustaining, 
sometimes audible gas-phase reaction of the sample or 
its decomposition products with an oxidant. A readily 
visible yellow or blue flame usually accompanies the 
reaction (NFPA 325M, 1994). 


3.1.588 Human Error — Actions by designers, 
operators, or managers that may contribute to or result 
in accidents. 


3.1.589 Human Error Probability — The ratio between 
the number of human errors and the number of 
opportunities for human error. 


3.1.590 Human Factors — A discipline concerned with 
designing machines, operations, and work 
environments so that they match human capacities and 
limitations. 


3.1.591 Human Health Risk — The likelihood that a 
given exposure or series of exposures may have 
damaged or will damage the health of individuals. 


3.1.592 Human Reliability Analysis (HRA) — A 
method by which the probability of a person 
successfully performing a task is estimated. 


3.1.593 Hydration — The incorporation of molecular 
water into a complex molecule with the molecules or 
units of another species. The complex may be held 
together by relatively weak forces or may exist as a 
definite compound. 


3.1.594 Hydrocarbons — The basic building blocks of 
all organic chemicals which are composed solely of 
carbon and hydrogen. 


3.1.595 Hygrometer — An instrument to measure 
humidity in the atmosphere. 


3.1.596 Hygroscopic — Readily absorbing or retaining 
moisture. 


3.1.597 Hygroscopicity 
water vapor. 


— The tendency to absorb 


30 


3.1.598 Hypergolic — Hypergolic behavior is 
characterized by immediate, spontaneous ignition of an 
oxidation reaction upon mixing of two or more 
substances. 


3.1.599 Hypersensitive — The condition of being 
reactive to substances that normally would not affect 
most people. 


3.1.600 Hyperthermia — An elevated body 
temperature due to failed thermoregulation. It is usually 
defined as a temperature greater than 37.5 °C to 38.3 °C 
(100 °F to 101 °F). Hyperthermia occurs when the body 
produces or absorbs more heat than it can dissipate. 
When the elevated body temperatures are sufficiently 
high, hyperthermia is a medical emergency and requires 
immediate treatment to prevent disability and death. 


3.1.601 Hypothermia — Lowered core body 
temperature, usually considered a drop in core 
temperature to 35 °C (95 °F) or lower. It produces 
shivering and discomfort sufficient to adversely affect 
performance; at about 25 °C (77 °F) hypothermia is 
ordinarily fatal. Cold water immersion produces 
hypothermia very rapidly, whereas exposure in cold air 
environments is tolerable for much longer periods. 
Treatment for hypothermia is rapid re-warming in a 
warm bath. 


I 


3.1.602 Ignition Temperature — The minimum 
temperature to which a material must be raised before it 
will burn. The ignition temperature is higher than the 
flashpoint. 


3.1.603 Immediate Hazard — The potential to cause an 
adverse effect within a short period of time. 


3.1.604 Immediate Severe Health Effect — Acute 
clinical sign of a serious, exposure-related reaction that 
occurs within 72 h. 


3.1.605 Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health 
(IDLH) — An atmospheric concentration of any toxic, 
corrosive, or asphyxiant substance that poses an 
immediate threat to life or would cause irreversible or 
delayed adverse health effects or would interfere with 
an individual’s ability to escape from a dangerous 
atmosphere. 


3.1.606 Imminent Danger — An impending or 
threatening dangerous situation that could be expected 
to cause death or serious injury to persons in the 
immediate future unless corrective measures are taken. 


3.1.607 Imminent Hazard — A hazard that would likely 
result in unreasonable adverse effects on humans or the 
environment or risk unreasonable hazard to an 


endangered species during the time required for a 
pesticide registration cancellation proceeding. 


3.1.608 Impeller — The rotating part of a device (fan, 
blower, compressor or pump). 


3.1.609 Impervious — Incapable of being passed 
through or penetrated. 


3.1.610 Impinge — To impact, hit, strike, collide, or 
push against. 


3.1.611 Impingers — Small glass bottles normally 
filled with a specific liquid that will absorb air borne 
chemicals when air containing the contaminant is 
bubbled through it. 


3.1.612 Implosion — The catastrophic collapse of the 
walls of a closed container due to excessive external 
pressure in comparison with the internal pressure. 


3.1.613 Impurity — The presence of one substance in 
another, often in such low concentration that it cannot 
be measured quantitatively by ordinary analytical 
methods. In the air, trace amounts of sulfur dioxide and 
carbon monoxide are potentially dangerous impurities 
in concentrations of 5 ppm of sulfur dioxide and 50 ppm 
of carbon monoxide. 


3.1.614 Incendiary — A substance causing or designed 
to cause fires. Also, a person who willfully destroys 
property by fire. 


3.1.615 Impulse — The area under the overpressure- 
time curve for explosions. The area can be calculated 
for the positive phase or negative phase of the blast. 


3.1.616 Incident — An unplanned event or series of 
events and circumstances that may result in an 
undesirable consequence. 


3.1.617 Incident Investigation — The management 
process by which underlying causes of undesirable 
events are uncovered and steps are taken to prevent 
similar occurrences. 


3.1.618 Incident Investigation Team — A group of 
qualified people that examine an incident in a manner 
that is timely, objective, systematic and technically 
sound to determine that factual information pertaining 
to the event is documented, probable causes are 
ascertained, and complete technical understanding of 
such an event is achieved. 


3.1.619 Incompatible — The term can refer to any 
undesired results occurring when substances are 
combined. In the context of this publication, it refers to 
incompatible substances giving an undesired chemical 
reaction when combined, posing a chemical reactivity 
hazard under a defined scenario. 


31 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.620 Incompatible Chemicals — Two or more 
chemicals which can react with each other violently, 
with evolution of substantial heat, so as to produce 
flammable or toxic products. 


3.1.621 Incompatible wastes — Two or more chemical 
wastes, the mixing of which can result in the slow or 
explosive release of toxic gases, vapors or fumes. This 
may occur spontaneously at ambient temperature and 
pressure, or if the mixture is exposed to water, subjected 
to strong force, or heated under confined conditions. 


3.1.622 Incident — The loss of containment of material 
or energy. 


3.1.623 Incident Enumeration — The identification and 
tabulation of incidents without regard to significance or 
other bases. 


3.1.624 Incident Outcome — 
manifestation of an incident. 


The physical 


3.1.625 Incident Outcome Case — The quantitative 
definition of a single result of an incident outcome 
through specification of sufficient parameters to allow 
distinction of this case from all others for the same 
incident outcome. 


3.1.626 Incineration — The controlled combustion of 
waste so as to prevent explosion or the unacceptable 
release of harmful products. 


3.1.627 Indicating Layer — The calorimetric reactive 
portion of the detector tube. 


3.1.628 Indicating Molecular Sieve — A molecular 
sieve that indicates by a color change when the capacity 
for water absorption in drying a gas or vapor has been 
exceeded. 


3.1.629 Independent Protection Layer (IPL) — 
Protection measures that reduce the level of risk or a 
serious event by 100 times, have a high degree of 
availability (greater than 0.99), or have specificity, 
independence, dependability, and auditability. 


3.1.630 Indirect Damage — Loss resulting from a 
hazardous condition or incident but not caused directly 
thereby. 


3.1.631 Individual Hazard Index (IHI) — The Fatal 
Accident Rate (FAR) for a particular hazard, with the 
exposure time defined as the actual time that a person is 
exposed to a hazard of concern. 


3.1.632 Individual Risk — The risk to a person in the 
vicinity of a hazard. This includes the nature of the 
injury to the individual, the likelihood of the injury 
occurring, and the time period over which the injury 
might occur. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.633 Industrial Waste — Unwanted materials 
produced in or eliminated from an industrial operation 
and categorized under a variety of headings, such as 
liquid wastes, sludge, solid wastes, and hazardous 
wastes. 


3.1.634 Inert Chemical — Not having active properties. 


3.1.635 Inert Dust — Dust that does not chemically 
react with other substances. 


3.1.636 Inert Gas — A gas that neither experiences nor 
causes chemical reaction, nor undergoes a change of 
state in a system or process. 


3.1.637 Inflammable — A general term once used to 
describe combustible gases, liquids, or solids. 


3.1.638 Initial List (of Incidents) — A list containing all 
the incidents identified by the enumeration methods 
chosen. 


3.1.639 Initiator — The substance or molecule (other 
than reactant) that initiates a chain reaction, as in 
polymerization. 


3.1.640 Initiating Event — The first event in an event 
sequence. 


3.1.641 Inhalation — Breathing a chemical into the 
lung. 


3.1.642 Inhibited — Containing a small amount of 
another substance included to prevent the first material 
from reacting with itself or other things in its 
environment. 


3.1.643 Insecticide — A chemical used to kill insects. 
3.1.644 Insoluble — Not able to be dissolved. 


3.1.645 Instantaneous Release — Emissions that are 
short in duration compared with the travel time (time 
for cloud to reach location of interest) or sampling (or 
averaging) time. 


3.1.646 Intermediate Event — An event that propagates 
or mitigates the initiating event during an event 
sequence. 


3.1.647 Inhibitor — A chemical substance used to 
prevent or stop a chemical reaction, such as 
polymerization, from occurring. 


3.1.648 Instability — The degree of intrinsic 
susceptibility of a material to release energy through 
self-reaction (polymerizing, | decomposing or 
rearranging). 


3.1.649 Inert Gas — A noncombustible, nonreactive 
gas that renders the combustible material in a system 
capable of supporting combustion. 


32 


3.1.750 Inherently Safe — A system is inherently safe 
if it remains in a nonhazardous situation after the 
occurrence of non-acceptable deviations from normal 
operating conditions. 


3.1.751 Injury — Physical harm or damage to a person 
resulting from traumatic contact between the body and 
an outside agency or exposure to environmental factors. 


3.1.752 Inlet Size — The nominal pipe size of the inlet 
of a pressure relief valve, unless otherwise designated. 


3.1.753 Inorganic — Term used to designate 
compounds that generally do not contain carbon. 


3.1.754 Interlock System — A system that detects out- 
of-limits or abnormal conditions or improper sequences 
and either halts further action or starts corrective action. 


3.1.755 Intrinsically Safe — Equipment and wiring 
which is incapable of releasing sufficient electrical or 
thermal energy under normal or abnormal conditions to 
cause ignition of a specific hazardous atmospheric 
mixture or hazardous layer. 


3.1.756 Integrated Sampling — The passage of a 
known volume of air through an absorbing or adsorbing 
medium to remove the desired contaminants from the 
air during a specified period. 


3.1.757 Intentional Chemistry — Processing of 
substances such that a chemical reaction takes place as 
intended. 


3.1.758 Interference — The term applied when a 
contaminant, other than the target gas or vapor, reacts 
with a reagent in the detector tube to produce erroneous 
results. 


3.1.759 Inter-laboratory Quality Control (QC) — A 
systematic procedure for selecting inter laboratory 
participants, analyte, duration and frequency of inter 
laboratory testing, and evaluating statistics and 
reporting of test data to ensure the quality of test result 


3.1.760 Internal Occupational Exposure Limit — An 
occupational exposure limit (OEL) formally set by an 
organization for its private use. 


3.1.761 Intra-laboratory Quality Control (QC) — A 
systematic procedure for evaluating the precision and 
accuracy for within analyst and between analyst data 
constructing and using control charts, and using 
duplicate, replicate, and/or spiked samples to ensure the 
quality of test results. 


3.1.762 Intrinsic Safety — Plants that are designed so 
that departures from normal tend to be self-correcting 
or atmost lead to minor events rather than major 
disasters. Plants designed to be forgiving and self- 
correcting are inherently safer than plans where 


equipment has been added to control hazards or where 
operators are expected to control them. 


3.1.763 Intrinsically Safe — A feature available on air 
sampling equipment that ensures that pumps are not an 
explosive hazard in specific environments. 


3.1.764 Intrinsic Property — In relation to materials, a 
property of the material itself, regardless of use or 
environmental conditions. 


3.1.765 Ion Chromatography(IC) — A 
chromatographic technique that separates mixture of 
ions. 


3.1.766 Ionization Potential — The energy per unit 
charge needed to remove an electron from a given kind 
of atom or molecule to an infinite distance, usually 
expressed in volts. Also known as ion potential. 


3.1.767 Irritant — A chemical, which is not corrosive, 
that causes a reversible inflammatory effect on living 
tissue by the chemical action at the site of contact. 


3.1.768 Isenthalpic Expansion — A reduction in 
pressure that occurs with no change in enthalpy of the 
system, which implies negligible change in kinetic 
energy effects, and no work or exchange of heat with 
the surroundings. This condition is approached in 
throttling processes or flow through piping, where 
friction effects usually occur, but where heat transfer 
with the surroundings and changes in kinetic energy can 
be neglected. 


3.1.769 Isentropic Expansion — A pressure reduction 
that occurs reversibly, with no friction, work, or 
exchange of heat with the surroundings. This condition 
is approached in flow of compressible gases through a 
smooth, well-rounded nozzle. 


3.1.770 Isomer — A material with the same chemical 
composition (i.e. kind and number of elements) as 
another material but with a different arrangement of 
those elements. For example, n-butyl alcohol and t- 
butyl alcohol are isomers of one another. 


3.1.771 Isomerization — The conversion of a chemical 
with a given molecular formula to another compound 
with the same molecular formula but a different 
molecular structure, such as from a straight chain to a 
branched-chain hydrocarbon or an alicyclic to an 
aromatic hydrocarbon. Examples include the 
isomerization of ethylene oxide to acetaldehyde (both 
C2H40) and butane to isobutene (both C4H10) 


3.1.772 Isothermal — A system condition in which the 
temperature remains constant. This implies that 
temperature increases and decreases are compensated 
by sufficient heat exchange with the environment of the 
system. 


33 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.773 Isotope 


3.1.773.1 Two or more nuclides with the same atomic 
number but different atomic mass. 


3.1.773.2 Atoms of the same element that differ in 
atomic weight. 


3.1.774 Isoperibolic System — A system in which the 
controlling external temperature is kept constant. 


3.1.775 Isopleth — A line of constant 
concentration downwind from a release. 


vapor 


3.1.776 Iterative Risk Assessment — A process in 
which increasingly complex and data-rich risk 
assessments are conducted. 


J 


3.1.777 Jet Discharge — A pressurized discharge of 
liquid, vapor, and/or gas into free space from an orfice, 
the momentum of which induces the surrounding 
atmosphere to mix with the discharged material 


3.1.778 Jet Fire — Fire type resulting from ignition of 
a jet discharge. 


3.1.779 Job safety analysis (JSA) — A safety 
management risk assessment technique that is used 
todefine and control the hazards associated with a 
process, job or procedure. The job safety analysis 
ensuresthat the hazards involved in each step of a task 
are reduced to as low as reasonably practical (ALARP). 
The assessment starts with a summary of the entire job 
process. The job is broken into smaller steps and listed 
in a tabular form. The hazards for each step are then 
identified and listed. This is repeated for each step in 
the process and a method of safe work is identified. It 
may be also called a job hazard analysis (JHA). 


3.1.780 Job Safety Training — Training associated 
with or emphasizing the safety aspects of a job and the 
hazards of tasks and their interrelationships within a 
job. 


K 


3.1.781 Kawamura and Mackay Model — A model 
used to represent pool evaporation. 


3.1.782 Key Event (of an Accident) — That event (or 
events) in a series of events in an incident that 
determine the exact time, place, type, and extent of 
consequences of the incident. 


3.1.783 Kinetic Data — data that describe the rate of 
change of concentrations, heat, pressure, volume, etc. in 


a reacting system. 


3.1.784 Kinetic Energy—Energy due to motion 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.785 Kinetic Tree Theory (KIT) — An 
approximation method that allows the analyst to 
estimate fault tree Top Event reliability characteristics 
through use of minimal cut sets, and failure data for the 
basic events in the fault tree. 


L 


3.1.786 Labeled — Equipment or materials to which is 
attached a specified label, symbol, or other identifying 
mark of an inspection agency, nationally recognized 
testing laboratory, or organization acceptable to the 
authority having jurisdiction and concerned with 
product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of 
the production of labeled equipment or materials. The 
provision of a label by the manufacturer on a fire 
protection product indicates compliance with 
appropriate standards or performance in a specified 
manner for fire safety. 


3.1.787 Lachrymator — A chemical that irritates the 
mucous membranes of the eye or nose that causes 
secretions. (tears, or a running nose). 


3.1.788 Lagging — Asbestos and magnesia plaster that 
is used as a thermal insulation on process equipment 
and piping. 


3.1.789 Latency — A delay between the onset of 
exposure to a hazardous agent and the onset of illness 
attributable to that agent. 


3.1.790 Latency Period — The time that elapses 
between exposure and the first manifestation of 
damage. 


3.1.791 Level of Concern — The concentration of an 
airborne chemical above which there may be adverse 
human health effects experienced as a result of a short- 
term exposure during an episodic release. 


3.1.792 Likelihood — A measure of the expected 
probability or frequency of occurrence of an event. 


3.1.793 Limit of Detection (LOD) — A stated limiting 
value designating the lowest concentration that canbe 
detected and that is specific to the analytical procedure 
used. 


3.1.794 Limit of Quantification (LOQ) — A stated 
limiting value designating the lowest concentration 
that can be quantified with confidence and that is 
specific to the analytical procedure used. 


3.1.795 Liquid Trim Valve — A safety relief valve 
designed for incompressible fluid service, typically 
with adjustable blowdown. The valve can be certified 
for use with compressible fluids. 


34 


3.1.796 Localized Incident — An incident whose effect 
zone is limited to a plant area (e.g., pump fire, small 
toxic release), and does not extend into the off-site 
surrounding community. 


3.1.797 Local Exhaust Ventilation (LEV) — An 
industrial ventilation system that captures and removes 
emitted contaminants before dilution into the workplace 
ambient air can occur. 


3.1.798 Logic Gate — A symbol in a logic diagram 
which specifies the logical combination of inputs 
required for an output to be propagated. 


3.1.799 Loop Reactors — Continuous flow reactors in 
which all or part of the product stream is recirculated to 
the reactor, either directly or mixed with a reactant 
supply stream. 

3.1.800 Lower Boundary of Working Range — Refers 
to the contaminant concentration that may be quantified 
at a specific air volume when the mass of contaminant 
is equal to the LOQ. 


3.1.801 Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) or Lower 
Flammable Limit (LFL) — The lowest concentration of 
a vapor or gas (the lowest percentage of the substance 
in air) that will produce a flash of fire when an ignition 
source (heat, arc, or flame) is present. see also Upper 
Explosive Limit or Upper Flammable Limit. 
Importance: At concentration lower than the LEL/LFL, 
the mixture is too —lean to burn. 


3.1.802 Low Order Explosion — Materials that require 
excessive heat and reducing agents to initiate 
combustion. 


3.1.803 Low Pressure Container —A container 
designed to withstand pressures from 5 psi to 100 psi. 


M 


3.1.804 Malformation — Defective or abnormal 
formation. 


3.1.805 Malodorous substance — A substance that has 
an unpleasant smell. 


3.1.806 Management of Hazardous Waste — The 
implied control and environmentally sound handling of 
hazardous waste during the phases of generation, 
storage, processing for recovery or reuse, transporting, 
treating and discharging into the air and water or 
discarding onto the soil. 


3.1.807 Manifold — A holder for more than one 
detector tube. When attached to the sampling pump, it 
permits simultaneous sampling. 


3.1.808 Manometer — An instrument for measuring 
pressure, essentially a U-tube partially filled with a 
liquid (usually water, mercury or a light oil), so 
constructed that the amount of displacement of the 
liquid indicates the pressure being exerted on the 
instrument. 


3.1.809 Manual Pull Station (MPS), Fire Alarm — A 
switch provided on a fire alarm system that is manually 
activated to indicate a fire event. The switch is 
configured to conspicuously identify it as a fire alarm 
device and is usually fitted with a tamper device (break 
glass, rod, or cover) to discourage or prevent false 
activation. It sends a signal to a central monitoring 
station for notification of location and activation of 
alarms. 


3.1.810 Margin of Safety — A border, edge, or limit 
beyond which a particular behavior, condition, or 
situation becomes hazardous or unsafe. 

3.1.811 Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) — A 
document containing information on hazardous 
ingredients, their properties, and precautions for use for 
a specific chemical substance. 


3.1.812 Mask — A protective covering for the face 
or head, such as a wire screen, a metal shield, a 
respirator, or a gas mask. 


3.1.813 Mass Number — The number of nucleons 
(protons and neutrons) in the nucleus of an atom. 


3.1.814 Maximum Allowable Concentration — The 
maximum concentration in air of a material that may be 
toxic or hazardous to health that the facility and the 
public authorities having jurisdiction are willing to 
tolerate at a populated downwind location in the event 
of a major accident. 


3.1.815 Maximum Allowable Venting (or Relieving) 
Pressure — The pressure corresponding to the Code 
allowable pressure rise (accumulation) over the 
maximum allowable working pressure (MAWP) under 
relieving conditions. 


3.1.816 Maximum Allowable Working Pressure — 
The maximum gauge pressure permissible at the topof 
a completed vessel in its operating position for a 
designated temperature. The pressure is based on 
calculations for each element in a vessel using nominal 
thickness, exclusive of additional metal thickness 
allowed for corrosion and loadings other than pressure. 
The maximum allowable working pressure is the basis 
for the pressure setting of the pressure relief devices 
that protect the vessel. 


NOTE — In general MAWPis the basis for the maximum 
permissible settings of the relief devices. 


35 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.817 Major Incident — An incident whose effect 
zone, while significant, is still limited to site boundaries 
(for example, major fire, spill). 


3.1.818 Maximum Individual Risk — The individual 
risk to the person(s) exposed to the highest risk in an 
exposed population. 


3.1.819 Maximum Potential Quantity — The maximum 
amount of a chemical that can be released from a 
process containment system. Such a system may be an 
isolated pressure vessel and associated piping or two or 
more interconnected and communicating vessels 
without isolation capability. 


3.1.820 Maximum Pressure after Decomposition — 
The maximum pressure obtainable in a closed vessel; 
this pressure is a function of the adiabatic temperature 
rise and the specific gas production. 


3.1.821 Mean Free Path — The average distance 
travelled between collisions by the molecules in a gas 
or vapor. 


3.1.822 Mean Time between Failure (MTBF) — A 
basic measure of "reliability" for repairable items. The 
mean operating time or number of demands during 
which all parts of the item performed within their 
specific limits, during a particular measurement 
interval, under stated conditions (I/Failure Rate). 


3.1.823 Melting point (MP) — For a given pressure, the 
temperature at which the solid and liquid phases of the 
substance are in equilibrium. 


3.1.824 Metabolic Transformation — The chemical 
transformation of substances that takes place within an 
organism. 


3.1.825 Metabolism — In general, the sum total of all 
physical and chemical processes that take place within 
an organism; in a narrower sense, the physical and 
chemical changes that take place in a given chemical 
sub- stance within an organism. It includes the uptake 
and distribution within the body of chemical 
compounds, the changes  (biotransformation) 
undergone by such substances, and the elimination of 
the compounds and of their metabolites. 


3.1.826 Metabolite — A substance resulting from 
chemical transformation in an organism. 


3.1.827 Metal Fume Fever — A flu-like condition that 
is caused as a result of inhaling heated metal fumes. 


3.1.828 Metallic Oxide Semiconductor (MOS) Sensor 
— A solid state sensor used to detect ppm and 
combustible concentrations of gases. It can be used to 


IS 4155 : 2023 


detect a variety of compounds including nitro, amine, 
alcohol, and halogenated hydrocarbons, as well as a 
limited number of inorganic gases. 


3.1.829 Methaemoglobinaemia — The presence of 
methaemoglobin in the blood due to the exposure to a 
chemical that gives rise to oxidation of haemoglobin. 


3.1.830 Microcalorimetry — Essentially isothermal 
techniques of high sensitivity in which very small heat 
fluxes from the reacting materials are measured; 
differential microcalorimetry is a technique to 
determine heat fluxes from the reacting materials 
compared with those of a reference material. 


3.1.831 Minimal Cut Set Approach — A term used in 
Fault Tree Analysis to describe the smallest 
combination of component and human failures which, 
if they all occur, will cause the top event to occur. The 
failures all correspond to Basic or Undeveloped Events. 


3.1.832 Misuse Mode and Effects Analysis (MMEA) — 
Assesses the likelihood of occurrence of potential 
misuse modes and their effect on safety before and after 
corrective actions. 


3.1.833 Mitigation Factors — Systems or procedures, 
such as water sprays, foam systems, and sheltering and 
evacuations, which tend to reduce the magnitude of 
potential effects due to a release. 


3.1.834 Mixture —Any combination of two or more 
chemicals if the combination is not, whole or part,the 
result of a chemical reaction. 


3.1.835 Minimum Ignition Energy (MIE) — Electrical 
energy discharged from a capacitor, which is just 
sufficient to effect ignition of the most ignitable mixture 
of a given fuel-mixture under specific test conditions. 


3.1.836 Monomer — A simple molecule that is capable 
of combining with a number of other molecules toform 
a polymer. 


3.1.837 Moral (Ethical) Safety — The ability to 
maintain a set of standards, beliefs, and operating 
principles that are consistent, that guide behavior, and 
that are grounded in a respect for life. 


3.1.838 Minimum Required Relief Capacity — 
Relieving capacity required to prevent the pressure in 
the protected vessel from exceeding the maximum 
allowable working pressure by more than allowed by 
the ASME BPVC or other applicable codes or practices. 


3.1.839 Mitigation — Lessening the risk of an accident 
event sequence by acting on the source in a preventive 
way by reducing the likelihood of occurrence of the 
event, or in a protective way by reducing the magnitude 
of the event and /or the exposure of local persons or 


property. 


36 


3.1.840 Mismanagement of Hazardous Waste — The 
uncontrolled and environmentally unsound or 
indiscriminate handling of hazardous wastes, whether 
intentionally or un intentionally. 


3.1.841 Miscible — Susceptible to being mixed; soluble 
in all proportions. 


3.1.842 Mixing box — A compartment in which two air 
supplies mix before being discharged. 


3.1.843 Molecule — Generally the smallest particle of 
an element or a compound capable of retaining the 
physical properties and chemical identity of the 
substance in mass. 


3.1.844 Molluscicide — 
molluscs. 


A chemical used to kill 


3.1.845 Moment of Inertia — The measure of resistance 
to rotational change. 

3.1.846 Monitoring Instruments — A broad range 
of scientific equipment used for the purposes of 
collecting and/or measuring chemical levels. 


3.1.847 Monitoring of Airborne Concentrations — A 
chemical technique used in occupational health 
surveillance to measure a variety of different toxic 
materials in workplace or ambient air. 


3.1.848 Monodisperse — Composed of particles with a 
single size or small range of sizes. 


3.1.849 Monodisperse Aerosol — An aerosol with a 
uniform size distribution having a geometric standard 
deviation of less than 1.1. 


3.1.850 Morphological Approach — A structured 
analysis of an incident directed by insights from 
historic case studies but not as rigorous as a formal 
hazard analysis. 


3.1.851 Mortality Index — An index based on the 
observed average ratio of casualties to the mass of 
material or energy released, as derived from the 
historical record. It is used to characterize the potential 
hazard of toxic material storage. 


3.1.852 Multi-gas Detector — An air monitoring 
device that measures oxygen levels, explosive 
(flammable) levels, and one or two toxic gases such as 
carbon monoxide or hydrogen sulfide. 


3.1.853 Multi-layer Detector Tube — A detector tube 
construction containing several filling layers. In 
addition to the indicating layer the tube contains one or 
more prelayers, which act as a filter to remove 
interfering substances or for chemical conversion of the 
gas or vapor being measured. Such tubes may be used 
to determine qualitatively the classes of compounds 
present in the atmosphere sampled. 


3.1.854 Multiple Chemical Sensitivity (MCS) — A 
condition resulting from exposure to toxic chemicals 
that affect the immune system, leading to multiple 
sensitivities to other chemicals and/or foods. 
Symptoms of MCS, which may be similar to those of 
sick building syndrome (SBS), are often attributed to 
exposure to trace amounts of chemicals (especially 
those with perceptible odor) in indoor air. 


3.1.855 Multiple Particle Optical Monitor — A real- 
time dust monitor used to measure aerosol 
concentrations. 


3.1.856 Multistage Sampling — A type of sampling in 
which the sample is selected by stages, the sampling 
units at each stage being sub sampled from the larger 
units chosen at the previous state. 


3.1.857 Mutagenicity — The property of a physical, 
chemical, or biological agent to induce mutations in 
living tissue. 


3.1.858 Mutation — Any heritable change in genetic 
material. This may be a chemical transformation of an 
individual gene (a gene or point mutation), which alters 
its function. On the other hand, this change may involve 
a rearrangement, or a gain or loss of part of a 
chromosome, which may be microscopically visible. 
This is designated a chromosomal mutation. 


N 


3.1.859 Narcosis — Stupor or unconsciousness 
produced by chemical substances. 


3.1.860 Negatively Buoyant Gas — A gas with density 
greater than that of air at ambient temperature. 


3.1.861 Negative-Pressure Glove Box — A glove box 
that is maintained and used at a lower pressure than 
atmospheric to ensure that there is no loss of material 
inside it to the laboratory. 


3.1.862 Nematicide 
nematodes. 


— A chemical used to kill 


3.1.863 Nephrotoxin — A chemical which may cause 
kidney damage. Common examples include antimony 
compounds, dimethyl sulphoxide, dimethylformamide 
and tetrahydrofuran. 


3.1.864 Neurotoxin — Chemical whose primary action 
is on the CNS (Central Nervous System). Many 
neurotoxins, such as some mercury compounds, are 
highly toxic, and must only be used under carefully 
controlled conditions. 


3.1.865 Neutralization — Control strategy for 
hazardous substances (e.g., strong acids, caustics, 
oxidizers, etc.) whereby a neutralizing compound is 


37 


IS 4155 : 2023 


added to a highly dangerous compound, e.g., an acid to 
an alkali, to reduce its immediate danger. 


3.1.866 Neutral Buoyant Gas — A gas with density 
approximately equal to that of air at ambient 
temperature. 


3.1.867 Net Flow Area — The area which determines 
the flow after a non reclosing pressure relief device has 
operated. The (minimum) net flow area of a ruptured 
disk is the calculated net area after a complete burst of 
the disk, with appropriate allowance for any structural 
members which may reduce the net flow area through 
the rupture disk device. 


3.1.868 Net Positive Suction Head (NPSH) — 
Equivalent total head of liquid at the pump center line, 
lessthe vapor pressure, required to avoid cavitation in a 


pump. 


3.1.869 Nitrating Mixture — Mixture of nitric acid and 
sulphuric acid with or without varying amounts of 
water, used in the manufacture of explosives by 
nitration process. 


3.1.870 Nitrogen Narcosis — Narcosis caused by 
gaseous nitrogen at high pressure in the blood. 
Produced in divers breathing air at depths of 100 ft (30 
m) or more. 


3.1.871  Nitrogen-Phosphorus Detector — The 
nitrogen-phosphorus detector is highly sensitive and 
selective for nitrogen and phosphorus compounds, 
including amines and organophosphates. The detector 
is similar in principle to the FID, except that ionization 
occurs on the surface of an alkali metal salt, such as 
cesium bromide, rhobidium silicate, or potassium 
chloride.(Also known as thermionic or alkali flame 
detector). 


3.1.872 Node — As identified in a safety review (e.g., 
process hazard analysis [PHA], What-If Analysis, 
Hazard and Operability Study [HAZOP]), a defined 
part (section or subsystem or item of equipment) of a 
process that has a design intention that is specific and 
distinct from the design intention of other process 
parts, which allows the study team to analyze the 
specific equipment or system in an organized fashion. 


3.1.873 Nominal Hazard Zone — The NHZ is the zone 
around the laser where the beam intensity exceedsthe 
exposure limit. 


3.1.874 No — Observed — Adverse-Level (NOEL) — 
The greatest concentration or amount of a chemical, 
found by experiment or observation, that causes no 
detectable adverse alteration of morphology, functional 
capacity, growth, development, or life span of the 
target. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.875 Non-beam Hazard — A hazardous agent, other 
than the beam, generated by the use of lasers (e.g., 
electricity, airborne contaminants, plasma radiations, 
fires and explosions). 


3.1.876 Noncarcinogen — A chemical that exerts 
adverse health effects other than cancer. 


3.1.877 Noncompliance — Noncompliance with health 
and safety regulations. 


3.1.878 Nonflammable — Not easily ignited, or if 
ignited, not burning rapidly. 


3.1.879 Nongenotoxic Chemicals —Toxic substances 
that do not interact directly with DNA. 

3.1.880 Nonionizing Radiation (NIR) — Photons with 
energies less than 12.4 eV are considered to have 
insufficient energy to ionize matter, and are nonionizing 
in nature. The nonionizing spectral region includes 
ultraviolet (UV), visible, infrared (IR), radiofrequency 
(RF), and extremely low frequency (ELF) region. 


3.1.881 Nonhazardous Waste — Waste material of 
sufficiently low toxicity for safe disposal in a sanitary 
landfill. All such materials have LDso of 500 mg/kg or 
more. 


3.1.882 Noxious — Harmful to health. 


3.1.883 Noncombustible — A material or substance 
that will not burn readily or quickly. Noncombustible 
implies a lower degree of fire resistance than fire 
resistive. 


3.1.884 Noncredible Event — A scenario or event that 
has very low and unreasonable likelihood of 
occurrence, and need not be considered in selecting the 
design basis for an emergency relief system. This 
should be based on a risk analysis that includes a careful 
and thorough review of process characteristics, 
experience with similar systems, hazardous nature of 
the materials handled, and consequences of an incident. 


3.1.885 Nonreclosing Pressure Relief Device — A 
pressure relief device designed to remain open after 
operation. A manual resetting means may be provided. 


3.1.886 Nozzle — A pressure containing element of a 
pressure relief valve which constitutes the smooth inlet 
flow passage and includes the fixed portion of the seat 
closure. The downstream end of the nozzle is often 
termed the valve orifice or nozzle throat. 


NOTE — Also can refer to the inlet or outlet connection on a 
vessel. 


38 


(0) 
3.1.887 Occluded — Closed, shut, or blocked. 


3.1.888 Occupational Cancer — Cancer caused by 
exposure to chemical or physical agents in the work 
environment. 


3.1.889 Occupational Disease — Disease associated 
with a work environment, usually caused by a specific 
agent. 


3.1.890 Occupational Exposure Limit (OEL) — A 
health-based work-place standard to protect workers 
from adverse exposure. 


3.1.891 Occupational Hazard — Conditions that exist 
in a workplace environment that increase the 
probability of death, injury, or illness to a worker. 


3.1.892 Occupational Hygiene — The applied science 
concerned with recognition, evaluation and control of 
chemical, physical or biological factors arising from the 
workplace and which may affect the well-being of those 
at work or in the community. 


3.1.893 Occupational Incident — Incident involving 
injury to workers. 


3.1.894 Occupational Safety — The prevention of 
personnel and environmental incidents in work-related 
environments or situations. Effective occupational 
safety efforts involve the control and elimination of 
recognized workplace hazards to attain an acceptable 
level of risk and promote the wellness of workers. 
Optimal occupational safety results from a continuous 
proactive process of anticipating, identifying, 
designing, implementing, and evaluating risk-reduction 
practices. 


3.1.895 Occupational Safety and Health Codes and 
Standards — Rules of procedure designed to secure 
uniformity and protection of life and property having 
the force of law in certain jurisdictions. 


3.1.896 Onset Temperature — The temperature at 
which a deflection from the established baseline is first 
observed. 


3.1.897 Opening Pressure — The value of increasing 
inlet static pressure of a pressure relief valve at which 
there is a measurable lift, or at which the discharge 
becomes continuous as determined by seeing, feeling, 
or hearing. 


3.1.898 Open Up Tester — A device for determining 
flash points of flammable and combustible liquids, 
utilizing an open cup, or container of the liquid. 
Recognized types are the Tagliabue (Tag) Open Cup 
Apparatus and the Cleveland Open Cup Apparatus. 


3.1.899 Operating Margin — The difference between 
the highest pressure attained in normal operation and 
the set pressure, expressed either in pressure units or as 
a percentage of the set pressure. Note that the Code term 
is -pressure differential. 


3.1.900 Optimum Risk — A risk level that balances the 
cost of the risk with the cost of risk mitigation. 


3.1.901 Organic — Term used to designate chemicals 
that contain carbon. To date nearly 1 million organic 
compounds have been synthesized or isolated. Many 
occur in nature; others are produced by chemical 
synthesis. 


3.1.902 Orifice — A small opening that controls flow 
rate of gases or liquids. Orifices are used in some hand- 
held detector tube pumps. 


3.1.903 Orifice Plate — A plate with a relatively sharp 
edged opening or orifice used to measure fluid flow 
rates based on pressure difference between the two 
sides of the plate. 


3.1.904 Organic Peroxide — An organic compound 
that contains the bivalent — O — O — structure and which 
may be considered to be a structural derivative of 
hydrogen peroxide where one or both of the hydrogen 
atoms has been replaced by an organic radical. 


3.1.905 Outlet Size — The nominal pipe size of the 
outlet of a pressure relief valve, unless otherwise 
designated. 


3.1.906 Over Adiabatic Mode — A quasi-adiabatic 
mode in which the (small) energy leaks to the 
environment are overcompensated for by input of 
supplementary energy. 


3.1.907 Overload — Operation of equipment in excess 
of the normal full load rating. If it persists for a 
sufficient length of time it would cause damage or 
dangerous overheating. A fault, such as a short circuit 
or ground fault, is not an overload. 


3.1.908 Overpressure — A pressure increase over the 
set pressure of a pressure relief valve, unless otherwise 
designated. 


3.1.909 Overrange Limit — The maximum input that 
can be applied to a device without causing damage or 
permanent change in performance. 


39 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.910 Oxidant — A chemical material that supports 
the combustion reaction process to combine with a fuel, 
e.g., oxygen, nitrous oxide, nitric oxide, chlorates, and 
chlorine. 


3.1.911 Oxidation — Depending on the context, 
oxidation can either refer to (a) a reaction in which 
oxygen combines chemically with another substance or 
(b) any reaction in which electrons are transferred. For 
the latter definition, oxidation and reduction always 
occur simultaneously (redox reactions), and the 
substance that gains electrons is termed the oxidizing 
agent. Electrons might also be displaced within a 
molecule without being completely transferred away 
from it. 


3.1.912 Oxidizer — Any material that readily yields 
oxygen or other oxidizing gas, or that readily reacts to 
promote or initiate combustion of combustible 
materials. More generally, an oxidizer is any oxidizing 
agent. 


3.1.913 Oxidizing — This adjective applied to a 
chemical is a substance which gives off oxygen to 
another substance. Oxidizing chemicals may increase 
and sustain fires. For example, chemicals belongingto 
following groups may act as oxidizers: bromates, 
chlorates, chromates, dichromates, iodates, nitrates, 
oxides, perborate, perbromates, perchlorates, 
periodates, permanganates and peroxodes. 


3.1.914 Oxidizing Agent — see definition for oxidation. 


3.1.915 Oxygen Deficient — ambient air containing less 
than 19.5 % oxygen concentration. 


3.1.916 Oxygen Enriched — ambient air containing 
above 20 percent oxygen concentration. 


3.1.917 Ozone — A colorless gas with a characteristic 
odor that is produced in ambient air during the 
photochemical oxidation of combustion products such 
as the nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons. It can also 
result from the operation of electrical motors, 
photocopy machines and electrostatic air cleaners in 
occupational environments. 


3.1.918 Oxygen Monitor — A device that measures the 
percentage of oxygen present in the atmosphere at any 
point in time. In some instances it is linked to a visual 
or audible alarm when the level has decreased to a point 
of concern. 


3.1.919 Oxygen Toxicity — A disorder associated with 
increased partial pressures of oxygen. There are two 
types of oxygen toxicity: 


3.1.919.1 High pressure: Breathing 100 percent 
oxygen at pressures greater than 3 ATA (atmospheres 
absolute) may result in acute toxicity, producing 
convulsions. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.919.2 Low pressure: Breathing 100 percent oxygen 
at 1 ATA for extended periods (24hours orgreater) may 
result in pulmonary dysfunction and pulmonary edema. 


P 


3.1.920 Partial Oxidation — The combination of 
oxygen with a material in an oxygen-deficient 
atmosphere that generally results in carbon monoxide 
being one of the combustion products. 


3.1.921 Partial pressure — Pressure of a gas in a 
mixture equal to the pressure that it would exert if it 
occupied the same volume alone at the same 
temperature (see also Dalton‘s law). 


3.1.922 Particle — A small discrete object, often 
having a density approaching the intrinsic density of the 
bulk material. It may be chemically homogeneous or 
contain a variety of chemical species. It may consist of 
solid or liquid material or both. (see also aerosol) 


3.1.923 Particle Bounce — Rebound of particles that 
fail to adhere after impacting on a collecting surface. 


3.1.924 Particle Diffusivity (Dg) — Aerosol particles in 
a gaseous medium are bombarded by collisions with 
individual gas molecules that are in Brownian motion. 
This causes the particles to undergo random 
displacements known as diffusion. The particle 
parameter that describes this process is the particle 
diffusivity, Dg (Also known as — diffusion coefficient.) 


3.1.925 Particle Size Distribution — A relationship 
expressing the quantity of a particle propertyassociated 
with particles in a given size range. 


3.1.926 Particulate — Particle of solid or liquid matter. 


3.1.927 Particulate Matter (PM) — A suspension of 
fine solid or liquid particles in air, such as dust, fog, 
fume, mist, smoke, or sprays. Particulate matter 
suspended in air is commonly known as an aerosol. 


3.1.928 Partition Coefficient — The constant ratio that 
is found when a heterogenous system of two phases is 
in equilibrium; the ratio of the concentrations of the 
same molecular species (substance) in two phases 
(usually water and octanol) is constant at given 
temperature and pressure. 


3.1.929 Passive dosimeter — A sample collection 
device based on the mass transport of the air 
contaminant to the sorbent by gaseous diffusion. It can 
incorporate direct-reading colorimetry to determine the 
concentration of the chemical in the air. 


3.1.930 Passive sampling — The collection of airborne 
gases and vapors at a rate controlled by a physical 
process such as diffusion through a static air layer or 


40 


permeation through a membrane without the active 
movement of air through an air sampler. 


3.1.931 Pathway — The course a chemical or pollutant 
takes from the source to the organism exposed. 


3.1.932 Penetration — The flow of chemical through 
zippers, weak seams, pinholes, cuts or imperfections 
in the protective clothing on a nonmolecular level. 


3.1.933 Perceived risk — The risk that the individual 
believes exists. 


3.1.934 Permeation — The movement of a chemical 
through a protective clothing barrier that has no 
visible holes. 


3.1.935 Periodicity — The frequency at which tests are 
given. 


3.1.936 Permeation Method — A method for preparing 
a known mixture of a low concentration gas for 
verification testing of detector tubes. Gas permeates the 
walls of a gas permeable vessel (permeation tube)into 
the mixing solution, where it is combined with the 
diluent gas (usually purified air). The test gas 
concentration is calculated from the permeation rate, 
the flow rate of the diluent gas, and the thickness of the 
walls of the permeation tube. 


3.1.937 Permeation Rate — The rate of movement 
(mass flux) of the chemical through the barrier. The 
permeation rate is normally reported in mass per unit 
area per unit time (e.g., ug/em/min) after equilibrium 
is reached and may be normalized for thickness. 


3.1.938 Permeation Tube — A plastic tube in which is 
sealed a liquefied gas or volatile liquid that slowly 
permeates through the walls at a constant rate. 


3.1.939 Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL) — The 
permissible concentration in air of a substance to which 
nearly all workers may be repeatedly exposed 8 
hours a day, 40h a week, for 30 years without 
adverse effects. 


3.1.940 Permissible Exposure  Limit-short-term 
exposure limit (PEL-STEL) — Short term exposure 
limit is the employe’s 15 min TWA exposure that shall 
not be exceeded at any time during a workday unless 
another time limit is specified in a parenthetical 
notation below the limit. 


3.1.941 Permissible Heat Exposure Threshold Limit 
Values — A limit designed to provide a work 
temperature and wet bulb globe temperature 
combination so that 95 percent of the workers would 
not have a deep body temperature exceeding 38 °C. 
Work load categories are light work < 200 kcal/h (233 
watts), moderate work 200 kcal/h to 350 kcal/h (233 
watts to 407 watts), and heavy work 350 kcal/h to 500 
kcal/h (407 watts to 581 watts). 


3.1.942 Permit-Required Confined Space/Permit Space 
— A confined space that has one or more of the 
following characteristics: 


a) Contains or has the potential to contain a 
hazardous atmosphere; 

b) Contains a material that has the potential for 
engulfing an entrant; 

c) Has an internal configuration such that an 
entrant could be trapped or asphyxiated by 
inwardly converging walls or by a floor that 
slopes downward and tapers to a smaller cross 
section; and 

d) Contains any other recognized serious safety or 
health hazard. 


3.1.943 Peroxide — A chemical compound that 
contains the peroxy (— O — O -) group, which may be 
considered a derivative of hydrogen peroxide (HOOH). 


3.1.944 Peroxide Former — A material that reacts with 
oxygen or hydrogen peroxide to produce a peroxide of 
the reactant. 


3.1.945 Persistence — When applied to a chemical this 
has a meaning of ability to remain unchanged in the 
environment. 


3.1.946 Personal Sampler — Air sampling instrument 
developed for estimating exposure of individual 
workers to air contaminants. 


3.1.947 Personal Sampling — The collection of 
airborne chemicals in the worker’s breathing zone done 
by having the worker wear the sampling equipment 
throughout the workday. 


3.1.948 Personal Alert Safety Systems (PASS) — An 
individual protective device that emits an audible alarm 
to notify others and assists in locating a firefighter in 
danger. The personal alert safety system (PASS) device 
includes a motion detector that senses movement and 
automatically sounds an alarm signalif no movement is 
sensed for 30 seconds in case a firefighter is 
incapacitated and cannot activate the alarm. 


3.1.949 Personal Gas Monitor — A device carried by 
an individual to detect toxic gases or an oxygen- 
deficient atmosphere, which would cause harm to the 
health of an individual. They generally have an audible, 
visual, and vibrating alarm that activates at a preset 
level to warn the wearer of the immediate hazard of the 
surrounding atmosphere. 


3.1.950 Personal Protection — The action of shielding 
the body against contact with known chemical or 
physical hazards in the environment. 


41 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.951 Perturbation — Any effect that makes a small 
modification in a physical system. 


3.1.952 Pesticides — A descriptor applied to chemicals 
used to kill pests and minimize their impact in 
agriculture, health and other human interests. Pesticides 
are often classified according to the organisms which 
they are used to control, for example as fungicides, 
herbicides, insecticides, molluscicides, nematicides, 
rodenticides, etc. 


3.1.953 Peak side-on overpressure — The maximum 
pressure incident to an object exposed to a blast wave. 


3.1.954 Piston Pump — A hand-held sampling pump 
that draws a fixed volume of air. It operates by pulling 
and locking a piston into position while the sample is 
drawn into the detector tube. The piston is released after 
the sampling time has elapsed. 


3.1.955 Pitot Tube — A small bore tube inserted into a 
flowing stream with its orifice facing the stream to 
measure total pressure. The term is often used for a 
double tube instrument from which the flow velocity 
can be calculated with one orifice facing the flowing 
stream to register total pressure and other perpendicular 
to the stream to register static pressure. 


3.1.956 Placard — A sign or symbol designed to be 
hung on a wall, container or vehicle containing warning 
information to convey the level of hazard. 


3.1.957 Plug Flow Reactor (PFR) — A tube reactor in 
which the reactants are fed continuously at one end and 
the products are removed continuously from the other 
end; concentration and heat generation change along 
the length of the tube; the PFR is often used for 
potentially hazardous reactions because of the relatively 
small inventory in the system. 


3.1.958 Point Source Model — A thermal energy model 
based on representing the total heat release as a point 
source. 


3.1.959 Poison — A chemical substance or biological 
material which taken into or formed within the 
organism, destroys life or impairs the health status. 


3.1.960 Polar Solvent Liquids — Those liquids that mix 
(are miscible with water). 


3.1.961 Polymer — A giant long chain of molecules 
having extremely high molecular weights made up of 
many repeating smaller units called monomers or co- 
monomers. 


3.1.962 Polymerization — Chemical bonding of 
monomers to form a polymer. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.963 Positively Buoyant Gas — A gas with density 
less that of air at ambient temperature. 


3.1.964 Powder — A solid reduced to dust by 
pounding, crushing or grinding. 


3.1.965 Pressure Relief Device — A mechanism that 
vents fluid from an internally pressurized system to 
counteract system overpressure; the mechanism may 
release all pressure and shut the system down (as does 
a rupture disc) or it may merely reduce the pressure in 
a controlled manner to return the system to a safe 
operating pressure (as does a spring-loaded safety 
valve). 


3.1.966 Pressure Safety Valve — A valve that opens at 
a preset pressure to relieve excessive pressure within a 
vessel or piping. It may also be called a Pressure Relief 
Valve, Relief Valve, or Pop Valve. 


3.1.967 Proactive Safety Measures — Programs or 
activities that are undertaken to prevent an incident. 
Sometimes referred to as leading safety indicators. 
These may include preparation and implementation of 
safety policies, standards and procedures, safety 
communication activities, risk assessments, 
management of change, audits and inspections, training, 
continuous safety improvement activities, etc. 


3.1.968 Probability — The projected frequency of the 
occurrence of an event, usually based on statistical 
analysis of past similar events. Used for determining 
risk levels. May be qualitatively assessed or based on 
historical data for various types of hazard assessments. 
May also be sometimes referred to as likelihood. 


3.1.969 Probability of Failure on Demand (PFD) — A 
value that indicates the probability that a device or 
system will fail to respond to a demand in a specified 
interval of time. PFD equals 1 minus Safety 
Availability. 


3.1.970 Probit — A random variable with a mean of 5 
and a variance of 1, which is used in various effect 
models. 


3.1.971 Proof Test Interval — The time interval 
between checking a protection system. 


3.1.972 Process Media — The material (i.e., chemical 
substances) processed by the equipment. 


3.1.973 Protective Clothing — An article of clothing 
furnished to an employee that is worn for personal 
safety and protection in the performance of work 
assignments in potentially hazardous areas or under 
hazardous conditions. 


3.1.974 Protective Apparel — Garments or accessories, 
such as shoes, laboratory coat, gloves or goggles that 
are intended to protect laboratory personnel from injury 
or chemical exposure. 


42 


3.1.975 Protective Equipment — Any device such as 
respirator, safety shield, fume cabinet or manipulator, 
that is intended to protect laboratory personnel from 
injury or chemical exposure. 


3.1.976 Protective System — Systems such as pressure 
vessel relief valves, that function to prevent or mitigate 
the occurrence of an incident. 


3.1.977 Puff Model — A mathematical model used to 
represent the dispersion of gas from an instantaneous 
release. 

3.1.978 Puff Release — See Instantaneous Release. 


3.1.979 pH — A mean to express and to compare the 
acidity and alkalinity of a solution. It is expressed in a 
scale from 0 to 14. The solution of pH 7 is neutral; if 
the pH is lower than 7 the solution is acidic; if the pH is 
higher than 7 the solution is alkaline (basic). 


3.1.980 Phased Sampling Scheme — The conduction of 
a second sequential set of sampling is based on results 
of a first set. 


3.1.981 Phi-factor — A correction factor which is 
based on the ratio of the total heat capacity of a vessel 
(Myes, Cp,ves) and the total heat capacity of the vessel 
contents (mCp). The phi factor = 1 + (Myes Cp,ves/mCp) 
approaches the value of one for large vessels, for 
extremely light vessels, or at genuine adiabatic 
conditions. 


3.1.982 Photo Acoustic Spectroscopy (PAS) — A 
spectroscopic technique for investigating solid and 
semisolid materials, in which the sample is placed in a 
closed chamber filled with a gas such as air and 
illuminated with monochromatic of any desired 
wavelength, with intensity modulated at some suitable 
acoustic frequency; absorption of radiation results in a 
periodic heat flow from the sample, which generates 
sound that is detected by a sensitive microphone 
attached to the chamber. 


3.1.983 Photo Ionization Detector (PID) — The PID is 
a portable, general survey instrument used for detecting 
leaks, surveying plants to identify problem areas, 
evaluating source emissions, monitoring ventilation 
efficiency, evaluating work practices, and determining 
the need for personal protective equipment for 
hazardous waste site workers. 


3.1.984 Photon Energy — Photon energy describes the 
energy possessed by electromagnetic energy when 
characterized as discrete bundles, as described by 
quantum theory. The unit of photon energy is the 
Joule(J) or the electron volt (eV). 


3.1.985 Physical Factors, Unsafe — Environmental 
factors conducive to an incident occurrence, which 
include physical or environmental hazards. 


3.1.986 Physical Hazard — A chemical for which there 
is scientifically valid evidence that it is a combustible 
liquid, a compressed gas, explosive, flammable, an 
organic peroxide, an oxidizer, pyrophoric, unstable 
(reactive) or water reactive. 


3.1.987 Physical Relief Device — Mechanical 
equipment that performs an action to relieve pressure 
when the normal operating range of temperature or 
pressure has been exceeded. Physical relief devices 
include pressure relief valves, thermal relief valves, 
rupture disks, rupture pins, and high temperature fusible 
plugs. 

3.1.988 Physical Work Capacity (PWC) — The 
maximum amount of oxygen that an individual can 
consume per minute. 


3.1.989 Pilot Operated Safety Relief Valve — A 
pressure relief valve in which the major relieving device 
is combined with and is controlled by a self-actuating 
auxiliary pressure relief valve. 


3.1.990 Piezoelectric Mass Sensor — A sensor based 
on the principle that when crystalline materials are 
mechanically stressed by compression or tension they 
produce a voltage proportional to the stress. When these 
crystals are subjected to an electric current, they 
oscillate, and the natural vibrational frequency depends 
on the thickness and density of the crystal. 


3.1.991 Point of Operation Guarding — Machine 
guards, such as a hard guards or safety light screens, 
that are designed to protect personnel from hazardous 
machine motion when close to the machine’s point of 
operation. 


3.1.992 Point of Perception — The time and place at 
which the individual actually first perceived, that is, 
saw, heard, smelled, or feltl the hazard, or the unusual 
or unexpected movement or condition that could be 
taken as a sign that the incident is about to occur. 


3.1.993 Point of Possible Perception — The place and 
time at which the unusual or unexpected movement or 
condition could have been perceived by a normal 
person. This point always comes at or before the point 
of (actual) perception. 


3.1.994 Pool Fire — The combustion of material 
evaporating from a layer of liquid at the base of the fire. 


3.1.995 Policy, Safety — A declaration by an 
organization of how it manages loss prevention at its 
facilities. It reflects the organization’s culture, values, 
and commitment towards health and safety in its 
workplace. 


3.1.996 Polymer — Substance made of giant molecules 
formed by the union of simple molecules (monomers); 
for example, polymerization of ethylene forms a 


43 


IS 4155 : 2023 


polyethylene chain, or condensation of phenol and 
formaldehyde (with production of water) forms phenol 
formaldehyde resins. 


3.1.997 Pollutant — Any undesirable solid, liquid, or 
gaseous matter in a gaseous, liquid, or solid medium. 
For the meaning of “undesirable” in air pollution 
contexts, see pollution. A primary pollutant is a 
pollutant emitted into the atmosphere from an 
identifiable source. A secondary pollutant is a pollutant 
formed by chemical reaction in the atmosphere. 


3.1.998 Pollution — The introduction of pollutants into 
a solid, liquid, or gaseous medium, the presence of 
pollutants in a solid, liquid, or gaseous medium, or any 
undesirable modification of the composition of a solid, 
liquid, or gaseous medium. For air pollution, an 
undesirable modification is one that has injurious or 
deleterious effects. 


3.1.999 Popping Pressure — The pressure at which 
a safety (relief) valve passing compressible fluid pops 
from partially open to full open with no further increase 
in the inlet pressure. 


3.1.1000 Potential Exposure — Exposure that is not 
expected to be delivered with certainty but that may 
result from an accident at a source or owing to an event 
or sequence of events of a probabilistic nature, 
including equipment failures and operating errors. 


3.1.1001 Potential Hazard — A situation, thing, or 
event having latent characteristics conducive to an 
incident occurrence. 


3.1.1002 Potentiation — The joint action of two or 
more chemicals on an organism is more than additive. 


3.1.1003 Pressure — Thermodynamically, the normal 
force exerted by a homogeneous liquid or gas, per unit 
of area, on the wall of the container. Force exerted per 
unit area. 


3.1.1004 Pressure-drop — Loss in pressure (as from 
one end of the refrigerant line to the other) from friction, 
static, heat etc. The differential pressure across some 
element of a system, such as a valve or orifice. (Also 
known as — back pressure). 


3.1.1005 Pressure Relief Valve — A pressure relief 
device which is designed to reclose and prevent the 
further flow of fluid after normal conditions have been 
restored. 


3.1.1006 Pressure Vessel — A tank or other container 
constructed so as to withstand interior pressure greater 
than that of the atmosphere. 


3.1.1007 Precision — The closeness of agreement 
between the results obtained by applying the 


IS 4155 : 2023 


experimental procedure several times under prescribed 
conditions. 


3.1.1008 Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA) — An 
early or initial screening study for the identification, 
qualitative review, and ranking of process hazards, 
typically conducted during an initial evaluation of 
existing facilities or a project’s conceptual design. 
Recommendations for the mitigation of identified 
hazards are provided. 


3.1.1009 Preliminary Hazard List (PHL) — A line item 
inventory of system hazards, with no evaluation of 
probability, severity, or risk. 

3.1.1010 Preventive Maintenance — A systematic 
procedure by which laboratory components that are 
most likely to fail are replaced and instruments 
recalibrated to ensure that the laboratory operates at 
maximum efficiency. 


3.1.1011 Preventive Measures — Measures taken at the 
initial stages of a runaway to avoid further development 
of the runaway or to reduce and mitigate its final effects. 


3.1.1012 Process — Any activity involving a chemical 
including any use, storage, manufacturing, handling, or 
on-site movement of such chemicals, or combination of 
these activities. 


3.1.1013 Process Change— Changing a process to 
make it less hazardous (e.g., paint dipping in place of 


pain spraying). 


3.1.1014 Process Controls — Emission control devices 
installed on a process or piece of equipment. 


3.1.1015 Process Critical Equipment — Rotating 
equipment including turbines, electric driven pumps, 
compressors or generators handling combustible, 
flammable or toxic materials, and use drivers equal to 
orgreater than 1 000 HP. Process critical equipment also 
includes rotating equipment that is categorized as 
critical by a Process Hazard Analysis. 


3.1.1016 Process Hazard Analysis — An organized 
effort to identify and evaluate hazards associated with 
chemical processes and operations to enable their 
control. This review normally involves the use of 
qualitative techniques to identify and assess the 
significance of hazards. Conclusions and appropriate 
recommendations are developed. Occasionally, 
quantitative methods are used to help prioritize risk 
reduction. 


3.1.1017 Process Hood — A device to capture, enclose 
or receive hazards from a process. Hoods enclose a 
process and capture or receive contaminants. 


3.1.1018 Process Related Incident — An incident with 
impact, or potential impact, on process, equipment, 
people, and/or the environment. The incident could be 


44 


internal or external to the process. An occupational 
incident can result from a process related incident. 


3.1.1019 Process Safety — A discipline that focuses on 
the prevention of fires, explosions, and accidental 
chemical releases at chemical process facilities. 
Excludes classic worker health and safety issues 
involving working surfaces, ladders, protective 
equipment, etc. 


3.1.1020 Process Safety Time — The period of time 
between a trip point being reached and a hazardous 
event occurring if no safety measures such as a 
shutdown are taken. 

3.1.1021 Process Safety Management — A program or 
activity that involves the application of management 
principles and analytical techniques to ensure process 
safety in chemical facilities. The focusis on preventing 
major accidents rather than dealing with classic worker 
health and safety issues. 


3.1.1022 Process Safety Auditing — A formal review 
that identifies process hazards relative to established 
standards; for example, examining plant and 
equipment, often using a checklist or other audit guide. 


3.1.1023 Process Safety Management Systems — 
Comprehensive sets of policies, procedures, and 
practices designed to ensure that barriers to episodic 
incidents are in place, in use, and effective. 


3.1.1024 Process Safety Management Systems Auditing 


— The systematic review of process safety 
management systems, used to verify the suitability of 
these systems and their effective, consistent 
implementation. 


3.1.1025 Product Safety — A scientific process to 
assess the probability that exposure to a product during 
any stage of its life cycle will lead to an unacceptable 
impact on human health or the environment. May also 
be referred to as product risk characterization or product 
risk assessment. 


3.1.1026 Proof Test — Testing of safety system 
components to detect any failures not detected by 
automatic on-line diagnostics, i.e., dangerous failures, 
diagnostic failures, and parametric failures, followed by 
repair of those failures to an equivalent as new state. 
Proof testing is a vital part of the safety life cycle and 
is critical to ensuring that a system achieves its 
required safety integrity level through out the safety 
life cycle. 


3.1.1027 Public Health Impact Assessment — 
Application of risk assessment procedures to a specific 
target population. The size of the populations needs to 
be known. The end product is a quantitative statement 
about the number of people affected in the specific 
target populations. 


3.1.1028 Pump — A mechanical device used in air 
monitoring to draw the sample gas through a collection 
device. 


3.1.1029 Pungent — Sharp or irritating. 


3.1.1030 Purging — A method by which gases, vapors, 
or other air contaminants are displaced from a confined 
space. It is accomplished so that subsequent natural 
ventilation will not result in the reinstatement of an 
undesired atmosphere. Purging is commonly 
accomplished by the use of a protective or inert gas (for 
example, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, etc.) at a sufficient 
flow and positive pressure to reduce the concentration 
of any flammable gas, vapor, or toxic materials initially 
present to an acceptable level. It may also be called de- 
gassing. 


3.1.1031 Purging, Clearing — Replacement of a 
substance so rapidly so that there is minimum mixing, 
thus reducing the duration of any explosive mixture. 


3.1.1032 Purging, Dilution — Introduction of adequate 
quantities of an inert gas to an enclosure to ensure that 
explosive mixtures cannot form. 


3.1.1033 Purging, Displacement — Replacement of 
one substance with another without appreciablemixing. 
Displacement purges in pipelines are typically 
accomplished by separating the two substances with an 
inert fluid or a mechanical scraper. 


3.1.1034 Purge Gas — A gas that is continuously or 
intermittently added to a system to render the 
atmosphere non-ignitable. The purge gas may be inert 
or combustible. 


3.1.1035 Pyrolysis — A chemical decomposition or 
breaking apart of molecules produced by heating in 
the absence of air. 


3.1.1036 Pyrolyzer — A device that thermally 
decomposes certain gases and vapors, releasing 
constituents that then can react with the indicating layer 
in the detector tube. 


3.1.1037 Pyrophoric — A chemical that will ignite 
spontaneously in air at a temperature of 130 °F (54.4 
°C) or below. 


NOTE — that definitions of pyrophoric from other sources may 
specify a time frame, usually seconds or minutes, within which 
ignition must be observed. 


3.1.1038 Pyrophoric Gas — Gaseous materials that 
spontaneously ignite when exposed to air under 
ambient conditions. Example: trimethyl aluminium. 


3.1.1039 Pyrophoric Liquid — Liquid materials that 
spontaneously ignite when exposed to air under 
ambient conditions. 


45 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1040 Pyrophoric Solid — Solid materials that 
spontaneously ignite when exposed to air under 
ambient conditions. An example is phosphorus. 


3.1.1041 Pyrotechnics — Explosive commodities that 
have extremely high flame speeds and heat releases. 
Pyrotechnics are primarily used in fireworks displays 
and munitions. 


Q 


3.1.1042 Qualitative Risk Analysis — An evaluation of 
risk based on the observed hazards and protective 
systems that are in place as opposed to an evaluation 
that uses specific numerical techniques. 


3.1.1043 Quantitative Risk Assessment — The 
systematic development of numerical estimates of the 
expected frequency and/or consequence of potential 
accidents associated with a facility or operation based 
on engineering evaluation and mathematical 
techniques. 


3.1.1044 Quasi-Adiabatic — A vessel condition that 
allows for small amounts of heat exchange; this 
condition is typical in testing self-heating by oxidation 
that is characterized by gas flows (although well- 
controlled in temperature) into and/or out of the test 
vessel; this condition is typical as well in tests where 
heat transfer is avoided by active control, that is, the 
ambient temperature is kept identical to the test vessel 
temperature, such that an adiabatic condition is 
approached. 


3.1.1045 Quenching — Rapid cooling from an elevated 
temperature, for example, severe cooling of the reaction 
system in a short time (almost instantaneously), freezes 
the status of a reaction and prevents further 
decomposition. 


3.1.1046 Quench Pool — A vessel containing liquid 
and a sparger for quenching an effluent stream. 
Commonly used for cooling or condensing vapor or 
vapor-liquid mixtures, or for reacting effluent with a 
neutralizing agent, or for absorbing hazardous 
components from an effluent. 


R 


3.1.1047 Rain Out — When a superheated liquid is 
released to the atmosphere, a fraction of it will flash into 
vapor. Another fraction may remain suspended as an 
aerosol. The remaining liquid, as well as portions of 
aerosol, may rain out on the ground. 


3.1.1048 Rapid Phase Transition — An explosive 
generation of vapor that can occur when a cold volatile 
liquid contacts a warmer liquid. The cold liquid can 
superheat to such a degree that homogeneous 
nucleation can occur resulting in very rapid generation 


IS 4155 : 2023 


of vapor. This is the phenomenon involved in LNG- 


water, hot  oil-water, and  molten-metal-water 
explosions. Also referred to as homogeneous 
nucleation. 


3.1.1049 Reaction — Any transformation of material 
accompanied by a change of enthalpy which may be 
endothermic or exothermic. 


3.1.1050 Reactivity — Chemical reaction with the 
release of energy. Undesirable effects (such as pressure 
build up, temperature increase, formation of noxious, 
toxic or corrosive by products) may occur because of 
the reactivity of a substance to heating, burning, direct 
contact with other materials, or other conditions in use 
of in storage. 


3.1.1051 Reagent Grade — A chemical reagent that 
meets standards for purity set by the American chemical 
society. These reagents are produced for laboratory use. 


3.1.1052 Reaction Induction Time (RIT) Value — The 
time a chemical compound or mixture may be held 
under isothermal conditions until it exhibits a specific 
exothermic reaction. 


3.1.1053 Reaction Kinetics — A mathematical 
description of reaction rates in terms of concentrations, 
temperatures, pressures, and volumes that determine the 
path of the reaction. 


3.1.1054 Reaction Rate Constant —The constant in the 
rate of reaction equation; it is a function of temperature 
as represented in the Arrhenius equation. 


3.1.1055 Reactive Chemical — A substance that can 
pose a chemical reactivity hazard by readily oxidizing 
in air without an ignition source (spontaneously 
combustible or peroxide forming), initiating or 
promoting combustion in other materials (oxidizer), 
reacting with water, or self-reacting (polymerizing, 
decomposing or rearranging). Initiation of the reaction 
can be spontaneous, by energy input such as thermal or 
mechanical energy, or by catalytic action increasing the 
reaction rate. 


3.1.1056 Reactive Groups — Categories of chemicals 
that react in similar ways, often because they are similar 
in their chemical structure. 


3.1.1057 Reactivity, Chemical — 
reactivity. 


see chemical 


3.1.1058 Recognition Process —A process used to 
recognize work place hazards. 


3.1.1059 Recommended Alert Limits — Heat exposure 
limits for unacclimatized workers. 


46 


3.1.1060 Redox Compound— Compound with reducing 
and oxidizing features. 


3.1.1061 Reduced Comfort (RC) Resonance — The 
boundaries concerned with preservation of comfort 
during vibration exposure. 


3.1.1062 Re-entrainment—Resuspension of particles 
after they have been settled onto a collecting surface. 


3.1.1063 Regulatory Requirements — Any legal or 
statutatory legislation, which, in the context of this 
monograph, relates to laboratory safety, the safe use of 
chemicals, their storage, disposal, monitoring of 
laboratory personnel etc. 


3.1.1064 Reflux — A system condition in which a 
component in the reaction system (usually a solvent or 
diluent) is continuously boiled off, condensed in a 
nearby condenser, and then returned to the reaction 
system; reflux is often used to operate at a preset 
temperature or to avoid operating at unacceptably high 
temperatures. 


3.1.1065 Relative Risk Analysis — A hazardous 
material risk that is evaluated in comparison to 
anotherrisk. The type of risk analysis used should be 
appropriate for the available data and to the exposure, 
frequency, and severity of potential loss. 


3.1.1066 Relative Risk Index Model - Pipe Line — A 
relative risk index model is an analytical model or tool 
that is used to calculate a numerical score, representing 
the relative risk of a pipeline segment. This score is 
calculated based on variables that represent 
characteristics of the pipeline segment and the 
perceived importance of these characteristics to the risk 
of the segment. 


3.1.1067 Relief Valve — A pressure relief valve 
actuated by inlet static pressure having a gradual lift 
dependent on the increase in pressure over the opening 
pressure. It may be provided with an enclosed spring 
housing suitable for closed discharge system 
application and is primarily used for liquid service. 


3.1.1068 Relieving Capacity — The flow rate through 
a pressure relieving system calculated for a designated 
temperature, set pressure and overpressure, using a flow 
area and coefficient of discharge (or resistance factors 
for rupture disk device systems) determined in 
certification tests or otherwise specified in ASME 
BPVC. For pressure relief devices covered under the 
ASME BPVC but normally not capacity-certified, and 
for low pressure relief devices not covered by the 
ASME BPVC, the relieving capacity is based on the 
manufacturer’s calibration data. 


3.1.1069 Relieving Pressure — Relieving pressure is 
the set pressure plus overpressure. 


3.1.1070 Remote-Sensing Pressure Relief Valve — A 
pilot operated safety relief valve in which the pressure 
signal is obtained remotely from the valve body (e.g., 
from the vessel being protected). 


3.1.1071 Response — That portion of incident 
management in which personnel are involved in 
controlling a hazardous materials incident. 


3.1.1072 Resinification — A process involving slow 
polymerization of low molecular weight substances, 
sometimes induced by exposure to air. 


3.1.1073 Residual Risk — The risk remaining after 
preventive measures have been taken. Although 
preventive measures may have been implemented and 
effective, a residual risk will also be present if an 
operation or a facility continues to exist. 


3.1.1074 Return Procedure — Part of a safety plan 
intended to ensure that personnel do not return to a 
laboratory area until an emergency situation is ended. 


3.1.1075 Risk — A measure of economic loss or human 
injury in terms of both the incident likelihood and the 
magnitude of the injury. 


3.1.1076 Risk Analysis — The development of a 
quantitative estimate of risk based on engineering 
evaluation and mathematical techniques for combining 
estimates of incident consequences and frequencies 


3.1.1077 Risk Analyst — An individual who analyzes 
historical loss data, prepares loss models, estimates 
potential losses, and investigates and applies emerging 
research methodologies for preparing loss predictions. 
Primarily used in the insurance industry. 


3.1.1078 Risk Assessment — A process by which the 
results of a risk analysis (i.e., risk estimates) are 
prepared for use in decisions, either through relative- 
ranking of risk reduction strategies or through 
comparison with risk criteria. 


3.1.1079 Risk Assessment Management Process — A 
global term for the whole activity from hazard 
identification to risk management 


3.1.1080 Risk Attitude — A decision maker’s 
preferences towards facing variation in possible losses 
and gains. In decision analysis, risk attitude is expressed 
mathematically through a utility function. 


3.1.1081 Risk-averse — A description of a decision 
maker’s risk attitude in which the value for a risky 
alternative is lower than the expected value of the 
alternative. 


3.1.1082 Risk Avoidance — The philosophy of risk 
management that an entity will not enter into an 
operation that poses an exposure of loss or will 


47 


IS 4155 : 2023 


eliminate the exposure to a potential loss. [Ex: The 
replacement of a manual handling operation by a 
mechanical handling system. Primarily used in the risk 
management practices for corporate cost benefit in the 
analysis of insurance applications. ] 

3.1.1083 Risk-Based Inspection (RBI) — A frequency 
of inspection based on an evaluation of the hazard 
versus severity, i.e., the risk the facility represents, 
whereby high-risk facilities would be inspected more 
frequently than low-risk facilities. This focuses 
resources more beneficially to the appropriate potential 
high-risk facilities to improve safety. 


3.1.1084 Risk Control — The provision of suitable 
measures or elements to eliminate or control real or 
potential hazards. Risk control may be done through 
risk avoidance, risk retention, risk transfer, or risk 
reduction measures. see also Risk Avoidance; Risk 
Management; Risk Reduction; Risk Retention; Risk 
Transfer. 


3.1.1085 Risk Factor — A characteristic or agent 
whose presence increases the probability of occurrence 
of a disease or injury. 


3.1.1086 Risk Graph — A qualitative and category- 
based method of safety integrity level (SIL) 
assignment. Risk graph analysis uses four parameters to 
make a SIL selection: consequence, occupancy, 
probability of avoiding the hazard, and demand rate. 
Each of these parameters is assigned a category anda 
SIL is associated with each combination of categories. 
In some cases, quantitative tools, such as Layers of 
Protection Analysis (LOPA), are used to assist the 
analyst in determining which category to use, but 
typically the assignment is done qualitatively. Using the 
selected categories, the analyst follows the resulting 
path that leads to the associated SIL assignment. 


3.1.1087 Risk Integral — A summation of risk as 
expressed by the product of consequence and 
frequency. The integral is summed over all of the 
potential unwanted events that can occur. If calculating 
the risk integral for loss of life, the consequence of 
concern and thus the units of the integral are fatalities. 
It is useful in combination with event trees to determine 
a total value of risk for a group of related incidents. 


3.1.1088 Risk Characterization — The outcome of 
hazards identification and risk estimation applied to a 
specific use or occurrence of an environmental health 
hazard (e.g., a chemical compound). The assessment 
requires quantitative data on the human exposure in the 
specific situation. The end product isa quantitative 
statement about the proportion of affected people in a 
target population. 


3.1.1089 Risk Contour — Lines that connect points of 
equal risk around the facility ("iso-risk" lines). 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1090 Risk Estimation — The quantification of dose- 
effect and dose-response relationships for a given 
environmental agent, showing the probability and 
nature of the health effects of exposure to the agent. 


3.1.1091 Risk Evaluation — The assessment of risk, 
coupled with an appraisal of the significance of the 
results, both overall and from individual events. 


3.1.1092 Risk Management — The systematic 
application of management policies, procedures, and 
practices to the tasks of analyzing, assessing, and 
controlling risk in order to protect employees, the 
general public, and the environment as well as company 
assets, while avoiding business interruptions. Includes 
decisions to use suitable engineering and administrative 
controls for reducing risk. 


3.1.1093 Risk Management Techniques — Various 
methods available to handle a hazard, which primarily 
include risk avoidance, risk reduction, risk control, and 
risk acceptance. 


3.1.1094 Risk Marker — (synonym: risk indicator) An 
attribute that is associated with an increased probability 
of occurrence of a disease or other specified outcome 
and that can be used as an indicator of this increased 
risk. Not necessarily a causal factor. 


3.1.1095 Risk Monitoring — The process of following 
up decisions and actions within risk management in 
order to check whether the aims of reduced exposure 
and risk are achieved. 


3.1.1096 Risk Measures — Ways of combining 
information on likelihood with the magnitude of loss or 
injury (e.g., risk indices, individual risk measures, and 
societal risk measures). 


3.1.1097 Risk Rating — A rating of a risk from lowest 
to highest or vice versa. A rating is usually derived from 
a risk matrix assessing the risk from frequency or 
probability (high to low) against its consequences 
(minor to severe), whereby the function of the two 
provide a relative ranking of the risk compared to other 
risks, and the result will indicate the level of action that 
is required to resolve the risk. 


3.1.1098 Risk Reduction — The lowering of a loss 
exposure through the provision of risk avoidance, 
prevention techniques, loss control measures, or risk 
financing instruments. 


3.1.1099 Risk Retention — A risk management strategy 
where the risk is retained within an organization and 
any consequent loss is financed by the organization. 
There are considered to be two types: risk retention with 
knowledge and risk retention without knowledge. With 
knowledge a conscious decision is made to meet any 
resulting loss from within the organization’s resources. 


48 


Decisions on which risk should be retained should only 
be decided after all the risks have been identified, 
measured, and evaluated. Without knowledge are those 
that arise from a lack of knowledge of the existence of 
a risk or an omissionto insure against that risk. Risks 
that have not been identified and evaluated are a form 
of risk retention. 


3.1.1100 Risk Threshold — A level of risk at which 
society, organizations, employees, or an individual are 
prepared to accept in terms of risk acceptance, e.g., an 
individual crossing a road in heavy traffic. 


3.1.1101 Risk Transfer — Shifting a risk by the means 
of a two-party contract, typically an insurance contract. 


3.1.1102 Risk Targets — Objective-based risk criteria 
established as goals or guidelines for performance. 


3.1.1103 Rule Based Action Behavior — Behavior in 
which a person follows remembered or written rules. 
(Ex: the use of a written checklist to calibrate an 
instrument or a maintenance manual to repair a pump) 


3.1.1104 Risk-neutral — A description of a decision 
maker’s risk attitude in which the value for a risky 
alternative is equal to the expected value of the 
alternative. 


3.1.1105 Risk-preferring — A description of a decision 
maker’s risk attitude in which the value for a risky 
alternative is higher than the expected value of the 
alternative. 


3.1.1106 Risk profile — A cumulative probability 
distribution over the range of values associated with all 
possible outcomes resulting from selecting a given 
alternative. 


3.1.1107 Rodenticide — A chemical used to kill rodents 
(rats). 


3.1.1108 Routinely Collected Data —Various types of 
exposure and health data that are collected routinely in 
the occupational setting for use in surveillance 
programs. 


3.1.1109 Runoff — Excess water produced during fire 
fighting or from rain. 


3.1.1110 Runaway Reaction — A thermally unstable 
chemical reaction system which shows an accelerating 
increase of temperature and reaction rate. The runaway 
reaction can finally result in vessel failure. 


3.1.1111 Rupture Disk Device 


3.1.1111.1 A non-reclosing pressure relief device 
actuated by inlet static pressure and designed tofunction 
by the bursting of a pressure containing disk. Also 
called a frangible disk device or abursting disk device. 


3.1.1111.2 A non-reclosing differential pressure relief 
device actuated by inlet static pressure and designed to 
function by bursting the pressure containing rupture 
disk. A rupture disk device includes a rupture disk and 
a rupture disk holder. 


S 


3.1.1112 Safe — In occupational health, when a 
situation is safe it is meant that it is from an 
unacceptableamount of risk rather than free from all 
risk. Something is thus safe if its actual risk is judged to 
be acceptable. 


3.1.1113 Safe Failure — A failure that does not have 
the potential to put the safety instrumented systemin a 
dangerous or fail-to-function state. The situation when 
a safety-related system or component fails to perform 
properly in such a way that it calls for the system to be 
shut down or the safety instrumented function to 
activate when there is no hazard present. 


3.1.1114 Safe Failure Fraction (SFF) — The fraction 
of the overall failure rate of a device that results in either 
a safe fault or a diagnosed (detected) unsafe fault. The 
safe failure fraction includes the detectable dangerous 
failures when those failures are annunciated and 
procedures for repair or shutdown are in place. 


3.1.1115 Safe Holding Distance — A method of 
safeguarding that protects the operator by requiring the 
operator to hold the work piece at a distance from the 
hazard area such that the operator cannot reach the 
hazard portion of the machine cycle. 


3.1.1116 Safe Opening Safeguarding — A method of 
safeguarding that limits access to the hazard area by the 
size of openings, or by closing off access, when the 
work piece is in place in the machine. 


3.1.1117 Safe Position of Controls Safeguarding — A 
method of safeguarding that requires the operator to be 
positioned at the machine controls at a distance from the 
hazard area such that the operator cannot reach the 
hazard area during the hazardous portion of the machine 
cycle. 


3.1.1118 Safe Refuge — A location free of risk from an 
incident of concern. An area designated as safe refuge 
has the capability to provide protection against the 
designated emergency, i.e., fire, explosion, toxic gases, 
etc. see also Evacuation; Shelter-in-Place. 


3.1.1119 Safe State — The predetermined safe position 
of the process equipment device under control, as 
determined by operational experience, a preliminary 
hazards analysis, or formal Hazard and Operability 
(HAZOP) study. Unless otherwise specified, the 
safe-state is de-energized, i.e., without power, 
pneumatic, or hydraulic supply. It is also the state of the 
process after acting to remove the hazard resulting in no 


49 


IS 4155 : 2023 


significant harm. 


3.1.1120 Safe Practices in Laboratories — Accepted 
methods of working in a laboratory so as to comply with 
the relevant safety plan. 


3.1.1121 Safe Working Load (SWL) — Generally taken 
as the maximum load that an item of equipment (e.g., 
crane) may raise, lower, or suspend under particular 
service conditions and arrangements. Each individual 
type of equipment has its own specific safe working 
load limits. 


3.1.1122 Safe Workplace — One in which the 
likelihood of all identifiable undesired events are 
maintained at an acceptable level. 


3.1.1123 Safeguard — A precautionary measure or 
stipulation. Usually equipment or procedures designed 
to interfere with an incident propagation to prevent or 
reduce incident consequences. 


3.1.1124 Safety — A general term denoting an 
acceptable level of risk of, relative freedom from, and 
low probability of harm. 


3.1.1125 Safety (of A Drug or Other Chemical 
Substance For Human Health) — The extent to which 
a chemical substance may be used in the amounts 
necessary for intended purposes with a minimum risk 
of adverse health effects. 


3.1.1126 Safety Alert Symbol — A symbol used on a 
safety sign that indicates a potential personal injury 
hazard as defined in American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI) Z535.4. It is composed of an 
equilateral triangle surrounding an exclamation mark. 
The color of the sign signifies its hazard level: red for 
danger, orange for warning, and yellow for caution. The 
safety alert symbol is not to be used to alert persons to 
property damage only incidents. 


3.1.1127 Safety Availability — The fraction of time that 
a safety system is able to perform its designated 
function when the process is operating. The safety 
system is unavailable when it has failed dangerously or 
is in bypass. Safety availability is equal to 1 minus the 
Probability of Failure on Demand of the safety function. 
See also Probability of Failure on Demand (PFD). 


3.1.1128 Safety Award — An item provided to a 
worker, group, or organization to recognize its safety 
performance in accordance with an organization’s 
goals. The award helps promote prevention of 
workplace injuries and illness and motivate employees 
to improve their safety performance. see also Safety 
Recognition Program. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1129 Safety Belt (Waist Belt) — A robust and secure 
belt worn by an individual (e.g., telephone line worker, 
window washers, construction worker, etc.) attached to 
a secure object (telephone pole, window sill, anchor 
point, etc.) via a safety lanyard, to prevent injury due to 
falling. They are intended for use where mobility can 
be limited, and where the combined effects of the 
anchorage point position and lengthof the lanyard 
limits the potential drop of the individual in case the 
individual falls. Also can refer to a seat or torso belt 
securing a passenger in an automobile or airplane to 
provide body protection during a collision, sudden stop, 
air turbulence, etc. 


3.1.1130 Safety Awareness — General appreciation by 
personnel of necessary safety requirements for the tasks 
in hand. 


3.1.1131 Safety Can — A small, approved metallic can 
of not more than 18.9 liters (5 gallons) capacity 
equipped with a spring closing lid, which will safely 
relieve pressures when exposed to a fire. 


3.1.1132 Safety Case — A formal examination of 
methods to be adopted to reduce the risk of an incident. 
It is often used in high potential risk applications, i.e., 
petroleum installations, nuclear facilities, etc. 


3.1.1133 Safety Chain (Towing) — Chains that are 
utilized to prevent a trailer from separating from its 
towing vehicle in event of the hitch’s failure. The chains 
should be arranged so they are crossed in an X fashion 
below the ball mount, with enough slack that they do 
not restrict turning or allow the coupler tohit the 
ground. This prevents the trailer tongue from dropping 
to the ground if the connection becomes undone. Safety 
chains should be rated to equal or greater than twice the 
maximum gross trailer weight rating. 


3.1.1134 Safety Committee — A team of employees 
formed to advise and promote the safety and healthof 
the workplace. Members should include representative 
employees and management from all sections ofan 
organization. 


3.1.1135 Safety Communication — The collective 
means by which safety information is disseminated to 
employees, including the classroom, departmental 
safety meetings, and written communications such as 
posters, newsletters, and postings of regulatory agency 
inspection findings. 


3.1.1136 Safety Competition — A safety promotion and 
motivation program to enhance an organization’s safety 
performance by organizing a competition among 
various groups or departments for the best safety 
achievements (e.g., incident statistics, proactive safety 
activities).The winner of the competition is provided 
with a recognition or award for their efforts. 


50 


3.1.1137 Safety Consequences — A failure has safety 
consequences if it causes a loss of function or other 
damage that could cause injury or result in a fatality. 


3.1.1138 Safety Coordinator — Individuals within 
organizations who assist in implementing the 
workplace safety program in their respective areas. 


3.1.1139 Safety Coupling — A friction coupling 
adjusted to slip at a predetermined torque to protect the 
rest of the system from overload. 


3.1.1140 Safety Coordinator/Officer— Individual 
whose task it is to ensure safe day to day operation of a 
part or whole of the laboratory. 


3.1.1141 Safety Cuffs — An extended piece of 
protective shirt material attached by a seam at the wrist. 
Safety cuffs provide additional protection to the wrist 
area and slide on and off easily. Safety cuffs are 
typically made of more rigid material and remain firm 
even when exposed to perspiration. 


3.1.1142 Safety Cut-Out — An overload protective 
device in an electric circuit. 


3.1.1143 Safety Device — Any kind of device, item, 
or system that is used in or on equipment and that 
controls or monitors any aspect of the safety of the 
equipment and includes a safety relief device. 


3.1.1144 Safety Distance — The minimum distance 
from each control-actuating device of a two-hand 
control system to the hazard point such that the operator 
cannot reach the hazard point with a hand or other body 
part before cessation of motion of the hazardous portion 
of the machine cycle. see also separation distance 
(safety light screen). 


3.1.1145 Safety Education — The transmission of 
knowledge, skills, attitudes, motivations, etc., 
concerning the safety requirements of operations, 
processes, environments, etc., to workers, supervisors, 
managers, and others. 


3.1.1146 Safety Engineering — Safety engineering is 
concerned with the planning, development, 
improvement, coordination, and evaluation of the safety 
component of integrated systems of individuals, 
materials, equipment, and environments to achieve 
optimum safety effectiveness in terms of both 
protection of people and protection of property. 


3.1.1147 Safety Equal — A slogan commonly used in 
industry to highlight the fact that safety considerations 
are equal to production concerns. Its use has recently 
risen, since there have been incidentswhere production 
concerns were considered of higher value than plant 
shutdown, but eventually this led to a higher losses. 
Another concern was that the slogan Safety First was 
not being seriously applied due to production demands. 


3.1.1148 Safety First — A slogan commonly used in 
industry to highlight the importance of safety in its 
operations. 


3.1.1149 Safety Function — A specific task or purpose 
that must be accomplished for safety. 


3.1.1150 Safety Fuse — It consists of a train of slow 
burning gun powder enclosed in waterproof covering 
and used for initiation of a detonator or an explosive 
charge from a safe distance. 


3.1.1151 Safety Glasses — Protective eyewear from 
impacts that may have side shields. They may alsobe 
called Safety Spectacles. They are required to meet 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z87 and 
be clearly marked with the manufacturer‘s name. 


3.1.1152 Safety and Health Organization — An 
established structure of responsible persons throughout 
a work place, whereby safe working practices may be 
developed and promulgated. 


3.1.1153 Safety Gloves — Gloves used to protect the 
hands of individuals from physical injury (cuts, 
abrasions, temperature extremes, electrical shock, etc.), 
chemical hazards, biological hazards, and radioactive 
hazards. 


3.1.1154 Safety Handbook — Generally a publication 
that provides information on an organization’s safety 
policies, responsibilities, rules, procedures, and 
guidelines for its employees. 


3.1.1155 Safety Helmet — Rigid headgear of varying 
materials designed to protect the head, not onlyfrom 
impact, but from flying particles and electric shock, or 
any combination of the three. Safety helmets should 
meet the requirements of American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI) Standard Z89.1, Protective Headware 
for Industrial Workers 


3.1.1156 Safety Injury — The classification for an 
occupational injury which includes all disabling work 
injuries and non-disabling work injuries as follows: 
eye injuries requiring treatment by a physician, 
fractures, injuries requiring hospitalization, loss of 
consciousness, injuries requiring treatment by a doctor 
and injuries requiring restriction of motion or work, or 
assignment to another job. 


3.1.1157 Safety Inspections — An inspection conducted 
by those who are classified as safety specialists. 


3.1.1158 Safety Instrumented Function (SIF) — A set 
of equipment intended to reduce the risk due to a 
specific hazard (a safety loop). Its purpose is to (1) 
automatically take an industrial process to a safe state 
when specified conditions are violated; (2) permit a 
process to move forward in a safe manner when 
specified conditions allow (permissive functions); (3) 


51 


IS 4155 : 2023 


take action to mitigate the consequences of an industrial 
hazard. It includes elements that detect when an 
incident is imminent, decide to take action, andthen 
carry out the action needed to bring the process to a safe 
state. Its ability to detect, decide, and act is designated 
by the safety integrity level (SIL) of the function. see 
also Safety Integrity Level (SIL). 


3.1.1159 Safety Instrumented System (SIS) — 
Implementation of one or more Safety Instrumented 
Functions. A SIS is composed of any combination of 
sensor(s), logic solver(s), and final element(s). ASIS 
usually has a number of safety functions with different 
safety integrity levels (SIL) so it is best to avoid 
describing it by a single SIL. 


3.1.1160 Safety Interlock Switch — A switch used on 
guard doors that is used to detect if the door is opened 
while the machine is running, and uses a coded actuator 
to prevent intentional defeat. Safety interlock switches 
use positive opening contacts, which ensure that the 
closed switching contact is forced open when the guard 
is opened, without reliance upon spring action. 


3.1.1161 Safety Issues — Deviations from current 
safety standards or practices, or weaknesses in facility 
design or practices identified by plant events, with a 
potential impact on safety because of their impact on 
defense in depth, safety margins, or safety culture. 


3.1.1162 Safety Lamp or Davy Lamp — A lamp used in 
areas of combustible gas that prevents ignition of the 
gas by the provision of a wire screen, which encloses 
the lamp flame. The wire screen absorbs theheat of 
the (oil lamp) light source before it can contact a gas, 
thereby preventing its ignition. Invented by the British 
chemist Sir Humphry Davy (1778 — 1829) in 1815 for 
use by coal miners where firedamp was present. George 
Stephenson (1781-1848), a British inventor and 
engineer, also independently invented a similar miner’s 
safety lamp at about the same time but shared credit for 
this invention with Sir Humphry Davy. 


3.1.1163 Safety Lock — A lock that can be opened only 
by its own key. Often used to lock out the electrical 
energized sources used in equipment or machinery 
operation. 


3.1.1164 Safety Layer— A system or subsystem that is 
considered adequate to protect against a specific hazard. 
The safety layer 


is totally independent of any other protective 
layers 

cannot be compromised by the failure of another 
safety layer 

must have acceptable reliability 

must be approved according to company policy 
and procedures 

must meet proper equipment classification 


IS 4155 : 2023 


may be a noncontrol alternative (i.e., chemical, 
mechanical) 

may require diverse hardware and software 
packages 

may be an administrative procedure 


3.1.1165 Safety Measure — Any action that might be 
taken, condition that might be applied, or procedure that 
might be followed to fulfill the basic requirements of 
safety. 

3.1.1166 Safety Meeting — A periodic meeting held by 
employers to communicate and evaluate safety and 
health issues brought up by employees. 


3.1.1167 Safety Monitoring — Periodic checks on the 
implementation of an organization’s safety standards 
and procedures. 


3.1.1168 Safety Net System — A method to protect 
workers that are exposed to falls of more than 182.9 cm 
(6 ft), primarily used on construction sites. It consists of 
a net arranged underneath a fall hazard to catch an 
individual to prevent injury. 


3.1.1169 Safety Newsletter — Typically a monthly 
publication used to communicate safety information to 
individuals of an organization. It may summarize the 
leading and lagging safety indicators of the 
organization, provide articles of safety interest, and 
highlight recent standards or regulatory changes that are 
pertinent to the operation. 


3.1.1170 Safety Pays — A slogan used to justify the 
utilization of safety procedures, controls, orequipment. 
Its basis is that the potential cost of injuries and 
damages outweighs the cost of safety improvements, 
and therefore it is beneficial from a business 
perspective. 


3.1.1171 Safety Perception Survey — A safety 
examination tool that measures the attitudes, 
perceptions, and motivation of employees towards 
safety that influence its safety culture and safety 
behaviors. It typically consists of a specifically 
constructed set of questions that are answered with a 
ranking scale, thatare submitted to a sample of the 
workforce, the results of which are analyzed for 
possible safety improvements. 


3.1.1172 Safety Pin — A pin with a covered point. It is 
usually constructed as a loop-shaped pin that fastens 
into itself with its point under a protective cover to 
prevent opening or injury. Can also be referredto as a 
pin that prevents detonation for explosives, i.e., a pin 
when properly inserted prevents inadvertent or 
premature detonation, e.g., in a grenade. 


3.1.1173 Safety Poster — A communication and 
motivation tool used to easily highlight by a graphic 
means a safety message, which can be placed at a highly 
observable location for individuals to see. 


52 


3.1.1174 Safety Procedure — A set of instructions 
designed for the protection of personnel. Typical safety 
procedures include incident reporting and investigation, 
first aid or medical assistance arrangements, waste 
disposal, emergency response plan instructions, work 
permits, confined space entries, personal protection 
requirements, etc. 


3.1.1175 Safety Professional — An individual who, by 
virtue of specialized knowledge and skill, training,and 
educational accomplishments, identifies hazards and 
develops appropriate controls for these hazards, that 
when effectively implemented, prevent occupational 
injury, illness, and property damage. These individuals 
may also have been awarded or earned the status of 
Certified Safety Professional by the Boardof Certified 
Safety Professionals. 


3.1.1176 Safety Program — All of an organization’s 
written safety policies, standards, and procedures 
applicable to its operations. This typically includes 
corporate safety policy, management and employee 
responsibilities, safety rules, incident management, 
training, records, audits and inspections, disciplinary 
policy, incentive or motivation, and safety 
communication and committees. 


3.1.1177 Safety Recognition Program — A program to 
promote on-the-job and off-the-job safety awareness by 
recognizing individuals and group safety achievements 
that achieve an organization’s safety goals. see also 
Safety Award. 


3.1.1178 Safety Representative — An individual that is 
charged with monitoring and assessing safety hazards 
or unsafe conditions, and developing and advising 
measures to prevent an incident from occurring. They 
may also be called Safety Officers. 


3.1.1179 Safety Relief Valve — A safety relief valve is 
a pressure relief valve characterized by a rapid opening 
pop action or by opening generally proportional to the 
increase in pressure over the opening pressure. It may 
be used for either compressible or incompressible 
fluids, depending in design, adjustments or application. 


3.1.1180 Safety Review — An inspection of a plant or 
process unit, drawings, procedures, emergency plans, 
and/or management systems, etc., usually by a team and 
usually problem-solving in nature. 


3.1.1181 Safety Rule — A directive stating minimum 
safeguarding requirements, procedures, personal 
protective equipment, and behavior for work activities 
to avoid injury and damage. 


3.1.1182 Safety Sampling — A systematic sampling of 
particular dangerous activities, processes, or areas. 


3.1.1183 Safety Shoe — Personal protective equipment 
used to protect the foot from a variety of hazards. They 
are required to meet certain industry performance 
standards to be acceptable as protective equipment for 
individuals. 


3.1.1184 Safety Shower — An emergency system 
designed to provide immediate water application to an 
individual’s face or body who has been in contact with 
hazardous chemicals, chemical compounds, or fire. 
They can be used in four basic ways as follows: 


e Dilution: The water reduces the concentration 
of chemical on the skin to anacceptable level. 

e Cooling or warming: Water warms or cools the 
body due to chemical reaction exposure, which 
has caused a temperature hazard. 

e Irrigation: The water flushes the chemical away. 

e Extinguishment: The water can extinguish a 
clothing fire. 


A safety shower provides cascading water over the 
entire body and face. It is not meant for flushing the 
eyes with water, which should be provided by an eye 
wash facility. 


3.1.1185 Safety Sign — A visual alerting device in the 
form of a sign, label, decal, placard, or other marking 
that advises the observer of the hazard(s) that can cause 
an incident and the level of hazard seriousness. It may 
also provide other directions to eliminate or reduce the 
hazard and may advise of the probable consequences of 
not avoiding the hazard. 


3.1.1186 Safety Symbol — A graphic representation 
that portrays a hazard or concern without the use of 
words. It may represent a hazard, hazardous situation, 
precaution to avoid a hazard, the result of not avoiding 
the hazard, or any combination of these messages. 


3.1.1187 Safety System — Equipment and/or 
procedures designed to respond to an accident event 
sequence by preventing accident propagation, thereby 
preventing the accident and its consequences. 


3.1.1188 Safety System Settings—The levels at which 
protective devices are automatically actuated in the 
event of anticipated operational occurrences or incident 
conditions, to prevent safety limits from being 
exceeded. 


3.1.1189 Safety Talk — A communication tool used to 
inform workers about health and safety requirements 
for the tools, equipment, materials, and procedures they 
use every day, for a particular job, or how to deal with 
specific problems on site. They do not replace formal 
training. A safety talk is usually five minutes in 
duration. 


53 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1190 Safety Task — The sensing of one or more 
variables indicative of a specific postulated initiating 
event, the signal processing, the initiation and 
completion of the safety actions required to prevent the 
limits specified in the design basis from being 
exceeded, and the initiation and completion of certain 
services from the safety system support features. 


3.1.1191 Safety through Design — The integration of 
hazard analysis and risk assessment in the early design 
phases of a project and the implementation of the 
necessary actions to achieve an acceptable level of risk 
for injury or damages. Typically this entails facilities, 
hardware, equipment, tools, materials, layout, 
configurations, energy controls, environmental aspects, 
and products. 


3.1.1192 Safety Training — Specific training given to 
all personnel to enable them to carry out their jobs 
safely. 


3.1.1193 Safety Valve — A pressure relief valve 
actuated by inlet static pressure and characterized by 
rapid opening or pop action. It is normally used for 
steam and air services. 


NOTE — A distinction is made between low lift safety valves 
(discharge area is determined by position of disk) or full lift 
safety valves (discharge area is not determined by position of 
disk). Used also for gases and vapors in process services. 


3.1.1194 Safety Zone—An area free of the hazard of 
concern. 


3.1.1195 Sample/Sampling— Selecting a portion of a 
group of data in order to determine the accuracy or 
propriety or other characteristics of the whole body of 
data. 


3.1.1196 Sample Volume — The amount of air pulled 
through the collection device by a pump during 
sampling. 


3.1.1197 Sampler Capacity — A predetermined 
conservative estimate of the total mass of contaminant 
that can be collected on the sampling medium without 
loss or overloading; typically two-thirds of themass 
of contaminant on the sorbent at the breakthrough 
volume. 


3.1.1198 Sampling Time — The length of time in 
atmospheric dispersion testing over which 
concentration data are sampled. Sampling time is 
normally synonymous with averaging time. 


3.1.1199 Sampling Error — Part of the total estimation 
error of a parameter due to the random nature of the 
sample. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1200 Sampling Media — Devices used to collect 
airborne chemicals for subsequent analysis, such as 
sorbent tubes, bags and filters. 


3.1.1201 Scald —A burn injury that may be caused by 
the direct exposure to hot liquid, steam, or a hot gas. 


3.1.1202 Scenario — (In the context of identifying 
incompatibilities) A detailed physical description of the 
process whereby a potential inadvertent combination of 
materials may occur. 


3.1.1203 Seat — The pressure containing contact 
between the fixed and moving portions of the pressure 
containing elements of a valve. 


3.1.1204 Secondary Pressure — Secondary pressure in 
a safety, safety relief, or relief valve is the pressure 
existing in the passage between the actual discharge 
area and the valve outlet. 


3.1.1205 Sediment — Material that occurs on the 
bottom of a water stream and is the result of 
sedimentation of suspended matter. 


3.1.1206 Sedimentation —The effect of gravitational 
forces resulting in the separation of particles from the 
fluid in which they are suspended. 


3.1.1207 Selectivity —The ratio of the amount of a 
desired product obtained to the amount of a key reactant 
converted. 


3.1.1208 Self Accelerating Decomposition 
Temperature — Certain compounds such as organic 
peroxides and some swimming pool chemicals, when 
held at moderate ambient temperatures for an extended 
period of time, may undergo an exothermic reaction 
that accelerates with increase in temperature. If the heat 
liberated by this reaction is not lost to the environment, 
the bulk material increases in temperature, which leads 
to an increase in the rate of decomposition. Unchecked, 
the temperature grows exponentially to a point at which 
the decomposition cannot be stopped or slowed. The 
minimum temperature at which this exponential growth 
occurs in a material packed in its largest standard 
shipping container is defined asthe self-accelerating 
decomposition temperature (NFPA 49, 1994). The 
result applies only to the specific container used. 


3.1.1209 Self-Heating Material — A material that when 
in contact with air and without an energy source, is 
liable to self-heat. 


3.1.1210 Self-Reactive — Capable of polymerization, 
decomposition or rearrangement. Initiation of the 
reaction can be spontaneous, by energy input such as 
thermal or mechanical energy, or by catalytic action 
increasing the reaction rate. 


54 


3.1.1211 Semi-Batch Reactor (SBR) — A type of batch 
reactor from which at least one reactant is withheld and 
then added at a controlled rate, usually to control the 
rate of heat generation or gas evolution; both heat 
generation and concentrations vary during the reaction 
process; products are removedfrom the reactor only 
upon conclusion of the reaction process. 


3.1.1212 Sensitivity — The sensitivity of a measure to 
a parameter is defined as the change in the measure per 
unit change in the parameter. How much an output of a 
model changes with change in one or more inputs. 
3.1.1213 Sensitivity Analysis — A technique in which 
one or more parameters are varied to examine their 
impact on a pressure. 


3.1.1214 Shear Pin Device — A non-reclosing pressure 
relief device actuated by inlet static pressure and 
designed to function by the shearing of a load carrying 
pin which supports a pressure containing member. 


3.1.1215 Shock Hazard — The potential release of 
energy caused by contact or approach to energized 
electrical conductors or circuit parts. 


3.1.1216 Shock Sensitive — A relatively unstable 
material, the energetic decomposition of which can be 
initiated by merely the input of mechanical energy at 
normal ambient conditions. Materials are considered as 
shock sensitive if they are more easily initiated than 
dinitrobenzene in a standard drop-weight test. 


3.1.1217 Shock Wave — A compression wave caused 
by sudden rise of pressure due to release of large 
quantity of gaseous products at high temperature 
resulting from decomposition of the explosive material. 


3.1.1218 Sheltering — Physical protection (such as an 
enclosed building) against the outcome of an incident. 


3.1.1219 Shelter in Place — Protect people without 
evacuating by keeping them inside a building with 
windows and doors closed and external ventilation 
systems shut off until a hazardous situation has 
resolved. 


3.1.1220 Side-On Pressure — The pressure that would 
be recorded on the side of a structure parallel to the 
blast. 


3.1.1221 Signaling Device — An alarm system 
component such as a bell, buzzer, horn, speaker, light, 
or text display that provides an audible, visible, or 
tactile output to announce a condition of concern. 


3.1.1222 Silica Gel — A regenerative absorbent 
consisting of amorphous silica. Used in dehydrating and 
in drying and as a catalyst carrier. 


3.1.1223 Siren — A high-pitched wailing sound readily 
distinguishable from whistles, horns, or other monotone 
audible devices and easily discernable from the 
confusion of other sounds. Sirens are commonly 
employed to announce an emergency condition. 


3.1.1224 Slurry — Pourable mixture of solid and liquid. 


3.1.1225 Smog — Smoke and fog: extensive 
atmospheric contamination by aerosols arising from a 
combination of natural and anthropogenic sources. 


3.1.1226 Smoke — 1. Carbon or soot particles less than 
1.0 um in size. These small, gas-phase particles created 
by incomplete combustion, consist predominantly of 
carbon and other combustible materials. Smoke 
generally contains droplets and dry particles. Size 
ranges are usually between 0.01 um and 1.0um. 

2. A mixture of dry and liquid particles generated by 
incomplete combustion of an organic material, 
combined with and suspended in the gases from 
combustion. 


3.1.1227 Snuffing Steam — Pressurized steam used to 
smother and inhibit fire conditions. 


3.1.1228 Societal Risk— A measure of risk to a group 
of people. It is most often expressed in terms of the 
frequency distribution of multiple casualty events. 


3.1.1229 Solution — Mixture in which the components 
lose their identities and are uniformly dispersed. All 
solutions are composed of a solvent (water or other 
fluid) and the substance dissolved called the solute. 
Air is a solution of oxygen and nitrogen. A true solution 
is homogeneous as salt in water. 


3.1.1230 Solubility — The degree to which one material 
may be completely mixed with or dissolved in another 
material. 


3.1.1231 Solvent — A substance that dissolves other 
substances, most commonly water but often an organic 
compound. 


3.1.1232 Solvent Extraction — The process of 
extracting adsorbed chemicals from sorbent material 
through the use of solvents. 


3.1.1233 Solid Plume Radiation Model — A thermal 
radiation model that assumes that entire visible volume 
of the flame emits thermal radiation, and the non-visible 
gases do not. 


3.1.1234 Sonometer —A device for testing acuteness of 
hearing. 


3.1.1235 Sorbent — A material that removes gases and 
vapors from air passed through a canister or cartridge. 


55 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1236 Sound — An oscillation in pressure, stress, 
particle displacement, particle velocity, etc., that is 
propagated in an elastic material, in a medium with 
internal forces (e.g., elastic, viscous), or the super- 
position of such propagated oscillations. Sound is also 
the sensation produced through the organs of hearing, 
usually by vibrations transmitted in a material medium, 
commonly air. 


3.1.1237 Sound Absorption — The change of sound 
energy into some other form, usually heat, in passing 
through a medium or on striking a surface. In addition, 
sound absorption is the property possessed by materials 
and objects, including air, of absorbing sound energy. 


3.1.1238 Sound Analyzer — A device for measuring the 
band-pressure level or pressure-spectrum level ofa 
sound as a function of frequency. 


3.1.1239 Sound Intensity — The average rate at which 
sound energy is transmitted through a unit area 
perpendicular to a specified point. 


3.1.1240 Sonic Flow — A condition that occurs when 
flow of gas/vapor through a pressure relief device, 
piping or other equipment does not respond to a 
decrease in downstream or back pressure on the device. 
This usually occurs when the fluid velocity in the 
device equals the velocity of sound. The mass flow rate 
then depends only on upstream conditions. 


3.1.1241 Sorbent Tube — A small glass tube normally 
filled with two layers of a solid sorbent material that 
will adsorb specific chemicals for subsequent elution 
and laboratory analysis. 


3.1.1242 Sour Gas — Term used for natural gas or a 
gasoline contaminated with odor-causing sulfur 
compounds. In natural gas, the contaminant is usually 
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and can be fatal in high 
concentrations; in gasoline, mercaptans are usually the 
source. 


3.1.1243 Source Model or Term— A model used to 
determine the rate of discharge, the total quantity 
released (or total time) of a discharge of material from 
a process, and the physical state of the discharged 
material. 


3.1.1244 Source Modification — Changing a hazard 
source to make it less hazardous (e.g., wetting dust 
particles or lowering the temperature of liquids to 
reduce off-gassing and evaporation). 


3.1.1245 Sas — The concentration of a calibration gas 
mixture needed to span a desired concentration range of 
a chemical specific detector. 


3.1.1246 Span Vapor — The concentration of a 
calibration vapor mixture needed to span a desired 
concentration range of a chemical specific detector. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1247 Splash-Proof Goggles — Eye protection 
constructed of noncorrosive material that fits snugly 
against the face and has indirect ventilation ports to 
protect against liquids that may inadvertently be 
directed to the eyes. 


3.1.1248 Specification Standards — Description of the 
specific means of hazard abatement. 


3.1.1249 Specificity (In Chemical Analysis) — The 
degree to which a given analytical procedure detects a 
specified component but not other components that may 
be present in the sample. 


3.1.1250 Specific Burst Pressure — The specified burst 
pressure of a rupture disk device is the value of 
increasing inlet static pressure, at a specified 
temperature, at which a rupture disk device is designed 
to function. 


3.1.1251 Spiked Sample — A normal sample of 
material (gas, solid or liquid) to which is added a known 
amount of some substance of interest. The extent of 
spiking is unknown to those analyzing the sample. 
Spiked samples are used to check on the performance 
of a routine analysis or the recovery efficiency of a 
method. 


3.1.1252 Spill-Control-Centre — A collection of all the 
materials that are necessary to safely contain and 
control a spilled chemical and prepare it for safe 
disposal. Spillage kits, with instructions, appropriate 
absorbents and reactants, together with protective 
equipment, should be located in strategic positions 
around a work-area. 


3.1.1253 Sprinkler System — A combination of water 
discharge devices (sprinklers), distribution pipingto 
supply water to the discharge devices or more sources 
of water under pressure, water flow controlling devices 
(valves), and actuating devices (temperature, rate of 
rise, smoke, or other type device). The system 
automatically delivers and discharges water in the fire 
area. 


3.1.1254 Spontaneously Combustible — Capable of 
igniting and burning in air without the presence of an 
ignition source. Pyrophoric materials are spontaneously 
combustible, although some pyrophorics require the 
presence of a minimum amount of moisture (humidity) 
to spontaneously ignite. Other spontaneously 
combustible substances and mixtures may require more 
time or an insulating environment to self-heat to the 
point of ignition. 


3.1.1255 Spontaneous Ignition — Many substances 
combine with atmospheric oxygen at ordinary 
temperature and liberate heat. If the heat is liberated 
faster than it is dissipated, a fire can start. This process 
is called spontaneous ignition. 


56 


3.1.1256 Spot Cooling— Cooling the air of a limited 
portion of an enclosed space. 


3.1.1257 Squeeze Bulb Pump — A sampling bulb that 
draws a fixed volume of air using a squeeze bulb. 


3.1.1258 Stable Materials — Those materials that 
normally have the capacity to resist changes in their 
chemical composition, despite exposure to air, water, 
and heat as encountered in fire emergencies. 


3.1.1259 Stabilizer — Substances, such as 
diphenylamine centralities which are added to 
explosives, suchas nitrocellulose and nitroglycerine to 
prevent them from gradual decomposition due to 
storage. These additives neutralize the nitric acid 
produced thus preventing enhanced degradation rates. 


3.1.1260 Stabilized — Containing a small amount of 
another substance included to keep the first material 
from changing form. 


3.1.1261 Stack 


3.1.1261.1 A Structure that contains a flue, or flues, for 
the discharge of gases. 


3.1.1261.2 The vertical train of a system of soil, waste, 
or vent piping extending through one or morestories. 


3.1.1261.3 A device used to discharge air into the 
ambient environment and away from the buildingwake. 


3.1.1262 Stack Sampling — A collection of aerosol 
samples in exhaust air ducts such as stacks or chimneys. 


3.1.1263 Stagnation Pressure — Stagnation pressure is 
the pressure that would be observed if a flowing fluid 
were brought to rest along an isentropic path. 


3.1.1264 Standard Trim Valve — A safety relief valve 
designed for compressible fluid service. With 
adjustable blow down, the valve can be set up for use 
with incompressible fluids. 


3.1.1265 Static Pressure (SP) Loss — The amount of 
kinetic energy to overcome an obstruction or fitting in 
a ventilation system. 


3.1.1266 Stationary Conditions — Conditions that are 
characterized by constant concentrations and 
temperatures as a function of time (i.e., the time 
derivatives are zero). 


3.1.1267 Strength (acid/base) — The amount of 
ionization that occurs when an acid or a base is 
dissolvedin liquid. 


3.1.1268 Sublime — To change from a solid state to a 
gaseous state without becoming a liquid. 


3.1.1269 Sub-iso-kinetic Sampling — A sampling 
condition in which the air flowing into an inlet has a 
lower velocity than the ambient airflow. Subsequently, 
the sample collected tends to be biased with larger 
particles, substance, process, or work activity is utilized 
instead of a more dangerous one. 


3.1.1270 Substrate Coating — Materials that are 
applied onto certain substrates to capture or stabilize 
particles that are impacted during sampling. 


3.1.1271 Superimposed Back Pressure — The static 
pressure existing at the outlet of a safety relief deviceat 
the time the device is required to operate. It is the result 
of pressure in the discharge system from other sources. 


3.1.1272 Super-iso-kinetic Sampling — A sampling 
condition in which the air flowing into an inlet has a 
higher velocity than the ambient airflow. Subsequently, 
the sample collected tends to be biased with smaller 
particles. 


3.1.1273 Supervised Area — Any area not designated 
as a controlled area but for which occupational 
exposure conditions are kept under review even though 
specific protective measures and safety provisionsare 
not normally needed. 


3.1.1274 Supplemental Guarding — Additional 
electro-sensitive safety devices and hard guarding 
measures used for the purpose of preventing a person 
from reaching over, under, or around the defined area 
of an installed safety light screen system and into the 
point of operation of the guarded machine. 


3.1.1275 Supplied Air — Breathable air supplied to a 
worker’s mask/hood from a source outside the 
contaminated area. 


3.1.1276 Supplied Air Suit — A one- or two-piece suit 
that is impermeable to most particulate and gaseous 
contaminants and is provided with an adequate supply 
of respirable air. 


3.1.1277 Supported Gloves — Protective gloves that 
are constructed of a coated fabric to provide some 
rigidity. 


3.1.1278 Synergistic Effect — A synergistic effect is 
any effect of two chemicals acting together which is 
greater than a simple sum of their effects when acting 
alone. 


3.1.1279 System Safety — The application of operating, 
technical, and management techniques and principles to 
the safety aspects of a system throughout its life to 
reduce hazards to the lowest level possible through the 
most effective use of available resources. 


57 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1280 System Safety Analysis — The hazard 
identification and evaluation of a complex process by 
means of a diagram or model that provides a 
comprehensive, overall view of the process, including 
its principal elements and the ways in which they are 
interrelated. There are four principal methods of 
analysis: failure mode and effect, fault tree, THERP, 
and cost-benefit analysis. Each has a number of 
variations, and more than one may be combined in a 
single analysis. 


3.1.1281 System Safety Engineering — The application 
of scientific and engineering principles during the 
design, development, manufacture, and operation of a 
system to meet or exceed established safety goals. 


3.1.1282 System Safety Society — A nonprofit 
organization organized in 1962 that is dedicated to 
supporting the safety professional in the application of 
Systems Engineering and Systems Management to the 
process of hazard, safety, and risk analysis to identify, 
assess, and control associated hazards while designing 
or modifying systems, products, or services. 


3.1.1283 Systematic Failure — A failure that happens 
in a deterministic (non-random) predictable fashion 
from a certain cause, which can only be eliminated by 
a modification of the design or of the manufacturing 
process, operational procedures, documentation, or 
other relevant factors. Since these are not 
mathematically predictable, the safety life cycle 
includes a large number of procedures to prevent them 
from occurring. The procedures are more rigorous for 
higher safety-integrity-level systems and components. 
Such failures cannot be prevented with simple 
redundancy. 


3.1.1284 Systemic Risk — The risk of an entire system, 
as opposed to risk associated with any one individual 
entity, group, or component of a system in contrast to a 
specific risk or unique risk. Systemic risk is a risk of 
security that cannot be reduced through diversification. 
Systemic risk evaluates the likelihood and degree of 
negative consequences to the larger body. 


3.1.1285 Systemic Toxicity — This term is applied 
when a substance affects a system in the organism other 
than and often distant from the site of application or 
exposure. 


T 


3.1.1286 Target Zero — A safety slogan or goal 
sometimes used in industry to highlight the 
measurementobjective of no incidents for a particular 
reporting period. Its rationale is that you should never 
be planning to have an incident, and therefore your 
safety goal should always be zero. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1287 Tautomerizing — Converting from one 
isomer into one another in organic compounds that 
differ from one another in the position of a hydrogen 
atom and a double bond. 


3.1.1288 Technical Audits — The examination of 
present status of health hazards. 


3.1.1289 Telltale — A device used in sawmills to serve 
as a warning for overhead objects. 


3.1.1290 Tempered Glass — A type of glass that has 
been treated to improve its stability and resistance to 
heat, impact, and distortion. Glass sheets are tempered 
at about 650 °C (1 200 °F) followed by a sudden 
chilling. This treatment increases the strength of the 
glass sheets approximately six times. When such glass 
does break (due to impact, expansion, etc.), it shatters 
into blunt granules to prevent injury insteadof sharp- 
edged pieces. 


3.1.1291 Temperature—Measure of the vibratory state 
of a molecule. 


3.1.1292 Temperature Actuated Pressure Relief Valve 
— A pressure relief valve which is actuated by external 
or internal temperature. 


3.1.1293 Temperature of No Return — The temperature 
at which the rate of heat generation of a reaction or 
decomposition is equal to the maximum rate of cooling 
available. 


3.1.1294 Thermal Conductivity — The heat flow across 
a surface per unit area per unit time, divided by the 
negative of the rate of change of temperature with 
distance in a direction perpendicular to the surface. 


3.1.1295 Thermal Desorption — The process of 
extracting adsorbed chemicals from sorbent material 
through the use of heat. 


3.1.1296 Thermal Drift — Drift caused by an internal 
heating of equipment during normal operation orby 
changes in external ambient temperature. 


3.1.1297 Thermal Expansion — The change in size of 
an object as the temperature changes. Normally, as the 
temperature increases, the size of an object also 
increases. Conversely, the object will shrink as the 
temperature drops. As an object expands or contracts 
with a temperature change, its change in length depends 
on three quantities: the original length, the temperature 
change, and the thermal properties of the material 
composing the object. When designing bridges, power 
lines, or similar items that might be subjected to wide 
temperature variations, engineers must take into 
account the effects of thermal expansion. Depending on 
the temperature range in a particular area, they may 
choose building materials that expand with heat or not, 


58 


different types of joint structures, and other kinds of 
reinforcements that might be required. 


3.1.1298 Thermal Effects on Safety Behavior — The 
relationship between unsafe work behavior and ambient 
temperatures, described as a U-shaped curve, with the 
minimum unsafe behavior rate occurring in the 
preferred temperature zone of 17 °C (63 °F) to 23 
°C (73 °F) wet bulb globe temperature (WBGT), and 
with the unsafe behavior rate increasing when ambient 
temperatures increase or decrease from this range. 


3.1.1299 Thermal Stress — A combination of air 
temperature, radiant heat exchange, air movement, and 
the partial pressure of water vapor that makes the 
environment stressful. 


3.1.1300 Thermometer — An instrument that measures 
temperature. 


3.1.1301 Theoretical Relieving Capacity — The 
computed capacity expressed in gravimetric or 
volumetric units of a theoretically perfect nozzle having 
a minimum cross sectional flow area equal to the actual 
discharge area of a pressure relief valve or relief area of 
a non-reclosing pressure relief device. The flow path in 
a perfect nozzle is conventionally taken as isentropic. 


3.1.1302 Thermally Unstable — A material that will 
undergo an exothermic, self-sustaining or accelerating 
self-reaction (decomposition, polymerization, or 
rearrangement) when heated to a specific temperature 
for given conditions of pressure, volume, composition, 
and containment. Thus, the self- reaction can be 
initiated by thermal energy alone. 


3.1.1303 Thermally-Broken-Down-Hazardous Waste 
— Nonhazardous chemicals produced by heattreatment 
of waste. 


3.1.1304 Thermodynamic Instability — Property of a 
chemical intermediate that causes it to break down, 
often with the release of energy leading to heat or 
explosion. 


3.1.1305 Time to Thermal Runaway — An estimation 
of the time required for an exothermic reaction, in an 
adiabatic container, (that is, no heat gain or loss to the 
environment), to reach the point of thermal runaway. 


3.1.1306 Trans — Referring to a particular arrangement 
of elements within a chemical molecule. 


3.1.1307 Trigger Event — Normal event which, in 
combination with abnormal conditions, allows an 
incident to occur. 


3.1.1308 Time-Related Failure — A failure that is 
primarily due to the degradation over the time that a 
device or system is in service. (Ex: the failure of a pump 


after 2 000 hours of continuous service due to wear on 
the bearings would be considered a time-related 
failure). 


3.1.1309 Time to Failure — The time period measure 
from the moment when equipment installation is 
complete to the equipment's inability to perform its duty 
or intended function. 


3.1.1310 Time to Maximum Reaction Rate — The 
measured time to the maximum reaction rate during a 
runaway or rapid decomposition; the specific result is 
highly contingent on the test method used. 

3.1.1311 Time-in-Service —Time from that moment 
when equipment installation is complete, the time 
period for equipment commissioning, and the operating 
time thereafter. 


3.1.1312 Time-Varying Continuous Release — A 
subset of continuous release (see Continuous Release) 
that the release rate varies significantly with time. 


3.1.1313 Time-Weighted Average (TWA) — The 
concentration of a substance to which a person is 
exposedin ambient air divided by the total time of 
observation. For occupational exposure a working shift 
of 8 hours is commonly used as the averaging time. 


3.1.1314 Tolerance — An adaptive state characterized 
by diminished responses to the same dose of a 
chemical. 


3.1.1315 Toll Processors — Contract chemical 
processors who produce material for a company. 


3.1.1316 Tongs, Safety — A device for feeding small 
objects to and removing them from a danger area. Itis 
typically a metal U-shaped tool that is used to grasp 
items with one hand. 


3.1.1317 Toolbox Safety Meetings — Short on-the-job 
meetings in heavy industry and construction to keep 
employees apprised of work-related hazards. Their 
objective is to reinforce safety training and information 
on a particular topic. Employees are kept abreast of 
changes in regulations, safety procedures,equipment, 
personal protective equipment (PPE), and job 
assignments and responsibilities. They help employees 
to remember requirements, avoid risks, and prevent 
incidents. 


3.1.1318 Toxicity — A relative property of a chemical 
agent, refers to a harmful effect on some biologic 
mechanism and condition under which the effect 
occurs. 


3.1.1319 Toxic Dose — The combination of 
concentration and time for inhalation of a toxic gas that 
produces a specific harmful effect. 


59 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1320 Toxic Hazard — In the context of these 
guidelines, a measure of the danger posed to living 
organisms by a toxic agent, determined not only by the 
toxicity of the agent itself, but also by the means by 
which it may be introduced into the subject organisms 
under prevailing conditions. 


3.1.1321 Toxico-kinetics — A term with the same 
meaning as chemo-bio-kinetics for substances not used 
as drugs. 


3.1.1322 Toxicologic Effect — Harmful or poisonous 
effect of a chemical agent. 

3.1.1323 Toxicology — Scientific study of poisons, 
their actions, their detection, and the treatment of 
conditions produced by them. 


3.1.1324 Toxicometry — A combination of 
investigation methods and techniques for making a 
quantitative assessment of toxicity and hazards of 
poisons. 


3.1.1325 Transport — The movement of chemicals 
within one environmental compartment or from one 
compartment to another. 


3.1.1326 Transportation — The removal of wastes 
from a plant to an off-site location. 


3.1.1327 Treated Filter — A filter that has been coated 
with a layer of chemical reagent to improve collection 
of specific chemicals for subsequent laboratory 
analysis. 


3.1.1328 True Risk — The actual value of the risk level. 


3.1.1329 Turbulent Flow — Chaotic flow with 
streamlines looping back on themselves; less —well- 
behaved and predictable than laminar flow. 


3.1.1330 Turndown — An expression of the range of 
minimum and maximum flow rates expected under 
commonly encountered operating conditions. 
Commonly expressed as a ratio of minimum-to- 
maximum flow rate. 


3.1.1331 Twin-Detector Tube — A detector tube 
construction consisting of a combination of a pretube 
and an indicating tube, joined by an intermediate sleeve 
and a piece of shrunk-on tubing. 


U 


3.1.1332 Ultimate Load — The minimum applied force 
necessary to cause failure of a material. 


3.1.1333 Ultimate Stress — The intensity of stress at the 
point of failure for a material. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


2.1.1334 Ultrasonic Testing — A type of 
nondestructive testing of materials using high 
frequency sound, which is used to check for defects and 
flaws. 


3.1.1335 Unattended Operation — The practice of 
leaving equipment to run outside normal working 
hours; such equipment should be fitted with suitable 
fail-safe devices. 


3.1.1336 Unavailability — The probability the fault 
event exists at a specified time. 


3.1.1337 Unconfined Vapor Cloud Explosion (UCVE) 
— Explosive oxidation of a vapor cloud in a unconfined 
space (i.e., not in vessels, buildings, etc.). The flame 
speed may accelerate to high velocities and produce 
significant blast overpressure. Vapor cloud explosions 
in densely packed plant areas (pipe lanes, units, etc.), 
may show accelerations in flame speeds and 
intensification of blast. 


3.1.1338 Undependability — The probability the fault 
event exists at a specified time or occurs during a 
specified time interval. 


3.1.1339 Undeveloped Event — A base event that is not 
developed because of insufficient consequence or 
because information is unavailable. 


3.1.1340 Unreliability — The probability that the fault 
event occurs during a specified time interval. 


3.1.1341 Unsafe Condition — Any omission of a safe 
practice or safe working condition that increases hazard 
or risk. 


3.1.1342 Unstable — Tending toward decomposition 
or other unwanted chemical change during normal 
handling or storage. 


3.1.1343 Unstable Material — A material that, in the 
pure state or as commercially produced, will vigorously 
polymerize, decompose or condense, become self- 
reactive, or otherwise undergo a violent chemical 
change under conditions of shock, pressure, or 
temperature. 


3.1.1344 Unsupported Gloves — A type of protective, 
unlined glove without any type of fabric lining to 
provide internal support to the glove. 


3.1.1345 Upper Explosive Limit (UEL) or Upper 
Flammable Limit (UFL) — The highest concentration 
ofa vapor or gas (the highest percentage of the 
substance in air) that will produce a flash of fire when 
an ignition source (heat, arc, or flame) is present. see 
also lower explosive limit or lower flammable limit. 


NOTE — At concentrations higher than the UEL the mixture is 
too — rich to burn. 


60 


3.1.1346 Urticaria — An allergic reaction that results 
in raised bumps on the skin and mucous membranes. It 
is usually accompanied by itching. It is an allergen to 
food, plant inhalants (e.g., pollen), or chemicals. 


Vv 


3.1.1347 Vacuum Distillation — Distillation under 
reduced pressure to achieve a low boiling point and 
reduce thermal degradation. 


3.1.1348 Vacuum Relief Valve — A pressure relief 
device designed to admit fluid to prevent an excessive 
internal vacuum; it is designed to reclose and prevent 
further flow of fluid after normal conditions have been 
restored. 


3.1.1349 Vacuum Support — An auxiliary element of a 
rupture disk device designed to prevent rupture or 
deformation of the disk due to vacuum or reversal of 
pressure. 


3.1.1350 Valve Bonnet — The housing around the 
spring of an enclosed-spring pressure relief valve. 


3.1.1351 Vaporization — Volatilization of a liquid at 
temperatures below the boiling point. 


3.1.1352 Vapors — Molecules of liquid in air; moisture 
such as steam, fog, mist etc, often forming a cloud 
suspended or floating in the air, usually due to the effect 
of heat upon a liquid. 


3.1.1353 Vapor Density — The weight of a vapor or gas 
compared to the weight of an equal volume of air, an 
expression of the density of the vapor or gas. Materials 
lighter than air have vapor densities less than 1.0 
(example: acetylene, methane, hydrogen). Materials 
heavier than air (examples: propane, hydrogen sulfide, 
ethane, butane, chlorine, sulfur dioxide) have vapor 
densities greater than 1.0. Importance: All vapors and 
gases will mix with air, but the lighter materials will 
tend to rise and dissipate (unless confined). Heavier 
vapors and gases are likely to concentrate in low places 
along or under floors, in sumps, sewers and manholes, 
in trenches and ditches—and can travel great distances 
undetectedwhere they may create fire or health hazards. 


3.1.1354 Vapor Pressure — The pressure exerted by a 
vapor above its own liquid. 


NOTE — The higher the vapor pressure, the easier it is for a 
liquid to evaporate and fill the work areawith vapors which can 
cause health or fire hazards. 


3.1.1355 Virtual Source — The offset in distance to the 
specified source of a gas or vapor release that results in 
a maximum concentration of 100 % at the source using 
a Gaussian dispersion model. 


3.1.1356 Viscosity — The measurement of the flow 
properties of a material expressed as its resistance to 
flow. Unit of measurement and temperature are 
included. 


3.1.1357 Venting — Flow of vessel contents out the 
vessel. The pressure is reduced by adequate venting, 
thus avoiding a failure of the vessel by over 
pressurization. The emergency flow can be one-phase 
or multiphase, each of which results in different flow 
and pressure characteristics. 


3.1.1358 Ventilation System — A means of supplying 
fresh air to and disposing of used air from the laboratory 
environment. 


3.1.1359 Vessel Neck — A piping connection on a 
vessel, also referred to as a — vessel nozzle. Commonly 
constructed of a short section of pipe welded to the 
vessel, and with either a flanged or threaded end for 
connecting piping or instrumentation. 


3.1.1360 Violent Reaction — The action by which a 
chemical changes its composition near or exceeding the 
speed of sound, often releasing heat and gases. 


3.1.1361 Viscosity — The tendency of a fluid to resist 
internal flow without regard to its density. 


3.1.1362 Volatile — Easily changes from a liquid to a 
vapor. 


3.1.1363 Volatile Organic Compound — Any organic 
compound that participates in atmospheric 
photochemical reactions. 


3.1.1364 Volatility 


3.1.1364.1 The tendency or ability of a liquid to 
vaporize. Such liquids as alcohol and gasoline, 
because of their well-known tendency to evaporate 
rapidly, are called volatile liquids. 


3.1.1364.2 A measure of how quickly a substance 
forms a vapor at ordinary temperatures. 


3.1.1365 Vortex Coolers — An open loop system 
in which both a hot and cold stream of air from a 
compressed air source is generated. 


Ww 
3.1.1366 Walk Through Survey — A physical safety 


inspection of the workplace to identify and evaluate 
potential hazards. 


3.1.1367 Water Reactive Chemical — A compound or 
element that reacts rapidly or violently with water. 


3.1.1368 Water Solubility — The ability of a substance 
to mix with water. 


61 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1369 Warning — Communication and 
acknowledgment of dangers, such as operating 
procedures, practices, or conditions that may result in 
injury or damage if not carefully observed or followed. 


3.1.1370 Warning Sign — An advisory or statutory sign 
that identifies a chemical, physical or other hazard. 


3.1.1371 Warning Signal — Typically means an 
auditory alarm (e.g., siren) or visual indication (e.g., 
flashing lights) to warn of a hazard aspect occurring 
over a wide area (e.g., toxic gas release in a chemical 
plant; tsunami approach etc.) and the need for 
immediate actions to prevent injury or damage(e.g., 
evacuation, shelter in place, etc.).The effectiveness of 
signal is dependent on its capability to be observed, the 
population‘s awareness of the signal characteristics, 
and the actions to be taken upon its activation. 


3.1.1372 Warning Tag — Warning tags are used to 
represent a hazard level between caution and danger. 


3.1.1373 Wet Bulb Globe Temperature (WBGT) 


3.1.1373.1 The combination of the effect of the four 
main thermal components affecting heat stress: air 
temperature, humidity, air velocity and radiation, as 
measured by the dry bulb (Tdb), natural wet bulb 
(Tnwb) and globe temperatures (Tg). 


3.1.1373.2 Temperatures calculated as the sum of 0.7 
natural wet bulb + 0.2 black globe + 0.1 dry bulb. 


3.1.1374 Wet Kata Thermometer — A thermometer 
where the bulb converted by a wetted wick and heated 
in water and then allowed to cool in the environment 
being measured. The time required for the liquid in the 
wet kata to cool between the two marks can be 
measured with a stop watch, and this time can be used 
with a calibration sheet to determine the cooling power 
of the air. 


3.1.1375 What-If Analysis (WIA) — A safety review 
method by which What-If investigative questions (i.e., 
brainstorming or checklist approach) are asked by an 
experienced and knowledgeable team of the system or 
component under review where there are concerns 
about possible undesired events. Recommendations for 
the mitigation of identified hazards are provided. 


3.1.1376 Witness — A person who has information 
related, directly or indirectly, to the accident or 
incident. 


3.1.1377 Working Occupational Exposure Limit — An 
informal occupational exposure limit set by a 
occupational hygienist based on whatever information 
may be available to differentiate acceptable from 
unacceptable exposures. Working OEL‘s are 
sometimes stated in ranges (e.g., 0.1 mg/m? to 1.0 
mg/m’) or incorporate large safety factors to account for 
uncertainty. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


3.1.1378 Workplace Exposure Assessment — The 
exposure characterization of the worker’s potential 
exposure to hazardous chemical, physical or biological 
agents. The information included should include the 
agents, their likely routes of exposure, and intensity, 
duration, and frequency of the exposure. 


3.1.1379 Workplace Safety Program — A program that 
aims to develop a long-term plan that is successful in 
protecting people from injury and death, that complies 
with regulations, and that controls the associated 
financial costs of loss. 


3.1.1380 Worst Case Consequence — A conservative 
(high) estimate of the consequences of the most severe 
accident identified. For example, the assumption that 
the entire contents of a contained volume of toxic 
material is released to the most vulnerable area in such 
a way (all at once or continuous) as to have the 
maximum effect on the public or employees in that area. 
The contained volume could be chosen as thecontainers 
and pipes between shutoff valves or the entire process 
unit but probably not the entire plant. 


3.1.1381  Worst-Case-Scenario — A method of 
conducting an exposure assessment in which the most 
conservative value of each input parameter is selected. 


3.1.1382 Worst Credible Incident — Hypothesized 
incident requiring the largest pressure relief device, that 
is considered plausible or reasonably believable. 


3.1.1383 Worst Possible Incident — The most severe 
incident, considering only incident outcomes and their 
consequences, of all identified incidents and their 
outcomes. 


X 


3.1.1384 Xenobiotic — A chemical which is not natural 
component of the organism exposed to it. 


Z 


3.1.1385 Zero Gas — A gas containing less than 1 ppm 
sulfur dioxide. 


3.1.1386 Zero Mechanical State — The mechanical 
potential energy in all elements of a machine or pieceof 
equipment is dissipated, so that opening or activation of 
any device will not produce a movement that could 
cause injury. 


62 


4 RADIATION HAZARDS 


A 


4.1 Absorbed Dose — The fundamental dosimetric 
quantity, D defined as 


D = dF/ dm, 


where, dE‘ is the mean energy imparted by ionizing 
radiation to matter in a volume element, and dm‘ isthe 
mass of matter in the volume element. The energy can 
be averaged over any defined volume, the average dose 
being equal to the total energy imparted in the volume 
divided by the mass in the volume. The SI unit of 
absorbed dose is joule per kilogram (J/kg) termed as 
Gray (Gy) (formerly rad was used as the unit of 
absorbed dose). Absorbed dose is defined at a point and 
for average dose in tissues/organs, new unit organ dose 
is defined. 


4.2 Activation— The process of inducing radioactivity. 


NOTE — This word is most commonly used to refer to the 
induction of radioactivity in moderators, coolants and structural 
and shielding materials, caused by irradiation with neutrons. 


4.3 Activity or Radioactivity — The emission of 
ionizing radiation or particles caused by the 
spontaneous disintegration of atomic nuclei. The 
quantity ‘A’, which represent activity for an amount of 
radionuclide in a given energy state at a given time is 
defined as: 


A=dNidt 
where 


dN’ is the expectation value of the number of 
spontaneous nuclear transformations from the 
given energystate in a time interval _dt’. The SI 
unit of activity is the reciprocal of second (s7'), 
termed the Becquerel (Bq). 


4.4 Action levels — The level of dose rate or activity 
concentration above which remedial actions or 
protective actions should be carried out in chronic 
exposure or emergency exposure situations. An action 
level can also be expressed in terms of any other 
measurable quantity as a level above which intervention 
should be undertaken. 


4.5 Acute exposure—Exposure received within a short 
period of time. 


NOTE — Normally used to refer to exposure of sufficiently 
short duration that the resulting doses can be treated as 
instantaneous (e.g. less than an hour). 


4.6 Airdose — X-ray dose expressed in roentgens 
delivered at a point in free air. In radiological practice 
it consists of the dose due to the radiations of the 
primary beam and to that scattered from surrounding 
air.(Also see kerma) 


4.7 ALARA — Anacronym for As Low As Reasonably 
Achievable. A concept meaning that the designand use 
of sources, and the practices associated therewith, 
should be such as to ensure that exposures are kept as 
low as reasonably practicable, with economic and social 
factors taken into account. The term ALARA should 
not be used to mean optimization of protection and 
safety. 


4.8 Alpha-Particle (a-Particle) — A helium nucleus 
(consisting of two protons and two neutrons) havinga 
mass of 4 units and 2 units of positive charge. It is a 
fundamental particle. 


4.9 AMAD — Activity Median Aerodynamic Diameter 
— The value of aerodynamic diameter such that 50 
percent of the airborne activity in a specified aerosol 
is associated with particles smaller than the AMAD, 
and 50 percent of the activity is associated with 
particles larger than the AMAD. AMAD is used for 
particle sizes for which deposition depends principally 
on internal impaction and sedimentation i.e. typically 
thosegreater than about 0.5 um. 


4.10 Ambient dose equivalent, H*(d) — see Dose 
equivalent quantities. 


4.11 Annual dose — The dose due to external 
exposure in a year plus the committed dose from 
intakes of radionuclides in that year. 


4.12 Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) — The intake by 
inhalation, ingestion or through the skin of a given 
radionuclide in a year by the reference man, which 
would result in a committed dose equal to the relevant 
dose limit. The ALI is expressed in units of activity 
(Bq). 


4.13 Atmospheric dispersion —The spreading of 
radionuclides in air resulting from physical processes 
viz. advection, diffusion etc. affecting the velocity of 
different molecules in the medium. 


4.14 Attenuation — The reduction in intensity of 
radiation passing through matter due to processes like 
absorption and scattering. 


63 


IS 4155 : 2023 


4.15 Attenuation Factor — The ratio of the incident 
intensity of a beam of radiation to the transmitted 
intensity. 


4.16 Autoradiograph — A self portrait of the 
radioactive material in an object made by placing the 
object close to photographic plates or films which are 
then developed. 


4.17 Averted dose — The dose prevented by the 
application of a countermeasure or set of 
countermeasures, i.e. the difference between the 
projected dose if the countermeasure(s) had not been 
applied and the actual projected dose. 


B 


4.18 Background Radiation — The dose or dose rate 
attributable to all sources other than a specified one. 
The natural background dose/dose rate or activity 
concentration associated with natural sources or any 
other sources in the environment that are not amenable 
to control. 


4.19 Becquerel (Bq) — The SI unit of activity, equal 
to one transformation per second. This supersedes the 
non-SI unit curie (Ci). 


1Bq = 2.7 x 10 — 11 Ci (approximately) 1 Ci = 
3.7 x 1 010 Bq. 


4.20 Beta-Particle(B-Particle) — Charged particle, 
emitted from the nucleus of an atom and having a mass 
and charge equal in magnitude to those of the electron. 
(see also positron) 


4.21 Bioassay — Any procedure used to determine the 
nature, radioactivity, location or retention of 
radionuclides in the body by direct (in vivo) 
measurement or by in vitro analysis of material. 


4.22 Biological half-life — The time taken for the 
quantity of a material in a specified tissue, organ or 
region of the body (or any other specified biota) to 
decrease by half as a results of biological processes. 


4.23 Bremsstrahlung — Electromagnetic radiation 
resulting from interaction between two chargedparticles 
(usually an electron and a nucleus), in the form of 
emission of continuous X-rays. 


C 


4.24 Characteristic (Discrete) Radiation (or 
characteristic X-rays) — X-radiation consisting of 
discrete wavelengths which are characteristic of the 
emitting element. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


4.25 Chronic exposure — Radiation exposures 
received over a prolonged duration of time. The 
adjective chronic relates only to the duration of 
exposure and does not imply anything about the 
magnitude of the doses involved. 


4.26 Clearance 


4.26.1 Removal of radioactive material or radioactive 
objects within authorized practices from any further 
regulatory control by the regulatory body. 


4.26.2 The net effect of biological processes by which 
radionuclides are removed from a tissue, organ or area 
of the body. The clearance rate is the rate at which this 
occurs. 


4.27 Clearance level — A value, established by a 
regulatory body and expressed in terms of activity. 
Concentration and/or total activity, at or below which a 
source of radiation may be released from regulatory 
control. 


4.28 Collective Dose — The total dose incurred by a 
population and the unit is man-Sv. An expression for 
the total radiation dose incurred by a population and 
defined as the product of the number of individuals 
exposed to a source and their average radiation dose. 


4.29 Committed Dose — The lifetime dose expected 
to result from an intake of radioactivity. The time period 
is generally taken as 50 years for adults and 70 years for 
infants. 


4.30 Committed Effective Dose, E(t) — The time 
integral of the whole body effective dose rate following 
an intake of a radionuclide. The quantity E(t) is defined 
as: 


E(r) = X, wTHT @)T 
where 


Hx(t) is the committed equivalent dose to tissue 

T over the integration time t and wr is the tissue 
weighting factor for tissue T. 

When 7 is not specified, it will be taken to be 50 
years for adults and the time to age 70 years for 
intakes by children. 


4.31 Containment — Methods or physical structures 
designed to prevent or control the release and the 
dispersion of radioactive substances. 


4.32 Contamination — Radioactive substances on 
surfaces, or within solids, liquids and gases (including 
the human body) where their presence is unintended or 
undesirable or the process giving rise totheir presence 
in such places. 


64 


4.33 Controlled Area — A delineated area to which 
access is controlled and in which specific protection 
measures and safety provisions are, or could be, 
required for 


e controlling normal exposures or preventing the 
spread of contamination during normal working 
conditions; and 

e preventing potential exposures or limiting their 
extent should they occur. 


4.34 Countermeasure — An action aimed at 
alleviating the radiological consequences of an 
accident. Counter measures are forms of intervention 
and may be protective actions or remedial actions. 


4.35 Critical group — A group of members of the 
public which is reasonably homogeneous with respect 
to its exposure for a given radiation source and is typical 
of individuals receiving the highest effective dose or 
equivalent dose from the given source. 


4.36 Criticality — The state of a nuclear chain reacting 
medium when the chain reaction is just self-sustaining 
(or critical) 1.e. when the reactivity is zero. 


4.37 Curie — The unit of radioactivity. It is the 
quantity of a radioactive isotope which disintegrates at 
the rate of 37 000 millions disintegrations per second. 
The activity of a gram of radium is approximately 
equal to one curie. 1 Ci = 3.7 x 10!° Bq (exactly) 


D 


4.38 Daughter — A synonym for Decay Product. 


4.39 Decay Constant — The constant ratio for the 
number of atoms of a radionuclide that decay in a given 
period of time compared with the total number of 
atoms of the same kind present at the beginningof that 
period. It is also called as disintegration constant. 


4.40 Decay Product — A nuclide resulting from the 
radioactive disintegration of a radio nuclide, formed 
either directly or as a result of successive 
transformations in a radioactive series. A decay product 
may be either radioactive or stable. 


4.41 Decay, Radioactive — Radioactive decay is the 
process whereby a radionuclide is transformed into a 
nuclide of another element as a result of the emission of 
radiation from its nucleus. The radioactive decay 
equation is 


N(t) = Noe~°-693¢/ ti 


where No is the initial quantity of the substance N(t) is 
the quantity that still remains and has not yet decayed 
after a time t, t1/2 is the half life of the decaying quantity, 
e = Euler’s number = 2.718 281 828 459 045 904 523 
536 028 747 135 27 


4.42 Decontamination Factor — Ratio of the initial 
concentration of contaminating radioactive material to 
the final concentration after a separation process. The 
ratio of activity per unit area (or per unit mass or 
volume) before a particular decontamination technique 
is applied to the ratio of activity per unit area (or per 
unit mass or volume) after application of the technique. 


4.43 Derived Air Concentration (DAC) — A derived 
limit on the activity concentration in air of a specified 
radionuclide. The limit has been calculated such that the 
Reference Man breathing air with constant 
contamination at the DAC while performing light 
physical activity for a working year, would receive an 
intake corresponding to the annual limit on intake for 
the radionuclide in question. 

The parameter values recommended for calculating 
DACs are a breathing rate of 1.2 m*/h and a working 
year of 2 000 h. 


4.44 Detection limit —see MDA 


4.45 Deterministic Effects — A health effect of 
radiation for which generally a threshold level of dose 
exists, above which the severity of the effect is greater 
for a higher dose. 


4.46 Directional dose equivalent H’(d, Q) — see Dose 
equivalent quantities. 


4.47 Discharge — Planned and controlled release of 
radioactive material (usually gaseous or liquid) 
radioactive material to the environment, in accordance 
with an authorization. 
4.48 Disintegration, Nuclear — see 
Radioactive. 


Decay, 


4.49 Dose — A measure of energy deposited by 
radiation in a target. The quantities termed absorbed 
dose, organ dose, equivalent dose, effective dose, 
committed equivalent dose, or committed effective 
doseare used, depending on the context. The modifying 
terms are used when they are not necessary for defining 
the quantity of interest. (see also Annual dose, Averted 
dose, Effective dose, Equivalent dose, Collective dose, 
committed dose, Life time dose, projected dose) 


4.50 Dose Equivalent Quantities 
4.50.1 Ambient dose equivalent, H*(d) — The dose 


equivalent that would be produced by the 
corresponding aligned and expanded field in the JCRU 


65 


IS 4155 : 2023 


sphere at a depth d (10 mm for strongly penetrating 
radiation) on the radius opposing the direction of the 
aligned sphere. It is a parameter defined at a point in a 
radiation field and can be used as a directly measurable 
substitute for effective dose for use in monitoring of 
external exposure. 


4.50.2 Directional dose equivalent H’(d, Q) — The 
dose equivalent that would be produced by the 
corresponding expanded field in the ICRU sphere at a 
depth d on a radius in a specified direction Q. This 
parameter is defined at a point in a radiation field. Used 
as a directly measurable proxy for equivalent dose in 
the skin for use in monitoring of external exposure. The 
recommended value of d is 0.07 mm for weakly 
penetrating radiation. 


4.50.3 Personal dose equivalent, H,(d) — The dose 
equivalent in soft tissue below a specific point on the 
body at an appropriate depth d. The recommended 
values of d are 10 mm for strongly penetrating radiation 
and 0.07 mm for weakly penetrating radiation. 


4.51 Dose Limit — The value of the effective dose or 
the equivalent dose to individuals from controlled 
practices that shall not be exceeded. 


4.52 Dose Rate — Radiation dose delivered per unit 
time. 


4.53 Dose coefficient — Radiation dose per unit intake 
of radioactivity. 


4.54 Dosimeter — Instrument used to detect and 
measure an accumulated dose of radiation; in common 
usage it is a pencil size ionization chamber with built in 
self-reading electrometer, used for personnel 
monitoring. 


E 


4.55 Electron Capture — A mode of radioactive decay 
involving the capture of an orbital electron by its 
nucleus. The mode is further designated as K-electron 
capture, L-electron capture, etc., depending on whether 
the capture is from the K-shell, or L-shell, etc. This is 
followed by emission of X-rays. 


4.56 Enriched Material — Material in which the 
relative amount of one or more isotopes of a constituent 
has been increased, such as enriched uranium, in which 
the abundance of U-235 isotope is increased above 
natural composition. 


4.56 Entrance Surface Dose — Absorbed dose in the 
centre of the field at the surface of entry of radiation for 
a patient undergoing a radio diagnostic examination, 
expressed in air and with backscatter. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


4.57 Effective Half-life (Terr) — The time taken for 
the activity of a radionuclide in a specified place to 
half of the initial activity as a result of all relevant 
processes. 


1 wu. 
er È 


where, Tiis the half-life for process i. 


4.58 Effective Dose, E — The quantity E, defined as a 
summation of the equivalent doses, each multipliedby 
the appropriate tissue weighting factor. 


E =} wTHT 
T 


where, Hr is the equivalent dose in tissue T and wr is 
the tissue weighting factor for tissue T. 


From the definition of equivalent dose, it follows that: 


E =X wT È WRDT,R 
T R 


where, Wr is the radiation weighting factor for radiation 
R and Dr,r is the average absorbed dose in the organ or 
tissue T. The unit of effective dose is sievert (Sv) equal 
to 1 J/kg. 


4.59 Emergency — A non-routine situation that 
necessitates prompt action, primarily to mitigate a 
hazard or adverse consequences for human health and 
safety, quality of life, property or the environment. This 
includes nuclear and radiological emergencies and 
conventional emergencies such as fires, release of 
hazardous chemicals, storms or earthquakes. It 
includes situations for which prompt action is 
warranted to mitigate the effects of a perceived hazard. 


4.59.1 Nuclear or radiological emergency: An 
emergency in which there is, or is perceived to be, a 
hazard due to: 


a) The energy resulting from a nuclear chain 
reaction or from the products of decay of the 
products of chain reaction; and 

b) Radiation exposure. 


4.59.2 Emergency Worker — A worker who may be 
exposed in excess of occupational dose limits while 
performing actions to mitigate the consequences of an 
emergency for human health and safety, quality of life, 
property and the environment. 


4.60 Equilibrium, Radioactive — The state of a 
radioactive decay chain (or part thereof) where the 
activity of each radionuclide in the chain (or part of the 
chain) is the same. This state is achieved when the 


66 


parent nuclide has a much longer half-life than the 
progeny, and after a time equal to several times the half- 
life of the longest lived of the progeny. 


4.61 Equilibrium Equivalent Concentration — The 
activity concentration of radon or thoron in radioactive 
equilibrium with its short lived progeny that would have 
the same potential alpha energy concentration as the 
actual (non-equilibrium) mixture. 

The unit of equivalent dose is sievert (Sv) equal to 1 
J/kg. 


4.62 Evacuation — The rapid, temporary removal of 
people from an area to avoid or reduce short term 
radiation exposure in an emergency. 


4.63 Exemption — The determination by a regulatory 
body that a source or practice need not be subject to 
some or all aspects of regulatory control on the basis 
that the exposure including potential exposure due to 
the source or practice is too small to warrant the 
application of those aspects or that this is the optimum 
option for protection irrespective of the actual level of 
the doses or risks. 


4.64 Exposure — The act or condition of being subject 
to irradiation. Exposure can be either external 
(irradiation by sources outside the body) or internal 
(irradiation by sources inside the body). Exposure can 
be classified as either normal exposure or potential 
exposure, either occupational, medical or public 
exposure; and in intervention situations, either 
emergency exposure or chronic exposure. The term 
exposure is also used in radiation dosimetry to express 
the amount of ions produced in air by ionising radiation. 


4.65 Exposure Pathway — The routes by which 
radioactive material can reach or irradiate humans. 


4.66 External Radiation — That radiation reaching a 
given point in the body or the material which is 
directly or indirectly due to a source of radiation outside 
the body of material. 


F 


4.67 Fertile — Fertile materials are materials that can 
undergo transmutation to become fissile materials. 
Thorium-232 and Uranium-238 are two fertile nuclides 
which can produce fissile uranium-233 and plutonium- 
239 respectively. 


4.68 Filter, Primary (Radiology) — A sheet of 
material usually metal, placed in the path of a beam of 
radiation to remove as far as possible the less 
penetrating components. 


4.69 Filter, Secondary (Radiology) — A sheet of 
material of lower atomic number relative to that of the 
primary filter placed in the path of the filtered beam of 
radiation to remove characteristic radiation produced by 
the primary filter. 


4.70 Fissile — Nuclides capable of undergoing fission 
by interaction with thermal neutrons. 


4.71 Fissile material — Uranium-233, Uranium-235, 
Plutonium-239, Plutonium-241 or anycombination of 
these radionuclides. 


4.72 Fission — The splitting of a heavy nucleus into 
two (or very rarely more) approximately equal 
fragments, fission fragments. Fission is accompanied 
by the emission of neutrons and the release of energy. 
It can be spontaneous or it can be caused by the 
interaction of neutrons, or fast charged particles or high 
energy proton. 


4.73 Fissionable — Nuclides that are capable of 
undergoing fission. 


G 


4.74 Gamma Ray (y -Ray) — Electro-magnetic 
radiation emitted by the nuclei of radioactive 
substances during decay. 


4.75 Gas Flow Counter — A counter (for measuring 
radioactivity) in which an appropriate atmosphere is 
maintained in the counter tube by allowing a suitable 
gas to flow slowly through the sensitive volume. 


4.76 Geiger Muller Counter — Highly sensitive gas 
filled device for counting photons or charged particles 
by means of ionization they produce in a gas. 


4.77 Geiger Region —The operation voltage interval 
in an ionization detector, in which the charge collected 
per ionizing event is essentially independent of the 
number of primary ions produced in the initial ionizing 
event. 


4.78 Gray — The SI unit of absorbed dose. One Gray 
is equal to 1 joule per kilogram. 1 Gy = 1 J/kg. 


H 


4.79 Half-Life (Biological) — The time required for 
the body to eliminate one half of an administereddose 
of any substance by regular process of elimination. This 
time is approximately the same for both stable and 
radioactive isotopes of a particular element. 


4.80 Half-Life (Effective) — Time required for a 
radioactive element absorbed in the tissue of an animal 
body to be diminished by half as a result of the 
combined action of radioactive decay and biological 
elimination. 


Effective half-life = Biological half-life x Physical half- 
life Biological half-life + Physical half-life 


4.81 Half-Life (Physical) — The time taken for the 
activity of a radioactive substance to decay to half its 
original value, that is, for half the atoms present to 


67 


IS 4155 : 2023 


disintegrate. Also termed Half-Life, Radioactive, or 
merely half-life. 


4.82 Half-Value Layer — The thickness of any 
particular material necessary to reduce the intensity of 
an X-ray or y-ray beam to one-half its original value 
4.83 Health Physics — The branch of radiological 
science dealing with the protection of personnel from 
harmful effects of ionizing radiation. 


4.84 Health Effects (of Radiation) 


4.84.1 Early Effect — A radiation induced health effect 
that occurs within months of the exposure that caused 
it. All early effects are deterministic effects. But, not 
all deterministic effects are early effects. 


4.84.2 Hereditary Effect—A radiation induced health 
effect that occurs in a descendant of the exposed person. 
These effects are usually stochastic effects. 


4.84.3 Late Effects — A radiation induced health effect 
that occurs years after the exposure that caused it.The 
most common late effects are stochastic effects such as 
leukaemia and solid cancers, but some deterministic 
effects like cataract formation can also be late effects. 


4.84.4 Somatic Effect — A radiation induced health 
effect that occurs in the exposed person. 


4.84.5 Stochastic Effect — A radiation induced health 
effect, the probability of occurrence of which is greater 
for a higher radiation dose and the severity of which is 
independent of dose. 


4.85 Hold Back Carrier — The inactive isotope or 
isotopes of a radioactive element of similar properties, 
or some reagent, which may be used to diminish the 
amount of a radionuclide co-precipitated or absorbed in 
a chemical reaction. 


4.86 ICRU — A sphere of 30 cm diameter made of 
tissue equivalent material with a density of 1 g/cm? and 
a mass composition of 76.2 percent oxygen, 11.1 
percent carbon, 10.1 percent hydrogen and 2.6 percent 
nitrogen. It is used as a reference phantom in defining 
dose equivalent quantities. 


4.87 Induced Radioactivity — Radioactivity caused in 
a substance after bombardment with neutrons, charged 
particles, y-rays etc. 


4.88 INES — A simple scale, designed for promptly 
communicating to the public in consistent terms the 
safety significance of events at nuclear facilities. The 
scale ranges from 0 to 7. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


4.89 Intake — The process of taking radionuclide into 
the body by inhalation or ingestion, or through the skin. 
It also refers to the activity of a given radionuclide taken 
into the body in a given time period or as a result of a 
given event. 


4.90 Initiating event — An identified event that leads 
to anticipated operational occurrences or accident 
conditions. 


4.91 Integral Dose — A measure of the total energy 
absorbed by a patient or any object during exposure to 
radiation. According to British usage the integral dose 
of X-rays or y-rays is expressed in gram-roentgens. 


4.92 Internal Conversion — A transition between two 
energy states of a nucleus where the energy difference 
is not emitted as a photon (gamma ray) but is given to 
an orbital electron in the K or L-shell which is thereby 
ejected from the atom. 


4.93 Internal Radiation Hazard — Possible adverse 
health conditions attributable to radiation damage to an 
individual from internally deposited radioactive 
materials. 


4.94 Intervention — Any action intended to reduce or 
avert exposure or its likelihood to sources which are not 
a part of controlled practice or which are out of control 
as a consequence of an accident. 


4.95 Investigation Level — The value of a quantity 
such as effective dose, intake or contamination perunit 
area or volume at or above which an investigation could 
be conducted. 


4.96 Iodine Prophylaxis — The administration of a 
compound of stable iodine (usually potassium iodide) 
to prevent or reduce the uptake of radioactive isotopes 
of iodine by the thyroid in the event of an accident 
involving radioactive iodine. 


4.97 Ionization Chamber — A device designed to 
measure the quantity of ionizing radiation in termsof the 
charge of electricity associated with ions produced in a 
defined volume. 


4.98 Ionizing Radiation — Any electro-magnetic or 
particulate radiation capable of producing ions, directly 
or indirectly, in its passage through matter. 


4.99 Irradiation — The exposure of materials to 
radiation. 


4.100 Isobar — One of two or more different nuclides 
having the same mass number. 


4.101 Isomer — One of two or more different nuclides 
having the same mass number, and the same atomic 
number but differing radioactive properties such as 


68 


different half-lives due to difference in energy levels 
and to the possibility of different decay patterns. 


4.102 Isomeric Transition (IT) —The process by 
which a nuclide decays to an isomer of a lower 
energy state. 


4.103 Isotone — One of two or more nuclides having 
the same number of neutrons in their nuclei. 


4.104 Isotope — One of two or more nuclides having 
the same number of protons in their nuclei, and hence 
having the same atomic number, but differing in the 
number of neutrons and hence in the mass number or in 
energy content (isomers). Almost identical chemical 
properties exist between isotopes. 


J 


4.105 Justification — The process of determining 
whether a practice is overall, beneficial, as required by 
the International Commission on Radiological 
Protection’s System of Radiological Protection, i.e. 
whether the benefits of individuals and to society from 
introducing or continuing the practice outweigh the 
harm (including radiation detriment) resulting from the 
practice. 


K 


4.106 K-Capture — A common term for capture of an 
electron from K-shell of an atom by the nucleus (a mode 
of radioactive decay). (see also electron capture). 


4.107 Kerma, K— The quantity K, defined as: 


_ dEtr 


K dm 


where dE, is the sum of the initial kinetic energies of 
all charged ionizing particles liberated by uncharged 

ionizing particles in a material of mass dm. The unit 

for kerma is Gray (Gy). 


L 


4.108 Labelled Compound — A compound consisting 
in part of labeled molecules (see Labelled Molecule). 


4.109 Labelled Molecule — A molecule containing 
one or more atoms, radioactive or stable, characterized 
by non-natural isotopic composition. 


4.110 Lead Equivalent — The thickness of lead 
affording the same reduction in radiation dose rate 
under specific conditions as the material in question. 


4.111 Leakage Radiation — Radiation coming out of 
the source/tube housing, except the useful beam or 
primary beam. 


4.112 License — A legal document issued by the 
regulatory body granting authorization to perform 
specified activities related to a facility or activity is 
called as licence. The holder of a current licence is 
termed a license. 


4.113 Lifetime Dose — The total dose received by an 
individual during his or her lifetime. In practice, this is 
approximated as the sum of the annual doses incurred. 
For prospective assessments of lifetime dose, a lifetime 
is normally interpreted as 70 years. 


4.114 Linear Energy Transfer (LET), La— It refers 
to a measure of how energy is transferred from radiation 
as a functidh of distance in any single collision. It is 
defined generally as: 


dE La = (> 


where dE is the energy lost in traversing distance dl and 
A is an upper bound on the energy transferred in any 
single collision. It is expressed in units of kilo electron 
volts per micron (keV/um). 


4.115 Low Enriched Uranium (LEU) — Enriched 
uranium containing less than 20 percent of the isotope 
35), LEU is considered a special fissionable material 
and an indirect use material. 


M 


4.116 Minimum Detectable Activity (MDA) — The 
radioactivity which, if present in a sample, produces a 
counting rate that will be detected (i.e. considered to 
be above background) with a certain level of 
confidence, normally set at 95 percent. This means, a 
sample containing exactly the minimum detectable 
activity will, as a result of random fluctuations, be taken 
to be free of radioactivity 5 percent of the time. 
Minimum detectable activity is sometimes referred to as 
the Detection limit. 


4.117 Medical exposure — Exposure incurred by 
patients as part of their own medical or dental diagnosis 
(diagnostic exposure) or treatment (therapeutic 
exposure); by persons, other than those occupationally 
exposed, knowingly while voluntarily helping in the 
support and comfort of patients; and by volunteers in a 
programme of biomedical research involving their 
exposure. 


4.118 Member of public — Any individual in the 
population except one who is subject to occupationalor 
medical exposure. For the purpose of verifying 
compliance with the annual dose limit for public 
exposure, the member of the public is the representative 
individual in the relevant critical group. 


4.119 Monitoring — The measurement of dose or 
contamination for reasons to the assessment/control of 
exposure to radiation/radioactive substances and the 
interpretation of the results. 


69 


IS 4155 : 2023 


4.120 Area Monitoring — A form of workplace 
monitoring in which an area is monitored by taking 
measurements at different points in that area. 


4.121 Environmental Monitoring — The 
measurement of external dose rates due to sources in 
the environment or of radionuclide concentrations in 
environmental media. 


4.122 Individual monitoring or Personal monitoring 
— Monitoring using measurements by equipment worn 
by individual workers or measurements of quantities of 
radioactive material in or on their bodies. 


4.123 Workplace monitoring — Continuous or 
periodic measurement of radiological or other 
parameters by using measurements made in the working 
environment. 


4.124 Personnel monitoring — A combination of 
individual monitoring and workplace monitoring 


4.125 Routine monitoring — Monitoring associated 
with continuing operations and intended to demonstrate 
that working conditions, including the levels of 
individual dose, remain satisfactory, and to meet 


regulatory requirements. This can be individual 
monitoring or workplace monitoring. 
4.126 Source monitoring — The measurement of 


activity in radioactive material being released to the 
environment or of external dose rates due to sources 
within a facility or activity. 


N 
4.127 Natural Uranium — see Uranium 


4.128 NORM — An acronym for Naturally Occurring 
Radioactive Material. A radioactive material containing 
no significant amounts of radio-nuclides other than 
naturally occurring radio-nuclides. 


4.129 Neutron — Elementary nuclear particle with a 
mass approximately the same as that of a hydrogen 
atom and having no electric charge. Its mass is 1.008 
986 mass units. 


4.130 Nuclear Fission — see Fission. 


4.131 Nuclear Reactor — An assembly in which 
controlled fission chain reaction can be maintained and 
controlled. It usually incorporates a fuel, coolant or 
moderator and other control mechanisms andmost 
often surrounded by a concrete biological shield to 
absorb neutrons and ionizing radiation. 


4.132 Nucleon — A constituent of the nucleus, that is, 
a proton or a neutron. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


4.133 Nucleus — The core of an atom in which the total 
positive electrical charge and most of the mass of the 
atom are concentrated. 


4.134 Nuclide — A species of atom characterized by its 
mass number, atomic number and its nuclear energy 
state, provided the mean life in that state is long enough 
to be observable. 


4.135 Nuclear Fuel Cycle — All operations associated 
with the production of nuclear energy, including 
mining, milling, processing and enrichment of uranium 
or processing of thorium, manufactureof nuclear fuel, 
operation of nuclear reactors, reprocessing of 
irradiated nuclear fuel, decommissioning and any 
activity for radioactive waste management and research 
or development activity related to any ofthe foregoing. 


4.136 Nuclear Accident — Any accident involving 
facilities or activities from which a release of 
radioactive material occurs or is likely to occur and 
which has resulted or may result in an international 
trans-boundary release that could be of radiological 
safety significance for another state. 


4.137 Nuclear Energy — The energy released by the 
nucleus of an atom as the result of nuclear fission, 
nuclear fusion, or radioactive decay. 


4.138 Occupational Exposure — All exposures of 
personnel incurred in the course of their work. 


4.139 Off-site Emergency — _ Accident 
condition/emergency situation involving excessive 
release of radioactive materials/hazardous chemicals 
from the plant to the public domain calling for 
intervention. 


4.140 On-Site Emergency — see Plant Emergency 


4.141 Organ Dose — The mean absorbed dose in a 
specified tissue or organ of the human body. 


4.142 Orphan Source — A radioactive source which 
is not under regulatory control, either because it has 
never been under regulatory control or because it has 
been abandoned, lost, misplaced, stolen or otherwise 
transferred without proper authorization. 


4.143 Overpack — An additional outer container for 
one or more waste packages used for handling, 
transport, storage and/or disposal. 


4.144 Personnel Monitoring — see Monitoring 


4.145 Photon — A quantum of electromagnetic energy 
whose energy value (E) in Joules is the product of its 
frequency (v) in cycles per second and Planck’s 
constant, h (h=6.626 x 10% J.s). The equation is E = hv. 


70 


4.146 Plant Emergency — Declared emergency 
conditions in which the  radiological/other 
consequences, confined to the plant or a section of the 
plant, requiring immediate operator action. 


4.147 Positron — A positron is a particle of matter with 
the same mass as an electron but an opposite charge. It 
is an antimatter counterpart of electron. When a 
positron encounters an electron, the two completely 
annihilate to yield energy in the form of gamma ray 
photons. 


4.148 Potential Alpha Energy — The total alpha 
energy ultimately emitted during the decay of radon 
progeny or of thoron progeny through the decay chain. 


4.149 Potential Exposure — Exposure that is not 
expected to occur with certainty but that may result 
from an accident at a source or owing to an event or 
sequence of events of a probabilistic nature, including 
equipment failures and operating errors. Such events 
could also include accidents or future events 
influencing the integrity of a repository. 


4.150 Practice — Any human activity that introduces 
additional sources of exposure or additional exposure 
pathways, or extends exposure to additional people, or 
modifies the network of exposure pathways from 
existing sources, so as to increase the exposure or the 
likelihood of exposure of people or the number of 
people exposed. 


4.151 Primary Protective Barrier — Barriers 
sufficient to reduce the useful X-ray beam to the 
permissible dose rate. 


4.152 Primary Radiation—All radiation coming 
directly from the target of a X-ray tube. 


4.153 Proportional Counter — Gas filled radiation 
detection device, in which the pulse produced is 
proportional to the number of ions formed in gas by the 
primary ionizing particle. 


4.154 Protection — The protection of people against 
exposure to ionizing radiation or radioactive materials 
and the safety of radiation sources, including the means 
for achieving this. It also refers to the means for 
preventing accidents and for mitigating the 
consequences of accidents should they occur. 


4.155 Protective Action — An intervention intended to 
avoid or reduce doses to members of the public in 
emergencies or situations of chronic exposure. 


4.156 Protective Barriers — Barriers of radiation 
absorbing material, such as lead, concrete and plaster 
that are used to reduce intensity of radiation. 


4.157 Proton — Elementary nuclear particle with a 
positive electric charge, equal numerically to the charge 
of the electron and having a mass of 1.007 594 mass 
units. 


Q 


4.158 Quantum — see Photon. 
R 


4.159 Rad — This is the unit of absorbed dose of any 
ionizing radiation and corresponds to the absorption of 
100 ergs/g of the absorbing medium. The roentgen and 
the rad (in soft tissues) areapproximately equivalent in 
magnitude. SI unit is Gray (Gy) 


4.160 Radiation — Radiation is a general term for 
energy which radiates out from a source which canbe a 
part of the Electromagnetic spectrum like Gamma rays, 
X-rays, or can be rays consisting of alpha particles, beta 
particles, neutrons, protons termed as ionizing radiation 
and other nuclear, sub-atomic particles, but not sound 
or radio waves, or visible, infrared, ultra-violet light. 


4.161 Radiation detriment — The total harm that 
would eventually be experienced by an exposed group 
and its descendants as a result of the group’s exposure 
to radiation from a source. 


4.162 Radiation or Radiological emergency — see 
Emergency 


4.163 Radiation Hazard — The risk to health arising 
from exposure to ionizing radiation. It may be due to 
external radiation or due to radiation from radioactive 
materials within the body. 


4.164 Radiation Hygiene — A term synonymous with 
radiological health. 


4.165 Radiation Protection —see Protection 


4.166 Radiological Safety Officer (RSO)/Radiation 
Protection Officer — A person technically competent 
in radiation protection matters relevant for a given type 
of practice who is designated by the registrant or 


licensee to oversee the application of relevant 
requirements established in national/international 
standards. 


4.167 Radiation Sickness — A self limited syndrome 
characterized by nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and 
psychic depression following exposure to appreciable 
doses of ionizing radiation. 


4.168 Radiation Therapy — Medical treatment by 
ionising radiation 


71 


IS 4155 : 2023 


4.169 Radiation Weighting Factor — Multipliers of 
absorbed dose used for radiation protection purposes to 
account for the relative effectiveness of different types 
of radiation in inducing health effects. 

4.170 Radioactivity — The phenomenon whereby 
atoms undergo spontaneous random disintegration, 
usually accompanied by the emission of radiation. 


4.171 Radioactive Material — Any substance or 
material, which spontaneously emits radiation in excess 
of the levels prescribed by notification by the Central 
Government. 


4.172 Radioautograph — see Auto Radiograph. 


4.173 Radiological Health — The art and science of 
protecting human beings from injury by radiation. 


4.174 Radiation Risks — The detrimental health 
effects of exposure to radiation (including the 
likelihood of such effects occurring). Any other safety 
related risks (including those to ecosystems in the 
environment) that might arise as a direct consequence 
of: 


a) Exposure to radiation; 

b) The presence of radioactive material (including 
radioactive waste) or its release to the 
environment; and 

c) A loss of control over a nuclear reactor core, 
nuclear chain reaction, radioactive source or 
anyother source of radiation. 


4.175 Radiological Survey — Evaluation of the 
radiation hazard incident to the production, use or 
existence of radioactive materials or other sources of 
radiation under a specified set of conditions. 


4.176 Radiology — The medical science of radioactive 
substances, X-rays and other ionizing radiationand the 
application of the principles of this science to diagnosis 
and treatment of disease. 


4.177 Radon Progeny — The short lived radioactive 
decay products of Radon-222. 


4.178 Recording Level — A level of dose, exposure or 
intake specified by the regulatory body at or above 
which values of dose, exposure or intake received by 
workers are to be entered in their individual exposure 
records. 


4.179 Recovery (Radiology) — The return towards 
normal of a particular cell, tissue or organism after 
radiation injury. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


4.180 Regulatory Body — A national authority 
designated by the Government of India having the legal 
authority for issuing regulatory consent for various 
activities related to the nuclear and radiation facility and 
to perform safety and regulatory functions, including 
their enforcement for the protection of the site 
personnel, the public and the environment against under 
radiation hazards. 


4.181 Relative Biological Effectiveness (RBE) — The 
ratio of y-ray or X-ray dose to the dose that isrequired 
to produce the same biological effect by the radiation in 
question. 


4.182 Reprocessing — A process or operation, the 
purpose of which is to extract radioactive isotopes from 
spent fuel for further use. 


4.183 Repository — A nuclear facility where waste is 
emplaced for disposal. 


4.184 Risk — In general terms risk can be defined as 
the potential for unwanted, adverse consequences to 
human life, property, health, environment or society. 
The calculation (or estimation) of risk is usually based 
on the Probability of the event occurring multiplied by 
the consequence of the event given that it has occurred. 
In order to do this a Risk Assessment has to be made 
which looks at all the hazards, severities and 
conditional probabilities. 


4.185 Roentgen — The quantity of X-radiation or 
gamma-radiation such that the associated corpuscular 
emission produces | electrostatic unit (lesu = 3.336 x 
10-1? C) of charge of either sign in 0.001 293 g of air (1 
cm} of air at atmosphere pressure and 0 °C). 


4.186 Roentgen Equivalent Man (REM) — That 
quantity of any type of ionizing radiation, which, when 
absorbed by man, produces an effect equivalent to the 
absorption by man of one roentgen of X- radiation or 
gamma-radiation. This is obtained by multiplying 
absorbed dose by Wr and/or Wr. 


4.187 Roentgenography — Radiography by means of 
X-rays. 


4.188 Roentgenology — That part of radiology which 
pertains to X-rays. 


4.189 Roentgen Rays — X-rays. 


4.190 Rotation Therapy — Radiation therapy during 
which either the patient is rotated before the source of 
radiation or the source is revolved around the patient. In 
this way, a larger dose is built up at the centre of rotation 
within the body of the patient than on any area of the 
skin. 


4.191 Routine Monitoring —see Monitoring 


72 


S 


4.192 Scattered Radiation — Radiation that, during 
passage through matter, gets deviated in direction. (It 
may have been modified by a decrease in energy) 


4.193 Scintillation Counter —The combination of 
phosphor, photomultiplier tube and associated circuitry 
for counting light emissions produced in the phosphor 
by radiation. 


4.194 Sealed source — Radioactive material that is (a) 
permanently sealed in a capsule or (b) closely bonded 
and in a solid form. 


4.195 Secondary Protective Barriers — Barriers 
sufficient to reduce stray radiation to the permissible 
dose rate. 


4.196 Secondary Radiation — Radiation originating 
as the result of absorption of other radiation in matter. 
It may by electromagnetic or particulate in nature. 


4.197 Sievert (Sv) — The SI unit of equivalent dose 
and effective dose, equal to 1 J/kg. The equivalent 
older unit is the Rem where 1 Sv = 100 rem. 


4.198 Somatic Effect — see Health effects of radiation. 


4.199 Source — Anything that may cause radiation 
exposure such as by emitting ionizing radiation or by 
releasing radioactive substances or material — and can 
be treated as a single entity for protection and safety 
purposes. 


4.200 Specific Activity—The activity per unit mass of 
a radionuclide and normally expressed as Bq/g. 


4.201 Specific Ionization — Number of ion pairs 
produced by the ionizing radiation when passing 
through matter per unit length of the tract of radiation. 


4.202 Stochastic Effect — see Health effects of 
radiation 


4.203 Stray Radiation — Radiation not serving any 
useful purpose. It includes direct radiation and 
secondary radiation from irradiated objects. 


T 


4.204 Tailings — The residues resulting from the 
processing of ore to extract uranium series or thorium 
series radionuclides, or similar residues from 
processing ores for other purposes. 


4.205 Teletherapy — Treatment with external 
radiation beam(s) where the distance from source to 
skin is greater than 5 cm. 


4.206 Tissue Weighting Factor — Multipliers of the 
equivalent dose to an organ or tissue used for radiation 
protection purposes to account for the different 
sensitivities of different organs and tissues to the 
induction of stochastic effects of radiation. 


4.207 Tracer, Isotopic — The isotope or non-natural 
mixture of isotopes of an element which may be 
incorporated into a sample to make possible 
observation of the course of that element, above or in 
combination, through chemical, biological or physical 


processes. The observations may be made by 
measurements of radioactivity or by isotopic 
abundance. 


4.208 Transport Index — Transport Index (TI) is a 
number, which, in reality, is the highest radiation level 
at 1 m from the surface of the package. 


U 


4.209 Uptake — The processes by which radionuclides 
enter one part of a biological system from another viz., 
the body fluids from the respiratory tract, 
gastrointestinal tract or through the skin, or the fraction 
of an intake that enters the body fluids by these 
processes. 


4.210 Uranium 


4.201.1 Natural Uranium — Uranium (which may be 
chemically separated) containing the naturally 
occurring distribution of uranium isotopes 
(approximately 99.28 percent uranium-238 and 0.71 
percent uranium-235 and 0.005 percent uranium-234 by 
mass). 


4.202.2 Depleted Uranium — Uranium containing a 
lesser mass percentage of uranium-235 than innatural 
uranium. 


4.202.3 Enriched Uranium — Uranium containing a 
greater mass percentage of uranium-235 than 0.72 
percent. 


4.202.4 High Enriched Uranium (HEU)—Uranium 
containing 20 percent or more of the isotope 7*°U. 


4.202.5 Low Enriched Material— Enriched uranium 
containing less than 20 % of the isotope 75U. 


W 


4.203 Waste — Material for which no further use is 
foreseen. 


4.203.1 Exempt Waste — Waste that is released from 
regulatory control in accordance with exemption 
principles. 


73 


IS 4155 : 2023 


4.203.2 NORM Waste —Naturally Occurring 
Radioactive Material for which no further use is 
foreseen. 


4.204 Waste, Radioactive 


4.204.1 Waste that contains, or is contaminated with 
radionuclides at concentrations or activities greater 
than clearance levels as established by the regulatory 
body. 


4.204.2 Exposure to which is not excluded from the 
Basic Safety Standards. 


4.204.3 Working Level (WL) — A unit of potential 
alpha energy concentration (i.e. the potential alpha 
energy per unit volume of air) resulting from the 
presence of radon progeny or thoron progeny, equal to 
1.3 x 108 MeV/m3 (exactly). In SI units, a working level 
is 2.1 x 10° J/m? (approximately). 


4.204.4 Working Level Month (WLM) — The 
exposure to radon progeny or thoron progeny which 
couldbe incurred during a working month (170 hours) 
in a constant potential alpha energy concentration of 
one working level. In S.I units, a working level month 
is 3.54 x 10° J.h/m? (approximately). 


X 


4.204.5 X-Rays — Electromagnetic radiation resulting 
from extra nuclear loss of energy of charged particles 
(namely, electrons) and having shorter wave-length 
than ultraviolet radiation. 


5 MEDICAL HAZARDS 
A 


5.1 Acute — In the medical sense it means of short 
duration’s. As applied to materials inhaled or absorbed 
through the skin, it refers to a single exposure. As 
applied to materials ingested, it refers to a single dose. 


5.2 Action Level — The level of dose rate or activity 
concentration above which remedial actions or 
protective actions should be carried out in chronic 
exposure or emergency exposure. 


5.3 Allergen — The agent, the presence of which in the 
body gives rise to allergy. 


5.4 Allergen Potential — A qualitative term that gives 

an idea of the allergic action of a material. A substance 
is said to have a high allergenic potential, if, even very 
small amounts of that substance giverise to symptoms 
of allergy. 


5.5 Allergy — A state in which the cells of the body are 
hypersensitive to certain substances (allergens), usually 


IS 4155 : 2023 


proteins, introduced into it. The reactions of the body 
exhibit themselves as edema, inflammation and 
destruction of tissue. 


5.6 Anaesthetic — A substance which produces 
insensibility to touch, pain and temperature with or 
without loss of consciousness. 


5.7 Analgesic — A chemical, inorganic or organic, 
which relieves pain. 


5.8 Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) — The intake by 
inhalation, ingestion or through the skin of a given 
radionuclide in a year by the reference man, which 
would result in a committed dose equal to the relevant 
dose limit. The ALI is expressed in units of activity. 


5.9 Antibiotic — A substance produced by micro- 
organisms which inhibits the growth of or destroys 
other micro-organisms. 


5.10 Antidote — A substance given to a patient to 
counteract the effects produced due to ingestion of a 
poisonous or toxic chemical or radioactive material. 


5.11 Aplastic Anaemia — Anaemia not followed by 
ordinary regeneration of the blood. 


5.12 Asphyxiant — A substance (gas) exposure to 
which leads to a morbid condition caused by the failure 
of the tissues to receive or utilize oxygen, the fault 
occurring in the lungs, blood or tissues or caused by 
dilution of atmospheric oxygen. 


B 


5.13 Bone Seeker — An element which tends to be 
deposited in the bones of the body because it is either 
chemically similar to calcium or takes part in bone- 
forming processes. 


C 
5.14 Cancer — The common term for malignant 
neoplasms or tumours. Neoplasias are new growths 
which occur in some organ or tissue. These can be 
roughly divided into benign and malignant forms, 
though in certain cases the distinction is unclear. 


5.15 Carcinogen — Any agent responsible for causing 
cancer. 


5.16 Chronic — In the medical sense, this term is used 
in contrast to Acute, and means of long duration. As 
applied to materials inhaled or absorbed through the 
skin, it means exposure times of long duration. As 
regards material ingested, it refers to repeated doses. 


5.17 Contaminant — The substance giving rise to a 
contamination. 


74 


5.18 Contact Dermatitis — Inflammation of the 
surface of the skin or epidermis due to physical contact 
with an allergy producing material. 


D 


5.19 Dermatosis — An affliction or inflammation of 
the deeper parts of the skin. 


5.20 Dosage — In the medical sense, a measure of any 
material, expressed in suitable units, that gains entry 
into the body. 


5.21 Dose — A measure of the radiation absorbed by a 
target. The quantities termed absorbed dose, organ 
dose, equivalent dose, effective dose, committed 
equivalent dose; or committed effective dose are used, 
depending on the context. The modifying terms are 
used when they are not necessary for defining the 
quantity of interest. 


E 


5.22 Effective Dose — The quantity E is defined as a 
summation of the tissue equivalent doses, each 
multiplied by the appropriate tissue weighting factor: 


E=FIWT x HT 


where, Hr is the equivalent dose in tissue T and Wr is 
the tissue weighting factor for tissue T. 


5.23 Entrance Surface Dose — Absorbed dose in 
the centre of the field at the surface of entry of 
radiation for a patient undergoing a radio diagnostic 
examination, expressed in air and with backscatter. 


5.24 Epilation — The temporary or permanent removal 
of hair. 


5.25 Equivalent Dose (Hr. r) The quantity Hrpis 
defined as: 


HT. R = DT.R X WR 


where Dr,r is the absorbed dose delivered by radiation 
type R averaged over a tissue or organ T and Wr is the 
radiation weighing factor for radiation type R. When 
the radiation field is composed of different radiation 
types with different values of WR, the equivalent dose 
is: 

HT.R =} Wr X DrR 


5.26 Erethism — An abnormal excitement of an organ 
or tissue. A symptom of mercury poisoning. 


5.27 Erythema — An abnormal redness of the skin, 
due to distension of the capillaries with blood. It can be 
caused by many different agents, such as heat, certain 
drugs, ultraviolet rays, and ionizing radiation. 


5.28 Extremities — The hands, forearms and (with 
restrictions) the head and the feet are considered 
extremities. The permissible exposure of these areas to 
radiation is greater, chiefly because they include less 
blood-forming material and have smaller volumes for 
energy absorption than other parts of the body. 


F 
5.29 Fertility — The ability to produce 


5.30 Fibrosis — The formation of fibrous tissue as a 
result of injury or inflammation of a part or of 
interference with its blood supply. 


5.31 Fumigant — Substance used in the form of 
vapour and aerosols for destroying microbes and 
insects. 


G 


5.32 Gene — One of the factors or determinants 
responsible for the inheritance of specific character 
differences between individuals. 


5.33 Genetics — The branch of biology dealing with 
the phenomena of heredity and variation. 


H 


5.34 Heredity — Transmission of characteristic and 
trains from parent to offspring. 


5.35 Hemolytic Anaemia — Anaemia accompanied by 
destruction of red blood corpuscles. 


I 


5.36 Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health 
(IDLH) — An IDLH level represents the maximum 
airborne concentration of a substance to which a healthy 
person can be exposed for as long as 30 min and still be 
able to escape without loss of life or irreversible organ 
system damage. 


5.37 Ingestion — The act of swallowing materials so 
that they pass into the body. 


5.38 Inhalation — As applied to chemical or radiation 
hazards the act of breathing in or taking into the lungs 
harmful chemicals, toxic or radioactive, in the form of 
vapours or fine dust or spray. 


5.39 Irritant — Any substance that causes local 
irritation when it comes into contact with the skin or the 
mucous membranes. 


75 


IS 4155 : 2023 


L 
5.40 Laukocythemia — see Leukaemia. 


5.41 Lethal Dose — The quantity of material 
administered orally or by skin absorption by which 50 
percent of the exposed population will be fatally 
injured. 


5.42 Lesion — Damage, injury, especially morbid 
change, in functioning or texture of organs. 


5.43 Lethal Concentration LC50 — A concentration 
of airborne material by which 50 percent of the exposed 
population will be fatally injured. 


5.44 Leukaemia — A disease in which there is a great 
over production of white blood cells or a relative over 
production of immature white cells, and great 
enlargement of the spleen. It is almost always fatal. It 
can be produced in some animals by long, continued 
exposures to low intensities of ionizing radiation. 


5.45 Local — This term refers to the site of action of a 
poison and means that the action takes place at the point 
or area of contact. The site may be the skin or the 
mucous membranes. 


M 


5.46 Maximum Allowable Concentration (MAC) — 
The concentration of a poison or toxic substance in air, 
expressed in suitable units, above which its presence 
becomes harmful. 


5.47 Maximum Permissible Dose — The maximum 
permissible dose for an individual is that dose, 
accumulated over a long period of time or resulting 
from a single exposure, which, in the light of present 
day knowledge carries a negligible probability of 
severe somatic or genetic injuries. Further more it is 
such a dose that any effects that ensue more frequently 
are limited to those of a minor nature that would not be 
considered unacceptable by the exposed individual and 
by competent medical authorities. 


5.48 Median Lethal Dose — see LD 50. 


5.49 Mutation — A change in the characteristics of an 
organism produced by an alteration of the usual gene 
pattern. 


N 
5.50 Narcotic — A substance which produces 


drowsiness, sleep, unconsciousness, etc., through its 
effect on the nervous system. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


P 


5.51 Pernicious Anaemia — Macrocytic anaemia 
associated with gastro intestinal and neutral disturbance 
and due to nutritional deficiency based on defects in 
gastric secretions, marked by pallor, weakness, 
yellowish colour of the skin, dyspnoea, palpitation and 
fever. 


5.52 Poison — Substances, assimilation of which in 
small quantities, through inhalation, ingestion or 
absorption results in systemic injury, acute toxic 
conditions or death within a reasonable time following 
exposure. 


5.53 Polycythemia — A disease characterized by over 
production of red blood cells. 


5.54 Potential Exposure — Exposure that is not 
expected to be delivered with certainty but that may 
result from an accident at a source or owing to an event 
or sequence of events of a probabilistic nature, 
including equipment failures and operating errors. 


R 


5.55 Relative Biological Effectiveness (RBE) — The 
ratio of y-ray or X-ray dose to the dose that is required 
to produce the same biological effect by the radiation in 
question. 


S 


5.56 Sarcoma — see Cancer. 


5.57 Sedative — A drug possessing the property of 
producing soothing effect. 


5.58 Sigmoid Curve — S-shaped curve often 
characteristic of a dose-effect curve in radio-biological 
studies. 


5.59 Skin Dose (Radiology) — Dose at centre of 
radiation field on skin. It is the sum of the aim dose and 
that due to the back scattered radiation. 


5.60 Soporific — A substance that causes sleep or 
drowsiness. 


5.61 Sterility (Biological) — Temporary or permanent 
incapability to reproduce. 


5.62 Stimulant — A substance that temporarily 
quickens some vital process or the function of an organ. 


5.63 Stochastic Effects of Radiation — Radiation 
effects generally occurring without a threshold level of 
dose whose probability is proportional to the dose and 
whose severity is independent of the dose. 


76 


5.64 Systemic — Effect of a poison at a site of action 
other than the point of application. This presupposes 
that absorption has taken place. 


5.65 Symptom — Evidence of a disease or disorder as 
experienced by a patient. 


5.66 Syndrome — A concurrence of several 
symptoms or signs in a disease which are characteristic 
of it. 


T 


5.67 Tumor — Generally refers to abnormal tissue 
growth in the body, often associated with swelling. 


5.68 Threshold Dose — The minimum dose that will 
produce a detectable degree of any given effect. 


5.69 Threshold Limit Value — The concentration of a 
contaminant or toxic substance in air at which,on the 
basis of present day knowledge, workers may be 
repeatedly exposed without any perceptible adverse 


effect on their health during the life time. This value 
should be used as a guide in the control of health 
hazards and should not be regarded as a fine line 
between safe and dangerous concentrations. 


5.70 Tissue Dose — Dose received by a tissue in the 
region of interest, In the case X-rays and -rays,tissue 
doses are expressed in roentgens. 


5.71 Tolerance Dose — The amount of radiation 
which may be received with expectation of no 
significantly harmful result. A more acceptable term is 
Maximum Permissible Dose. 


5.72 Toxicity — The poisonous nature of a substance 
(see also Poison). 


5.73 Toxicology — That branch of science which deals 
with the nature and effect of poisons. 


6 EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS 
A 


6.1 Abel Heat Test — British official heat test which 
is generally applied to nitro-explosives. The principle 
of the test is to note the time required to produce a 
standard tint on a potassium iodide-starch paper when 
the explosive is heated under specified conditions. 


6.2 Ammunition — Explosive substances when 
enclosed in any case or contrivance or otherwise 
adopted or prepared so as to form a cartridge or charge 
for small arms, guns, rockets or other weapons and 
components thereof such as caps, detonators, primers, 
boosters, fuses, shells, warheads, etc. 


6.3 ANFO — an explosive material consisting of 
Ammonium Nitrate and Fuel Oil. 


B 


6.4 Ballistic Pendulum — An apparatus for measuring 
the relative power of different explosives as compared 
to a standard explosive by determining the weights of 
different explosives, which when fired will produce 
similar deflection of the pendulum. 


6.5 Ballistics — The branch of applied physics which 
deals with the motion of projectiles and the conditions 
governing that motion, commonly called the science of 
shooting. 


6.6 Binary Explosives — Mixtures of TNT with 
another explosive, such as RDX, PETN or with 
another explosive and a non-explosive material such as 
ammonium nitrate and aluminium powder. 


6.7 Black Powder — A low explosive consisting of a 
mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and an alkali nitrate,usually 
potassium or sodium nitrate. 


6.8 Blasting Agent — An explosive material which 
meets prescribed criteria for insensitivity to initiation. 


6.9 Blasting Fuse — A device consisting of a length 
of slow burning composition which delays the firing of 
an explosive charge sufficiently to allow the person 
firing it to get out of danger. 


6.10 Booster — An intermediate high explosive charge 
in an Explosive Train, which is easily initiated by the 
primary charge and detonates at high speed, thereby 
imparting sufficient impulse to the main explosive 
charge to detonate completely. 


6.11 Brisance — Used for shattering power of an 
explosive as distinguished from its total work capacity 
and indicates its ability to shatter and fragment steel, 
concrete and other very hard structures and is dependent 
upon its velocity of detonation. 


C 


6.12 Camouflaged device — An explosive device 
disguised to avoid detection. 


6.13 Cap — The part of a cartridge or shell which is 
filled with a detonative composition and is fired by a 
percussion strike. It ignites the propellant charge in gun 
and small arm ammunition. 


6.14 Cleveland Open Cap Method — A method for 
determining the flash point of a liquid. In this the 
vapour being experimented upon has free access to air 
and thus is slightly less concentrated than the one in the 
Closed Cup Method (see also Closed Cup Method). 


77 


IS 4155 : 2023 


6.15 Closed Cup Method — One of the methods for 
determining the flash point of a liquid. In this method, 
measurements are made on a saturated vapour air 
mixture obtained in a closed cup. 


6.16 Collective Dose — An expression for the total 
radiation dose incurred by a population and defined as 
the product of the number of individuals exposed to a 
source and their average radiation dose. 


6.17 Combustible — Any material capable of 
combustion. 
6.18 Combustion — The action or the process of 


burning, usually associated with the development of 
light, heat and chemical combination. 


6.19 Commercial Explosives — explosives designed, 
produced, and used for commercial or industrial 
applications. 


6.20 Consequence Management — Response to a 
disaster focused on alleviating damage, loss, hardship, 
or suffering. 


D 


6.21 Deflagration — A release of energy caused by the 
propogation of a chemical reaction in which thereaction 
front advances into the unreacted substance at less than 
sonic velocity in the unreacted material. Where a blast 
wave is produced that has the potential to cause 
damage, the term explosive deflagration may be used. 


6.22 Detacord® — A brand name for a detonating cord 
manufactured by Ensign Bickford Company. 


6.23 Detonating Cord — A flexible cord containing a 
center core of high explosives used to detonate other 
explosives. The exterior has a waxy appearance and is 
initiated by means of a blasting cap. Colors and material 
of detonating cord are variable, according to each 
manufacturer. 


6.24 Detonation — An explosive reaction that moves 
through an explosive material at a velocity greaterthan 
the speed of sound in the material. 


6.25 Detonator — Any device containing an initiating 
or primary explosive that is used for initiating 
detonation. A detonator is not permitted to contain more 
than 10 grams of total explosive material per unit, 
excluding ignition or delay charges. The term includes, 
but is not limited to, electric detonators of the 
instantaneous and delay types, detonators for use with 
safety fuses, detonating cord delay connectors, and 
nonelectric detonators of the instantaneous and delay 
types that consist of a detonating cord, a shock tube, or 
any other replacement for electric leg wires. Unless 
specifically classified otherwise, detonators are 


IS 4155 : 2023 


classified 1.1 (Class A explosives). Also see Detonators 
1.4 (Class C explosives). 


6.26 Dirty Bomb — A conventional explosive that is 
packaged with radioactive material that scatters when 
the bomb is detonated. 


6.27 Dynamite — A high explosive used for blasting, 
consisting essentially of a mixture of, but not limited to, 
nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, ammonium nitrate, 
sodium nitrate, and carbonaceous materials. 


6.28 Electric Detonator — A detonator designed for, 
and capable of, initiation by means of an electric 
current. 


6.29 Electron Volt (eV) — A unit of energy equivalent 
to the amount gained by an electron in passingthrough 
a potential difference of one volt. Large multiple units 
of the electron volt are frequently used, such as KeV for 
kilo electron volts (1 000 eV). MeV for million electron 
volts (106 eV), and BeV for billion electron volts (109 
eV). 


6.30 Episodic Event — An event (typically incident) 
of limited duration; e.g., release of hazardous materials, 
spill, explosion. 


6.31 Esop Test — A test in which an explosive, such 
as picric acid, is mixed with olive oil or cotton seed oil 
and trials are made in order to determine the highest 
proportion of oil which may be present without causing 
failure to detonate by the initiating explosive present. 


6.32 Explosion — a chemical reaction involving an 
extremely rapid expansion of gases, usually associated 
with the liberation of heat. 


6.33 Explosive — Substance, which under certain 
conditions of temperature, shock or chemical action can 
decompose rapidly to evolve either large volumes of 
gases or so much heat that the surrounding air is forced 
to expand very rapidly. 


6.34 Explosive Materials — These include explosives, 
blasting agents, and detonators. This term includes, but 
is not limited to, dynamite and other high explosives; 
slurries, emulsions and water gels; black powder and 
pellet powder; initiating explosives; detonators 
(blasting caps); safety fuse; detonating cord; igniter 
cord; and igniters. 


6.35 Explosive Range — This is the range of 
concentration over which a particular vapour or gas will 
be conducive for propagation of flames (see also 
‘Flammability Limits’). 


78 


6.36 Explosive Train — Series of explosive substances 
arranged according to decreasing sensitivity and 
increasing power or brisance so as to enable a small 
impulse from an initiator explosive develops intoa 
sufficient powerful impulse through the medium of 
intermediate explosives which will be sufficient to 
cause detonation of the main explosive filling or 
explosive charge. 


6.37 Explosives, Classification of — Explosives may 
be classified into three distinct classes of materials 
according to their functioning characteristics, such as: 


6.37.1 Primary Explosives or Initiatory Explosives are 
those which explode or detonate on application of small 
external energy produced by friction, sudden impact, or 
heat, for example, mercury fulminate lead azide, lean 
styphanate, etc. 


6.37.2 Low Explosives or Propellants are those which 
undergo auto-combustion at rates that may vary from a 
few centimetres per minute to 400 m/sec. Examples of 
these are gunpowder, NC powders and colloidal 
propellants containing nitrocellulose and nitroglycerine 
with or without other ingredients. 


6.37.3 High Explosives — These explosives are 
comparatively less sensitive than primary explosives 
butwhen suitably initiated, undergo very rapid, almost 
instantaneous, decomposition, with velocity of 
detonation which may vary from 1 000 m/sec 
to 8 500 m/sec. Common example of these are TNT, 
cyclonites, dynamites, etc. 


F 


6.38 Fireworks — Combustible or explosive 
compositions or manufactured articles designed and 
prepared for the purpose of producing audible or visible 
effects. 


6.39 Flammability Limit — A flame can propagate in 
a mixture of combustible gas and air (or oxygen) only 
if the concentration of the gas is between two limits 
known as the lower and upper flammable (exposure) 
limits. 


6.40 Flare — A pyrotechnic device designed to 
produce a single source of intense light. 


6.41 Flash Point — The lowest temperature of a liquid 
at which a flame can be propagated across the surface 
of the liquid when a standard ignition source is applied. 


6.42 Flashless Powders — Explosive substances 
which give no visible flash in daylight and only a red 
glow at night. The flashlessness is effected by reducing 
the explosion temperature by the addition of DNT, 
powdered metal, metallic salt, etc. 


6.43 Fuse 


6.43.1 A tube, casing or cord, etc, filled with 
combustible material or explosive material by means 
ofwhich an explosive charge is initiated. 


6.43.2 A mechanical device containing primary 
explosives with or without booster explosive charge 
designed to function a projectile, a bomb or a mine at a 
predetermined time and place. 


G 


6.44 Gaine — A device used for converting the flash 
produced by an igniferous fuze into a detonation wave 
required to accomplish complete detonation of the high 
explosive charge in a shell. 


H 


6.45 High Explosives — Explosive materials that can 
be caused to detonate by means of a blasting cap. A few 
examples of high explosives would be boosters, 
detonators, dynamite, water  gels/slurries, and 
emulsions. 


6.46 HME — Home Made Explosives; a combination 
of commercially available ingredients combined to 
create an explosive substance. 


I 


6.47 Igniter — A device filled with combustible or 
explosive material used for igniting safety fuse or 
initiating an explosive charge. 


6.48 Ignition — The initiation of an explosive or 
flammable mixture of gases, vapours or other 
substances. 


6.49 Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health 
(IDLH) — An IDLH level represents the maximum 
airborne concentration of a substance to which a healthy 
person can be exposed for as long as 30 minutes and 
still be able to escape without loss of life or irreversible 
organ system damage. 


6.50 Improvised Explosive Device — A delivery 
system to deliver an explosive charge using items or 
methods not initially designed for this purpose. 


6.51 Initiating Explosive — Compounds that are 
sufficiently sensitive to friction, heat or impact, to 
undergo detonation or combustion under such physical 
causes. These possess more or less capacity to transmit 
a detonation wave to less sensitive explosives. 


79 


IS 4155 : 2023 


6.52 Intermediaries — High explosives used to pick 
up the small but concentrated shock given by the 
initiator and transform it into a violent impulse to 
detonate the shell filling. Their sensitiveness lies 
between that of the initiators and of bursting charges. 


L 


6.53 Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) — The minimum 
percent by volume of flammable vapour in air below 
which flame will not propagate in the mixture. see also 
‘Explosive Range’ and ‘Flammability Limit’. 


M 


6.54 Military Explosives — Items of equipment 
designed primarily for military offensive or defensive 
operations. A few examples of military explosives are 
M6 military electric detonators, M112 demolition 
charge, C4, TNT, and TOW blast simulators. 


6.55 Mortar Test — A test employed for measuring 
relative power of an explosive in comparison with a 
standard explosive. 


N 


6.56 Nitrating Mixture — Mixture of nitric acid and 
sulphuric acid with or without varying amounts of 
water, used in the manufacture of explosives by 
nitration process. 


6.57 Nitroglycerin — An explosive chemical 
compound that is used as a sensitizer in dynamite. 


(0) 


6.58 Oxidizer or Oxidizing Material — A substance, 
such as nitrate, that readily yields oxygen or other 
oxidizing substances to stimulate the combustion of 
organic matter or other fuel. 


P 


6.59 PBIED — An IED worn by a person, such as a 
vest, belt, backpack, etc., in which the person houses 
the whole IED or principle IED components and/or 
serves as the delivery or concealment means for 
explosives with an initiating device. 


6.60 Percussion — Initiation of primary explosive 
charge by impact striking to produce a spark or an initial 
impulse to explode an explosive charge. 


6.61 Permissible Explosives — Explosives permitted 
to be used in gassy mines. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


6.62 Primer — A device containing explosives used to 
ignite a secondary explosive, etc. 


6.63 Propellant — A low explosive in which the rate 
of energy release by auto-combustion can be controlled 
within limit (which may vary from a few centimetres 
per minute to 400 metres per second) and which will 
thus produce moderately high and sustained gas 
pressure for imparting acceleration to the projectile or 
the missile. 


6.64 Pyrotechnics — Any combustible or explosive 
compositions or manufactured articles designed and 
prepared for the purpose of producing audible or visible 
effects. 


S 


6.65 Safety Fuse — It consists of a train of slow 
burning gunpowder enclosed in waterproof covering 
and used for initiation of a detonator or an explosive 
charge from a safe distance. 


6.66 Secondary Device — An explosive device set to 
detonate after arrival of first responders. The purpose of 
the device is to injure emergency responders. 


6.67 Shock Wave — A compression wave caused by 
sudden rise of pressure due to release of large quantity 
of gaseous products at high temperature resulting from 
decomposition of the explosive material. 


6.68 Small Arms Ammunition Primers — Small 
percussion-sensitive explosive charges encased in a cap 
or capsule and used to ignite propellant powder. 


6.69 Smokeless Propellant (Smokeless Powder) — 
Solid propellant, commonly called smokeless powder 
in the trade, used in small-arms ammunition, cannons, 
rockets, propellant-actuated powder devices, etc. 


80 


6.70 Spontaneous Ignition — Many substances 
combine with atmospheric oxygen at ordinary 
temperature and liberate heat. If the heat is liberated 
faster than it is dissipated, a fire can start. This process 
is called spontaneous ignition. 


6.71 Stabilizer — Substances, such as diphenylamine 
centralities which are added to explosives, such as 
nitrocellulose and nitroglycerine to prevent them from 
gradual decomposition due to storage. These additives 
neutralize the nitric acid produced thus preventing 
enhanced degradation rates. 


6.72 Susceptibility to Spontaneous Ignition (SSI) — 
The tendency to undergo spontaneous ignition (see 
Spontaneous Ignition). 


6.73 Sympathetic Detonation — Detonation caused 
by transmission of a high energy shock wave through 
air emanating from one explosive charge to another 
explosive charge at some distance resultingin the 
detonation of the latter. 


T 


6.74 Trauzl Lead Block Test — A test based on the 
volume of the cavity produced when a given weight of 
an explosive is fired in a bore-hole in a lead block of 
specific dimensions. 


Vv 


6.75 VBIED — An IED delivered by any small ground- 
based vehicle (e.g. passenger vehicle, motorcycle, 
moped, bicycle, etc.) and/or serves as the concealment 
means for explosives with an initiating device. 


6.76 Velocity of Detonation — The speed at which 
detonation travels through the mass of the explosive 
and depends upon a number of factors such as density, 
degree of confinement and temperature. 


IS 4155 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Gol, Min Of Def 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Gol 


Department of Space(—ISRO), Bengaluru 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institutes , Mumbai 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), Gwalior 


Hindustan Unilever Limited , Mumbai 


Gas Industries Association 


Indian Chemical Council , Mumbai 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum , Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


81 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. S. DAS (Alternate) 


MS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


MRP. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
Ms LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


PROF SANDIP ROY 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 


IS 4155 : 2023 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest , New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council , Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Min of Pet and 
Natural Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association 
of India 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity (I-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 
Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


DR D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
D SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT) [REPRESENTING 


DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT ), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 07 (17326). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


