IS 16091 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


TRAA MAF 
Bd dad À sa vate mA — gege s 
fafste pedana at gA 


Indian Standard 


MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN OPEN 
CHANNELS — METHOD OF SPECIFYING 
PERFORMANCE OF HYDROMETRIC 
EQUIPMENT 


ICS 17.120.20 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


September 2013 Price Group 4 


Hydrometry Sectional Committee, WRD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydrometry 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


This standard contains recommendations for a method of specifying the performance of eguipment used for the 
sensing, measuring and, as appropriate, recording of physical variables related to measurement of liguid flow in 
open channels. The process of sensing, measuring and recording hydrological phenomena reguires the conversion 
of a time related physical event or state into a numerical expression in terms relative to a standard scale of 
measurement units. 


The ultimate measure of eguipment performance is the evaluation of the uncertainty with which the eguipment 
converts the absolute value or level of the hydrological variable into a measured guantity, relative to another 
arbitrary or fixed reference datum. The suitability of a piece of eguipment, however, may also be related to the 
particular method of measurement and to the measurement freguency. The nature of the uncertainty is closely 
related to the physical method or principle employed in the process of conversion from the natural variable to the 
measured guantity. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 11655:1995 'Measurement 
of liquid flow in open channels — Method of specifying performance of hydrometric equipment’. This standard 
was modified mainly for including certain additional factors of equipment performance such as accuracy (see 7.2) 
and initial start up time (see 7.5). A clause on baud rate (see 7.8) is also introduced. The timing performance for 
conventional as well as for superior electronically controlled timing devices (see 7.9) were found under specified 
in the International standard and therefore was changed with better tolerances. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
"Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16091 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


MEASUREMENT OF LIOUID FLOW IN OPEN 
CHANNELS — METHOD OF SPECIFYING 
PERFORMANCE OF HYDROMETRIC 
EQUIPMENT 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides a method of specifying the 
performance of hydrometric equipment. It identifies, 
within a performance framework, the factors that affect 
the range of uncertainty within which the hydrological 
quantity is converted into a numerical quantity. 


This standard applies to all equipment used for 
hydrological measurement, with the exception of 
equipment used for the determination of water quality. 
The sensor, the measurement system and the recorder 
are treated as a unit, whether operated in mechanical, 
electromechanical or electronic form, or using other 
physical principles. Because hydrological variables are 
frequently determined against time, the time 
measurement device is also considered to be an integral 
part of the measurement system. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


1890 
(Part 1) : 1995 
(Part 3) : 1995 


Ouantities and units 
Space and time (third revision) 
Mechanics (second revision) 


1191 : 2003 Hydrometric determinations — 
Vocabulary and symbols (second 
revision) 

3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1191 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Influencing Factor — Condition (environmental 
or otherwise), element, or activity external to the 
measuring eguipment which may influence eguipment 
performance. 


3.2 Performance Measure — Degree to which the 
intended functions of the eguipment are accomplished. 


3.3 Range — Span of values of the guantity being 
measured or of an influencing factor. 


3.4 Conditions of Storage and Transport — Those 
conditions specified by the manufacturer under which 
eguipment may be stored and transported in an 
in-operative state and may be subjected to influences 
outside those experienced in use or operation. 


Under these conditions the eguipment may be specially 
packed or protected in whatever way considered 
appropriate by the manufacturer, in order that the 
eguipment should not suffer damage or degradation 
of performance when subseguently operated within the 
applicable range of conditions. 


3.5 Conditions for Normal Operation — Those 
conditions within which the eguipment is expected to 
measure the parameter under study in accordance with 
the appropriate criteria of performance. 


The range of operational conditions shall be defined 
by the user. 


3.6 Extreme Conditions of Eguipment Use — Those 
conditions which exceptionally lie outside the range 
normally applicable to eguipment operation, and against 
which the eguipment is provided with no special protection. 


The eguipment is expected to resume reguired 
performance levels as soon as the influencing factors 
return to within the range applicable to the operation 
mode. The limits of these conditions should be 
specified by the manufacturer. 


3.7 Hazardous Area — Area in which exist hazardous 
conditions potentially capable of endangering safety 
by whatever means. 


The danger may arise through physical location or through 
exposure to a potentially explosive atmosphere, for 
example in sewers. 


3.8 Overall Performance Level — Statement of 
expected performance of the eguipment, relative to the 
true values of the measured hydrological variable. 


IS 16091 : 2013 


3.9 Timing Performance — Statement of expected 
performance of any timing element of the eguipment 
employed to control the sampling rate or freguency. 


4 UNITS OF MEASUREMENT 


The units of measurement used in this standard are SI 
units and in accordance with 1890 (Part 1) and 1890 
(Part 3). 


5 OBJECTIVES 
The purposes of this standard are: 


a) To specify the terminology and definitions 
related to the functional performance of 
equipment used for the determination of 
hydrological data and information; 

b) To specify the requirements for statements by 
manufacturers; and 

c) Torecommend the criteria to be identified by 
users/customers at the time of ordering/ 
acquiring equipment for hydrological 
measurement purposes. 


6 EQUIPMENT PERFORMANCE 


6.1 Influencing Factors 


Before choosing equipment for measurement purposes, 
the user should ascertain that the equipment shall 
provide the required operational performance relative 
to the chosen method of measurement under the range 
of factors which may influence that performance. These 
influencing factors are as follows. 


6.1.1 Atmospheric Conditions 


a) Ambient temperature; 

b) Atmospheric humidity; 

c) Atmospheric pressure; 

d) Atmospheric quality (for 
atmospheric contaminants); 

e) Atmospheric precipitation; 

f) Solar radiation; 

g) Wind speed; 

h) Environmental electrical discharges (natural 
and man-made); and 

j) Electromagnetic interference. 


example 


6.1.2 Aquatic Conditions 


a) Water temperature; 

b) Water pressure; and 

c) Water quality (for example pH, suspended 
solids, conductivity, visible oil). 


6.1.3 Mechanical Factors 


a) Operating position; 
b) Vibration; and 


c) Mechanical shock. 
6.1.4 Other Factors 


a) Nature of energy source; 
b) Level of biological activity; 


c) Electrical interference through ground or 
water; 


d) Operator skill; and 
e) Standards of operational maintenance. 


6.2 Range of Values of Influencing Factors 


Manufacturers supplying equipment for hydrometric 
measurement purposes, either as complete 
measurement systems or as elements of such systems, 
shall provide statements of the limiting ranges of values 
for each of the influencing factors listed in A-1 to A-3. 


Annex A presents the following three equipment 
situations for which ranges of influencing factors shall 
be provided: 


a) Equipment storage and transport, when the 
equipment is in an in-operative state; 

b) Equipment use when required to produce a 
functional signal only; and 

c) Equipment operation when required to 
produce data within the performance limits 
declared by the manufacturer and in 
accordance with the requirements of 7. 


Equipment operating in accordance with this standard 
shall show no permanent damage or degradation of 
performance when, whether in operative or in use, it is 
subjected to conditions where one or more of the 
influencing factors assumes a value within the limiting 
values of any of the ranges assigned for the equipment 
during a specified time. If no time limit is specified, it 
should be assumed that such conditions apply for an 
indefinite time. On re-establishment of conditions in 
which values of the influencing factors lie within the 
operating range, the equipment is expected to operate 
within the stated performance limits. 


It is recommended that the user and the manufacturer 
use the checklist form as given in Annex A, in order to 
clearly identify all environmental and other influencing 
factors which may affect equipment performance. 


It is further recommended that there be discussion 
between the manufacturer and the user in order to 
identify any combination of factors that may result in 
abnormal effects. 


7 OVERALL EQUIPMENT PERFORMANCE 


7.1 General 


The user shall state the allowable tolerance on any 


single parameter/measurement which lies within the 
operational range, subject to all influencing factor 
values lying within the range of operational use. The 
allowable tolerance may vary from one part of the range 
to another, in which case the user shall state both 
allowable tolerance values and the sub-division of the 
operational range over which any specific tolerance 
value applies. 


The manufacturer shall state the performance 
characteristics of the eguipment over the full 
operational range reguired by the user. 


7.2 Accuracy 


Accuracy is qualitative expression for the closeness of 
a measured value to the true value. Accuracy is 
generally expressed as a percentage of the full-scale 
range/operating range. 


7.3 Resolution 


The resolution of a device is its ability to define the 
value of a parameter, as qualified by the degree of 
discrimination possible (Resolution may be specified 
in either absolute terms or relative terms; for example 
+ 10 mm, + 0.5 percent of full scale, 1 ppm.). 


7.4 Repeatability 


The repeatability is the ability of a device to provide 
the same measurement response when sensing the same 
absolute parameter values on different occasions, and 
when operating under identical influence factor 
conditions. 


7.5 Initial Start-Up Time 


It is the time required after an installation/an initial 
start-up for an equipment/instrument to reach its steady 
state. It may be specified by manufacturer in terms of 
seconds. 


7.6 Response Time 


Response time is the time taken by the device to react 
to changes in the value of the parameter to be measured 
(Response time may be given in terms of seconds to 
register a specified proportion of change in the 
parameter value.). 


7.7 Uncertainty 


The uncertainty is an estimate characterizing the range 
of values within which the true value of the parameter 
being measured lies when operating within the 
operational range of influencing factors. The value of 
uncertainty applies only when operating under steady 
state conditions, and may be indicated in absolute or 
relative terms. 


IS 16091 : 2013 


7.8 Baud Rate 


Baud is a unit to measure data flow on a communication 
path, eguivalent to one bit per second. Baud rate is the 
speed at which data is transmitted over a 
communications line between devices. Baud rate may 
be specified by manufacturer in terms of bauds. 


7.9 Timing Performance 
7.9.1 General Comments 


The user shall state the allowable tolerance on the 
measurement of reference time (real or elapsed) by 
any timing unit which controls the operation of the 
eguipment. 


7.9.2 Timing Performance for Conventional Timing 
Devices 


This standard recommends specifying timing 
performance as given below, when using conventional 
mechanical timing devices. 


7.9.2.1 Timing performance for eguipment in storage 
and transport 


Not applicable. 


7.9.2.2 Timing performance for eguipment operation 
under extreme conditions 


Tolerances are to be stated by the manufacturer. 


7.9.2.3 Timing performance for normal eguipment 
operation 


Tolerances are as follows: 


a) For any 24h period — Reference time + one 
part in 1 500 (+ 1 min, approximately); 

b) For any 30 days period — Reference time + 
one part in 1 5000 (+ 3 min, approximately). 


7.9.3 Timing Performance for Superior Electronically 
Controlled Timing Devices 


This standard recommends specifiying timing 
performance as follows when using superior 
electronically controlled timing devices. 


7.9.3.1 Timing performance for eguipment in storage 
and transport 


Not applicable. 


7.9.3.2 Timing performance for eguipment operation 
under extreme conditions 


Tolerances are to be stated by the manufacturer. 


7.9.3.3 Timing performance for normal eguipment 
operation 


Tolerances are as follows: 


IS 16091 : 2013 


a) For any 24h period — Reference time + one 
part in 18 000 (+ 5 s, approximately); and 

b) For any 30 days period — Reference time + 
one part in 180 000 (+ 15 s, approximately). 


7.9.4 Other Devices 


Eguipment which incorporates timing control systems 
capable of operating at the superior performance level 
should be designated with the suffix notation/SPT 
(superior performance timing). 


7.10 Reliability 


For eguipment whose age is outside the initial warranty 
period and which has been maintained and operated 
in accordance with the  manufacturer's 
recommendations, the manufacturer shall state the 
expected mean time between failures and the basis of 
its determination. 


7.11 Period of Unattended Operation 


The user shall state requirements for the period of 
unattended operation. The manufacturer shall state the 
maximum period over which the equipment is capable 
of operation without exhaustion of energy supply, 
saturation of the equipment data storage or memory 
under specified requirements of operation, or within 
which the equipment shall operate without required 
adjustment or loss of performance. 


7.12 Remote Check Calibration 


Where equipment is to be operated remotely, the user 
may specify requirements for remote check calibration, 
either from a central control station or automatically 
at the measuring location. 


7.13 Manufacturer’s Certification 


The manufacturer shall provide the necessary 
certificate of calibration evaluating the performance 
characteristics listed in 7.2, 7.3 and 7.4, where 
applicable. 


8 DATA OUTPUT FORMATS 


This standard does not specify the design of interfaces 
for the removal of data recorded by the equipment, 
nor the format of the data output; nevertheless the 
manufacturer should use approved and commonly 
adopted interfaces and data formats. Where data are 
held in solid-state memory, the equipment should be 
capable of releasing data at a rate of not less than 9 600 


baud. However, the ‘Maximum cable length’ that can 
be used for data transmission shall depend on the Baud 
rate. Higher the Baud rate, lesser shall be the 
“Maximum cable length’. The manufacturer may 
specify the Baud rate as well as the ‘Maximum cable 
length’ for the specified Baud rate. 


9 ENERGY REQUIREMENT 


The manufacturer shall state the energy requirement 
of the equipment in terms of voltage and current 
consumption for its various operational states, for 
example during quiescent periods, during sampling and 
data recovery. The manufacturer shall state the expected 
life of battery operated equipment when operating 
under normal conditions. 


10 USER REQUIREMENTS 


In any contract, the user is required to state the 
following. 


10.1 Requirements in Terms of Equipment 
Performance 


See 7.2 to 7.9. 


10.2 Primary Characteristics of the Hydrological 
Phenomena to be Measured 


a) Maximum and minimum parameter values 
likely to be encountered at the measurement 
site; 

b) Maximum and minimum parameter values 
(that is, the range) to be detected/indicated 
and, as appropriate, recorded; and 

c) Maximum rate of change to be accommodated 
by the equipment (this may be stated as a 
single maximum rate over a given period of 
time, or as differential rates which correspond 
to different time periods). 


10.3 Attenuation of Oscillations in Hydrological 
Phenomena, if Necessary 


Specific requirements stating the degree and nature of 
the attenuation shall be given. 


10.4 Required Frequency of Sampling of the 
Hydrological Parameters 


User requirements shall normally fall within the accepted 
regulations of recognized International Organizations 
(for example the World Meteorological Organization). 


IS 16091 : 2013 


ANNEXA 
(Clause 6.2) 


RECOMMENDED CHECKLIST 


A-0 This annex presents a checklist recommended 
for agreement between the user and the manufacturer 
as to the values of the environmental factors which 
may influence the performance of hydrometric 
eguipment. 


It covers the transport and storage of the eguipment, 
the limiting conditions for use of the eguipment and 
the conditions for normal operation of the 
eguipment. 


A-1 RECORD OF THE ATMOSPHERIC 
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS WHICH MAY 
INFLUENCE THE PERFORMANCE OF 
HYDROMETRIC EOUIPMENT 


A-1.1 Ambient Temperature — Range Limits 


A-1.1.1 Range Limits of Temperature During 
Eguipment Storage and Transport 


a) Upper limit, reference value+......... °C; and 
b) Lower limit, reference value - .......... °C, 


A-1.1.2 Range Limits of Temperature for Extreme 
Conditions of Use 


a) Upper limit, reference value + ....... °C; and 
b) Lower limit, reference value - ....... °C. 


A-1.1.3 Range Limits of Temperature for Normal 
Operation 


a) Upper limit, reference value + … … °C; and 
b) Lower limit, reference value - ....... °C. 


A-1.2 Atmospheric Humidity — Range Limits 


Because extreme values of both temperature and 
humidity are not likely to occur simultaneously, the 
manufacturer may specify the time period over which 
these values may be applied and shall specify the limits 
of the combination, if any, for continuous operation. 


A-1.2.1 Range Limits of Relative Humidity for Storage 
and Transport of Eguipment 


a) Upper limit, to be stated by the manufacturer; 
and 
b) Lower limit, to be stated by the manufacturer. 
A-1.2.2 Range Limits of Relative Humidity for Extreme 
Conditions of Equipment Use and for Normal 
Operation 
a) Upper limit:.................... percent 
(without condensation); 


b) Lowerlimit:.................... percent 
(without condensation). 


NOTE — Ranges of relative humidity for extreme 
conditions of eguipment use and for normal operation 
are identical unless otherwise stated by the 
manufacturer. 


A-1.3 Atmospheric Pressure — Range Limits 


A-1.3.1 Range Limits of Atmospheric Pressures for 
Storage and Transport 


a) Upper limit, to be stated by the manufacturer; 
and 


b) Lower limit, to be stated by the manufacturer. 


NOTE — Special precautions may be necessary in the 
event of transport by air freight. 


A-1.3.2 Range Limits of Atmospheric Pressures for 
Extreme Conditions of Equipment Use and for Normal 
Operation 


a) Upper limit, local mean atmospheric pressure 


EEEN hPa; 
b) Lower limit, local mean atmospheric pressure 
monika eenen hPa. 


NOTE — The ranges of atmospheric pressure for 
extreme conditions of equipment use and for normal 
operation are identical unless otherwise stated by the 
manufacturer. 


A-1.4 Atmospheric Quality — Range Limits 


(with reference to the content of contaminating gas, 
vapour, sand or dust particles, salt spray, etc) 


The ranges of values for atmospheric quality, whether 
relative to equipment storage, transport or operation, 
are likely to be identical. 


NOTE — While under ideal circumstances the atmospheric 
concentration of any contaminant would be negligible, it should 
theoretically be taken into account in this standard. Equipment 
may be required to operate in atmospheres subject to varying 
degrees of contamination. Under these circumstances the user 
should identify the contaminant or contaminants and their 
likely maximum levels in order that the manufacturer may 
indicate the suitability of his product for that application or 
state upper range limits for these contaminants. 


A-1.5 Atmospheric Precipitation — Maximum 
Levels 


Ranges are to be provided in units of millimetres per 
hour (mm/h) or in millimetres per day (mm/d) 
according to whether the hydrological measurements 
shall be affected by short-term (storm-type) 


IS 16091 : 2013 


precipitation phenomena or by cumulative precipitation 
over a longer period. 


A-1.5.1 Maximum Levels of Atmospheric Precipitation 
for Storage and Transport 


The upper limit of allowable atmospheric precipitation 
(if appropriate) is to be stated by the manufacturer. 


A-1.5.2 Maximum Levels of Atmospheric Precipitation 
for Extreme Conditions of Equipment Use and for 
Normal Operation 


The maximum values of atmospheric precipitation for 
extreme conditions of equipment use and for normal 
operation are likely to be identical and, if relevant, 
should be defined by the user. 


A-1.6 Solar Radiation — Maximum Levels 


A-1.6. 1 Maximum Solar Radiation Levels for Storage 
and Transport 


Upper limit, to be stated by the manufacturer. 


A-1.6.2 Maximum Solar Radiation Levels for Extreme 
Conditions of Equipment Use and for Normal 
Operation 


Upper limit, ............. W/m? (energy-related 
illumination) 

or 
EE J/m? (energy-related exposure) 


NOTES 


1 The combined heating effect of solar radiation plus ambient 
temperature should not cause the surface temperature of any 
of the component elements of the equipment to exceed the 
range limits of ambient temperature alone. 


2 The maximum solar radiation levels for extreme conditions 
of equipment use and for normal operation are identical unless 
otherwise stated by the manufacturer. 


A-1.7 Maximum Wind Speed 


A-1.7.1 Maximum Wind Speeds and Direction for 
Storage and Transport 


If relevant, any precautions to protect equipment during 
storage and transport shall be stated by the 
manufacturer. 


A-1.7.2 Maximum Wind Speeds and Direction Relative 
to Extreme Conditions of Equipment Use and to Normal 
Operation 


Only those elements of the equipment likely to be 
exposed to wind are subject to this recommendation. 
Measurements of wind speed and direction applicable 
to this clause are to be measured in the immediate 
proximity and at the same height as the equipment. 


Upper limit, based on the local maximum hourly 
recorded wind speed 


bina; percent for gusting effects. 


NOTE — Maximum wind speeds and direction relative to 
extreme conditions of eguipment use and to normal operation 
are identical, unless otherwise stated by the manufacturer. 


A-1.8 Environmental Electrical Discharges or 
Electrical or Electromagnetic Field Strengths or 
Other Radiation — Range Limits 


a) Upper level, to be stated by the manufacturer; 
and 


b) Lower level, no measurable value. 


NOTE — The ranges of values of electrical discharges, 
electrical or electromagnetic field strengths, etc, 
whether relative to eguipment storage, transport, 
extreme conditions of eguipment use or normal 
operation, are likely to be identical. 


A-2 AOUATIC ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS 
WHICH MAY INFLUENCE THE PERFORMANCE 
OF HYDROMETRIC EOUIPMENT 


NOTE — These factors affect only such elements of the 
eguipment which are in contact with or immersed in water 
during normal operation. Thus they do not apply to conditions 
for storage and transport. 


A-2.1 Water Temperature — Range Limits for 
Extreme Conditions of Eguipment Use and for 
Normal Operation 


a) Upper limit: t................ Cn 
b) Lower limit: —................. °C; 


NOTE — Water temperature ranges relative to extreme 
conditions of equipment use and to normal operation 
are identical unless otherwise stated by the 
manufacturer. 


A-2.2 Water Pressure — Range Limits 


A-2.2.1 Range of Values for Water Pressure Relative 
to Extreme Conditions of Equipment Use 


a) Upper limit, upper operational range limit + 
50 percent; 
b) Lower limit, 0 gauge pressure. 


A-2.2.2 Range of Values for Water Pressure Relative 
to Normal Equipment Operation 


a) Upper limit, and to be determined by the 
manufacturer but normally not less than 10m 
H,O (1 m H,O = 9.806 65 Pa); and 

b) Lower limit, 0 gauge pressure. 


A-2.3 Water Quality — Range Limits 


These limits refer to the content of dissolved solids, 
the presence of contaminants, dissolved gases, miscible 
or immiscible liquids, or suspended solids. 


A-2.3.1 Range Limits of Components Affecting Water 
Quality for Extreme Conditions of Equipment Use and 
for Normal Operation 


The range limits of water guality parameters relative 
to extreme conditions of eguipment use and for normal 
operation are likely to be identical. 


While under ideal conditions the content of dissolved 
miscible, immiscible or suspended matter is likely to 
be minimal, natural waters contain highly variable 
levels of a wide range of matter. Under these 
circumstances the user shall specifically identify each 
component of interest affecting the water guality, in 
order that the manufacturer may indicate the suitability 
of his product for that application or state upper range 
limits for those components. 


The components affecting water guality which are most 
freguently met in natural waters may be assigned 
limiting values. 


A-2.3.2 Range Limits of pH Values for Extreme 
Conditions of Eguipment Use and for Normal 
Operation 


a) Upper level: pH.............. ; and 
b) Lower level: pH .............. 


A-2.3.3 Maximum Level of Suspended Solids for 
Extreme Conditions of Equipment Use and for Normal 
Operation 


Upper value: .............. mg/l. 


In certain cases, it may be necessary to indicate the 
presence of bed or wash loads and floating solids. 


A-2.3.4 Maximum Level of Conductivity for Extreme 
Conditions of Eguipment Use and for Normal 
Operation 


Upper value: … … … US. 


A-3 MECHANICAL FACTORS WHICH MAY 
INFLUENCE THE PERFORMANCE OF 
HYDROMETRIC EOUIPMENT 


A-3.1 Operating Position — Range Limits 


In the case of certain items of hydrometric eguipment, 
their performance is sensitive to the operating position. 
The manufacturer shall state the recommended 
operating position and the acceptable tolerance during 
operation. 


IS 16091 : 2013 


For eguipment whose performance is not sensitive to 
orientation, no specification of operating position is 
reguired. 


A-3.2 Vibration — Maximum Level 


The maximum level of mechanical vibration applicable 
to equipment in all modes of storage, transport and 
operation is likely to be identical. 


Upper limit, to be stated by the manufacturer. 
A-3.3 Mechanical Shock — Maximum Level 


A-3.3.1 Maximum Level of Mechanical Shock During 
Equipment Storage and Transport 


The manufacturer shall specify the mode of packaging 
to obviate damage. 


A-3.3.2 Maximum Level of Mechanical Shock During 
Extreme Conditions of Equipment Use and During 
Normal Operation 


a) Upper limit, to be stated by the manufacturer; 
b) Recommended maximum upper limit: 
.........g.m/s in any three mutually 
perpendicular axes. 
NOTE — The maximum levels of mechanical shock relative 


to extreme conditions of eguipment use and to normal operation 
are likely to be identical. 


A-4 POWER SOURCE FLUCTUATIONS — 
RANGE LIMITS 


Eguipment operated through a power source drawn 
from a national supply utility may be sensitive, 


a) to fluctuations in supply voltage; and 
b) to fluctuations in supply freguency. 


The manufacturer shall state whether the eguipment is 
sensitive to fluctuations of the above factors and 
accordingly specify the limits on the reference values 
of voltage and freguency. Manufacturer shall also state 
whether the eguipment has built-in over voltage and 
surge protection on power supply lines, sensor wires, 
all I/O contacts and data communication interface. 


Where batteries are employed as power sources, the 
range of voltage for proper performance of the 
eguipment shall be specified by the manufacturer. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enguiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 01 (389). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central  : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western  : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


