lS/lSO 14001:2004

WdPl+%q

wPkAmRH31-kN
(~
ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

2Pf~~)

Indian Standard MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS -- WITH GUIDANCE FOR USE ( First Revision)

ICS

13.020.10

@ BIS 2005

BUREAU
MANAK BHAVAN,

OF
9 NEW

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

February

2005

Price Group 9

Environmental

Management

Sectional

Committee,

CHD 34

NATIONAL

FOREWORD (First Revision) which is identical with ISO 14001:2004 with guidance for use' issued by the by the Bureau of Indian Standards Committee in 1997 `Environmental management for of the

This Indian Standard systems -- Standardization Environmental 1S/1S0 14001

Requirements Management was originally

International

Organization

(ISO) was adopted

on the recommendations Division Council. adopting

Sectional published

and approval of the Chemical under dual number :2004. standard

first edition of is

ISO 14001. With the publication

of second edition of ISO 14001 in line with ISO 14001

in 2004, the revision of 1S/1S0 14001

taken up for updating the standard The text of ISO Standard

has been approved

as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard

without Attention

deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard,

they should

be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma practice (,) has been used as a decimal (.) as the decimal marker marker. while in Indian Standards, the current

is to use a point

1S/1S0 14001:2004

~

Contents
1

Page

Scope ................................................................................................................................................ .... Normative references .......................................................................................................................... .......................................................................................................................... system requirements ..........................................................................

1 1 1 4 4 4 4 5 7 9 10 19 23

2 3 4 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6

Terms and definitions Environmental

management

General requirements Environmental Planning policy

......................................................................................................................... ..........................................................................................................................

.................................................................................................................................... ........... and operation ...........................................................................................................

Implementation Checking

.................................................................................................................................... .......... review ............................................................................................................................ on the use of this International between ISO 14001:2004 Standard ......................................... .......................

Management

Annex A (informative) Annex B (informative) Bibliography

Guidance

Correspondence

and ISO 9001:2000

.............................................................................................................................................. .

i

1S/1S0 14001:2004

Introduction
Organizations of all kinds are increasingly concerned with achieving and demonstrating sound environmental performance by controlling the impacts of their activities, products and services on the environment, consistent with their environmental policy and objectives. They do so in the context of increasingly stringent legislation, the development of economic policies and other measures that foster environmental protection, and increased concern expressed by interested parties about environmental matters and sustainable development. "reviews" or "audits" to assess their environmental Many organizations have undertaken environmental performance. On their own, however, these "reviews" and "audits" may not be sufficient to provide an organization with the assurance that its performance not only meets, but will continue to meet, its legal and policy requirements. To be effective, they need to be conducted within a structured management system that is integrated within the organization. international Standards covering environmental management are intended to provide organizations with the elements of an effective environmental management system (EMS) that can be integrated with other management requirements and help organizations achieve environmental and economic goals. These standards, like other International Standards, are not intended to be used to create non-tariff trade barriers or to increase or change an organization's legal obligations. This International Standard specifies requirements for an environmental management system to enable an organization to develop and implement a policy and objectives which take into account legal requirements and information about significant environmental aspects. H is intended to apply to all types and sizes of organization and to accommodate diverse geographical, cultural and social conditions. The basis of the approach is shown from all levels and functions of the in Figure 1. The success of the system depends on commitment organization, and especially from top management. A system of this kind enables an organization to develop an environmental policy, establish objectives and processes to achieve the policy commitments, take action as needed to improve its performance and demonstrate the conformity of the system to the requirements of this International Standard, The overall aim of this International Standard is to support environmental protection and prevention of pollution in balance with socio-economic needs. It should be noted that many of the requirements can be addressed concurrently or revisited at any time. The second edition of this International Standard is focused on clarification of the first edition, and has taken due consideration of the provisions of ISO 9001 to enhance the compatibility of the two standards for the benefit of the user community. For ease of use, the subclause numbers in Clause 4 of the body of this International Standard and in Annex A have been related. For example, 4.3.3 and A.3.3 both deal with objectives, targets and programmed, and 4.5.5 and A.5.5 both deal with internal audit. In addition, Annex B identifies broad technical correspondences between ISO 14001:2004 and ISO 9001:2000 and vice versa. There is an important distinction between this International Standard, which describes the requirements for an organization's environmental management system and can be used for certificatiordregistration and/or selfdeclaration of an organization's environmental management system, and a non-certifiable guideline intended to provide generic assistance to an organization for establishing, implementing or improving an environmental management system. Environmental management encompasses a full range of issues, including those with Demonstration of successful implementation of this International strategic and competitive implications. Standard can be used by an organization to assure interested parties that an appropriate environmental management system is in place. Guidance on supporting environmental management techniques is contained in other International Standards, particularly those on environmental management in the documents established by LSO/TC 207. Any reference to other International Standards is for information only.

ii

1S/1S0 14001:2004

NOTE This International Standard briefly described as follows.

is based on the methodology

known as Plan-Do-Check-Act

(PDCA).

PDCA can be

-- Plan: establish the objectives
environmental policy.

and processes

necessary

to deliver

results

in accordance

with the organization's

-- Do: implement the processes. .
Check: monitor and measure processes requirements, and report the results. against environmental policy, objectives, targets, legal and other

-- Act: take actions to continually

improve performance

of the environmental

management

system,

Many organizations manage their operations via the application of a system of processes and their interactions, which can be referred to as the "process approach". ISO 9001 promotes the use of the process approach. Since PDCA can be applied to all processes, the two methodologies are considered to be compatible.

Figure 1 -- Environmental

management

system model for this International

Standard

This International Standard contains only those requirements that can be objectively audited. Those organizations requiring more general guidance on a broad range of environmental management system issues are referred to ISO 14004. This International Standard does not establish absolute requirements for environmental performance beyond the commitments, in the environmental policy, to comply with applicable legal requirements and with other requirements to which the organization subscribes, to prevention of pollution and to continual improvement. Thus, two organizations carrying out similar operations but having different environmental performance can both conform to its requirements. The adoption and implementation of a range of environmental management techniques in a systematic manner can contribute to optimal outcomes for all interested parties. However, adoption of this International Standard will not in itself guarantee optimal environmental outcomes. In order to achieve environmental objectives, the environmental management system can encourage organizations to consider implementation of the best

...
Ill

1S/1S0 14001:2004

available techniques, where appropriate effectiveness of such techniques.

and where economically

viable, and fully take into account the cost-

This International Standard does not include requirements specific to other management systems, such as those for quality, occupational health and safety, financial or risk management, though its elements can be aligned or integrated with those of other management systems. It is possible for an organization to adapt its existing management system(s) in order to establish an environmental management system that conforms to the requirements of this International Standard. It is pointed out, however, that the application of various elements of the management system might differ depending on the intended purpose and the interested parties involved, The level of detail and complexity of the environmental management system, the extent of documentation and the resources devoted to it depend on a number of factors, such as the scope of the system, the size of an organization and the nature of its activities, products and services. This may be the case in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises.

iv

lS/lSO 14001:2004

Indian Standard ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS -- WITH GUIDANCE FOR USE ( First Revision)
1 Scope
This International Standard specifies requirements for an environmental management system to enable an organization to develop and implement a policy and objectives which take into account legal requirements and other requirements to which the organization subscribes, and information about significant environmental aspects. It applies to those environmental aspects that the organization identifies as those which it can control and those which it can influence. It does not itself state specific environmental performance criteria. This International a) b) c) Standard is applicable to any organization that wishes to management system,

establish, implement,

maintain and improve an environmental with its stated environmental with this International policy,

assure itself of conformity demonstrate conformity

Standard by or having an interest in the organization, such as

1) making a self-determination 2) seeking confirmation customers, or seeking confirmation

and self-declaration,

of its conformance

by parties

3) 4)

of its self-declaration

by a party external to the organization, management

or

seeking certification/registration
in this International

of its environmental
Standard are

system by an external organization.
into any environmental

All the requirements
management system.

intended

to be incorporated

such as the environmental policy of the organization, the nature of its activities, products and services and the location where and the conditions in which it functions. This International Standard also provides, in Annex A, informative guidance on its use.
The extent of the application depends on factors

2

Normative

references
identical with the

No normative references are cited. This clause is included in order to retain clause numbering previous edition (ISO 14001:1996),

3

Terms

and definitions
the following terms and definitions apply,

For the purposes of this document,

3.1 auditor person with the competence to conduct an audit [ISO 9000:2000, 3.9.9]

3.2 continual improvement recurring process of enhancing the environmental improvements in overall environmental performance environmental policy (3,1 1)

management system (3.8) in order to achieve (3.10) consistent with the organization's (3.16)

1S/1S0 14001:2004

NOTE

The process need not take place in all areas of activity simultaneously.

3.3 corrective action (3.15) action to eliminate the cause of a detected nonconformity 3.4 document information and its supporting medium
electronic or optical computer disc, photograph or master sample, or a

NOTE 1 The medium combination thereof. NOTE 2

can be paper, magnetic,

Adapted from ISO 9000:2000,

3.7.2.

3.5 environment surroundings in which an organization fauna, humans, and their interrelation
NOTE Surroundings

(3.16) operates,

including

air, water, land, natural

resources,

flora,

in this context extend from within an organization

(3.16) to the global system.

3.6 environmental aspect (3,16) activities or products or services that can interact with the environment element of an organization's (3,5)
NOTE A significant environmental

aspect has or can have a significant

environmental

impact

(3.7)

3.7 environmental impact or beneficial, wholly or partially resulting from an any change to the environment (3.5), whether adverse organization's (3.16) environmental aspects (3.6) 3.8 environmental EMS part of an organization's (3.16) management system used to develop and implement (3,1 1) and manage its environmental aspects (3.6)
NOTE 1 A management those objectives. system is a set of interrelated elements used to establish

management

system its environmental policy

policy and objectives

and to achieve

NOTE 2 A management system includes procedures (3.1 9), processes and resources.

organizational

structure,

planning

activities,

responsibilities,

PraCtlCeS,

3.9 environmental objective goal, consistent with the environmental policy (3.1 1), that an organization (3.16) sets overall environmental itself to achieve 3.10 environmental performance (3.16) management of its environmental measurable results of an organization's
NOTE (3. 16)

aspects (3.6)

In the context of environmental management environmental policy (3.1 1), environmental

systems (3.8), results can be measured against the organization's targets (3.1 2) and other objectives (3.9), environmental

environmentalperformancerequirements.

2

1S/1S0 14001:2004

3.11 environmental policy overall intentions and direction of an organization formally expressed by top management
NOTE The environmental policy provides a framework environmental targets (3.12). 3.12 environmental detailed target requirement, performance

(3.16) related to its environmental

performance

(3.10) as

for action and for the setting of environmental

objectives

(3.9) and

environmental
3.13 interested person (3,16) 3.14 internal audit party or group

objectives

(3.16) or parts thereof, that arises from the applicable to the organization (3.9) and that needs to be set and met in order to achieve those objectives

concerned

with

or affected

by the environmental

performance

(3.10) of an organization

systematic, independent and documented process for obtaining audit evidence and evaluating it objectively to determine the extent to which the environmental management system audit criteria set by the organization (3.16) are fulfilled
NOTE In many cases, particularly in smaller responsibility for the activity being audited. 3.15 nonconformity non-fulfilment [ISO 9000:2000, 3.16 organization company, corporation, of a requirement 3.6.2] organizations, independence can be demonstrated by the freedom from

incorporated
NOTE 3.17

firm, enterprise, authority or institution, or part or combination or not, public or private, that has its own functions and administration
with more than one operating unit, a single operating

thereof,

whether

For organizations

unit may be defined as an organization.

preventive action action to eliminate the cause of a potential nonconformity

(3.15)

3.18 prevention of pollution use of processes, practices, techniques, materials, products, services or energy to avoid, reduce or control (separately or in combination) the creation, emission or discharge of any type of pollutant or waste, in order to reduce adverse environmental impacts (3.7)
NOTE Prevention of pollution can include source reduction or elimination, process, product or service changes, use of resources, material and energy substitution, reuse, recovery, recycling, reclamation and treatment. 3.19 efficient

procedure specified way to carry out an activity or a process
NOTE 1 Procedures NOTE 2 can be documented or not. 3.4.5.

Adapted from LSO 9000:2000,

3

1S/1S0 14001:2004

3.20 record document
NOTE

(3,4) stating results achieved or providing evidence of activities performed

Adapted from ISO 9000:2000,3.7.6.

4

Environmental

management

system

requirements

4.1

General requirements

The organization shall establish, document, implement, maintain and continually improve an environmental management system in accordance with the requirements of this International Standard and determine how it will fulfil these requirements. The organization shall define and document the scope of its environmental management system.

4.2

Environmental

policy environmental policy and ensure that, within the defined scope

Top management shall define the organization's of its environmental management system, it a) b) c) is appropriate

to the nature, scale and environmental to continual improvement

impacts of its activities, products and services,

includes a commitment

and prevention of pollution, to which

includes a commitment to comply with applicable legal requirements and with other requirements the organization subscribes which relate to its environmental aspects, provides the framework is documented, is communicated
is available

d) e) f)
g)

for setting and reviewing environmental and maintained,

objectives and targets,

implemented

to all persons working for or on behalf of the organization,

and

to the public

4.3

Planning

4.3.1

Environmental

aspects implement and maintain a procedure(s)

The organization a)

shall establish,

to identify the environmental aspects of its activities, products and services within the defined scope of the environmental management system that it can control and those that it can influence taking into account planned or new developments, or new or modified activities, products and services, and impact(s) on the environment (i.e. significant

b) to determine those aspects that have or can have significant environmental aspects). The organization
The organization implementing

shall document
shall ensure

this information

and keep it up to date.
environmental management aspects system. are taken into account in establishing,

that the significant its environmental

and maintaining

4

JS/lSO

14001:2004

4.3.2

Legal and other requirements shall establish, implement and maintain a procedure(s) and other requirements to which the

The organization a) b)

to identify and have access to the applicable legal requirements organization subscribes related to its environmental aspects, and to determine how these requirements apply to its environmental

aspects.

The organization shall ensure that these applicable legal requirements and other requirements to which the organization subscribes are taken into account in establishing, implementing and maintaining its environmental management system.

4.3.3

Objectives,

targets and programmed environmental objectives and targets, at

The organization shall establish, implement and maintain documented relevant functions and levels within the organization.

The objectives and targets shall be measurable, where practicable, and consistent with the environmental policy, including the commitments to prevention of pollution, to compliance with applicable legal requirements and with other requirements to which the organization subscribes, and to continual improvement. When establishing and reviewing its objectives and targets, an organization shall take into account the legal requirements and other requirements to which the organization subscribes, and its significant environmental aspects. It shall also consider its technological options, its financial, operational and business requirements, and the views of interested parties. The organization shall establish, implement targets. Programmed shall include a) b) designation of responsibility organization, and the means and time-frame for achieving and maintain objectives a programmed for achieving its objectives and

and targets at relevant functions

and levels of the

by which they are to be achieved.

4.4
4.4.1

Implementation

and.operation

Resources,

roles, responsibility

and authority

Management shall ensure the availability of resources essential to establish, implement, maintain and improve the environmental management system. Resources include human resources and specialized skills, organizational infrastructure, technology and financial resources. Roles, responsibilities and authorities effective environmental management. shall be defined, documented and communicated in order to facilitate

The organization's top management shall appoint a specific management representative(s) other responsibilities, shall have defined roles, responsibilities and authority for a) b) ensuring that an environmental accordance with the requirements management system is established, of this International Standard, of the environmental implemented management

who, irrespective and maintained

of in

reporting to top management on the performance including recommendations for improvement.

system, for review,

4.4.2

Competence,

training and awareness

The organization shall ensure that any person(s) performing tasks for it or on its behalf that have the potential to cause a significant environmental impact(s) identified by the organization is (are) competent on the basis of appropriate education, training or experience, and shall retain associated records.

5

1S/1S0 14001:2004

The organization shall identify training needs associated with its environmental aspects and its environmental management system. It shall provide training or take other action to meet these needs, and shall retain associated records. The organization behalf aware of a) b) shall establish, implement and maintain a procedure(s) to make persons working for it or on its

the importance of conformity with the environmental environmental management system,

policy and procedures

and with the requirements

of the

the significant environmental aspects and related actual or potential impacts associated the environmental benefits of improved personal performance, their roles and responsibilities management system, and the potential consequences in achieving conformity with the requirements

with their work, and

c)

of the environmental

d)

of departure

from specified procedures.

4.4.3

Communication management system, the organization shall

With regard to its environmental aspects and environmental establish, implement and maintain a procedure(s) for a) b) internal communication receiving, documenting

among the various levels and functions of the organization, and responding to relevant communication from external interested parties.

The organization shall decide whether to communicate externally about its significant environmental aspects, and shall document its decision. If the decision is to communicate, the organization shall establish and implement a method(s) for this external communication.

4.4.4

Documentation management system documentation and targets, management system, management system and their interaction, and shall include .

The environmental a) b) c)

the environmental description

policy, objectives

of the scope of the environmental

description of the main elements reference to related documents, documents,

of the environmental

d) e)

including records, required by this International

Standard, and

documents, including records, determined by the organization to .- be necessary to .ensure the effective planning, operation and control of processes that relate to its significant environmental aspects.

4.4.5

Control

of documents

Documents required by the environmental management system and by this International Standard shall be controlled. Records are a special type of document and shall be controlled in accordance with the requirements given in 4.5.4. The organization a) b) c) d) e) shall establish, implement and maintain a procedure(s) to

approve documents

for adequacy

prior to issue, and re-approve documents, are identified,

review and update as necessary

ensure that changes and the current revision status of documents ensure that relevant versions of applicable ensure that documents documents

are available at points of use,

remain legible and readily identifiable,

6

1S/1S0 14001:2004

f)

ensure

that documents

and operation 9)

of external of the environmental

origin determined by the organization to be necessary for the planning management system are identified and their distribution controlled, and documents and apply suitable identification to them if they are

Prevent the unintended use of obsolete retained for any purpose.

4.4.6

Operational

control

The organization shall identify and plan those operations that are associated with the identified significant environmental aspects consistent with its environmental policy, objectives and targets, in order to ensure that they are carried out under specified conditions, by a) b) c) establishing, implementing and maintaining a documented procedure(s) absence could lead to deviation from the environmental policy, objectives stipulating the operating criteria in the procedure(s), and to control situations and targets, and where their

establishing, implementing and maintaining procedures related to the identified significant environmental aspects of goods and services used by the organization and communicating applicable procedures and requirements to suppliers, including contractors,

4.4.7

Emergency

preparedness

and response implement and maintain a procedure(s) to identify potential emergency that can have an impact(s) on the environment and how it will respond to

The organization shall establish, situations and potential accidents them. The organization shall respond associated adverse environmental

to actual impacts.

emergency

situations

and

accidents

and

prevent

or miti@e

The organization shall periodically review and, where necessary, revise its emergency preparedness response procedures, in particular, after the occurrence of accidents or emergency situations. The organization shall also periodically test such procedures where practicable.

and

4.5

Checking

4.5.1

Monitoring

and

measurement

The organization shall establish, basis, the key charac~eristics procedure(s) shall include the controls and conformity with the

implement and maintain a procedure(s) to monitor and measure, on a regular of its operations that can have a significant environmental impact. The documenting of information to monitor performance, applicable operational organization's environmental objectives awd targets. and measurement equipment is used and

The organization shall ensure that calibrated or verified monitoring maintained and shall retain associated records.

4.5.2

Evaluation

of compliance shall establish, implement legal requirements. and

4.5.2.1 Consistent with its commitment to compliance, the organization maintain a procedure(s) for periodically evaluating compliance with applicable The organization
4.5.2.2 The

shall keep records of the results of the periodic. evaluations,
shall evaluate compliance with other requirements to which it subscribes. The referred to in 4.5.2.1

organization

organization may wish to combine this evaluation with the evaluation or to establish a separate procedure(s). The organization

of legal compliance

shall keep records of the results of the periodic evaluations,

7

1S/1S0 14001:2004

4.5.3

Nonconformity,

corrective

action

and preventive

action

The organization shall establish, implement and maintain a procedure(s) for dealing with actual and potential nonconformity (ies) and for taking corrective action and preventive action. The procedure(s) shall define requirements for a) b) identifying and correcting investigating recurrence, nonconformity (ies) and taking action(s) to mitigate their environmental their cause(s) and taking actions impacts,

nonconformity

(ies), determining

in order to avoid their

c)

evaluating the need for action(s) designed to avoid their occurrence, recording the results of corrective reviewing the effectiveness shall

to prevent

nonconformity (ies) and implementing

appropriate

actions

d) e)

action(s) and preventive action(s) taken, and action(s) and preventive action(s) taken. of the problems and the environmental impacts

of corrective

Actions taken encountered. The organization documentation.

be appropriate

to the magnitude

shall ensure that any necessary

changes are made to environmental

management

system

4.5.4

Control

of records and maintain management records as necessary to demonstrate conformity to the system and of this International Standard, and the results

The organization shall establish requirements of its environmental achieved.

The organization shall establish, implement and maintain protection, retrieval, retention and disposal of records. Records shall be and remain legible, identifiable and traceable.

a procedure(s)

for the identification,

storage,

4.5.5

Internal

audit management system are conducted at

The organization shall ensure that internal audits of the environmental planned intervals to a) determine whether the environmental 1) conforms to planned arrangements International Standard, and 2) b) has been properly implemented management system

for environmental

management

including

the requirements

of this

and is maintained,

and

provide information

on the results of audits to management.

Audit programmed shall be planned, established, implemented and maintained by the organization, taking into consideration the environmental importance of the operation(s) concerned and the results of previous audits. Audit procedure(s) shall be established, and requirements implemented for planning and maintained and conducting that address audits, reporting results and retaining

-- the responsibilities
associated records,

-- the determination

of audit criteria, scope, frequency and methods. of the audit process.

Selection of auditors and conduct of audits shall ensure objectivity and the impartiality

8

1S/1S0 14001:2004

4.6

Management

review

Top management shall review the organization's environmental management system, at planned intervals, to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness. Reviews shall include assessing opportunities for improvement and the need for changes to the environmental management system, including the environmental policy and environmental objectives and targets. Records of the management reviews shall be retained.
Input to management reviews shall include

a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h)

results of internal audits and evaluations to which the organization subscribes,
communication(s) the environmental from external interested

of compliance
parties,

with legal requirements
complaints,

and with other requirements

including

performance

of the organization, and targets have been met,

the extent to which objectives status of corrective

and preventive actions, reviews, in legal and other requirements related to its

follow-up actions from previous management changing circumstances, including environmental aspects, and recommendations for improvement.

developments

The outputs from management reviews shall include any decisions and actions related to possible changes to environmental policy, objectives, targets and other elements of the environmental management system, consistent with the commitment to continual improvement.

9

1S/1S0 14001:2004

Annex A
(informative)

Guidance

on the use of this International

Standard

A.1

General

requirements

The additional text given in this annex is strictly informative and is intended to prevent misinterpretation of the requirements contained in Clause 4 of this International Standard. While this information addresses and is consistent with the requirements of Clause 4, it is not intended to add to, subtract from, or in any way modify these requirements. The implementation of an environmental management system specified by this International Standard is intended to result in improved environmental performance. Therefore this International Standard is based on the premise that the organization will periodically review and evaluate its environmental management system to identify opportunities for improvement and their implementation. The rate, extent and timescale of this continual improvement process are determined by the organization in the light of economic and other circumstances. Improvements in its environmental management system are intended to result in further improvements in environmental performance. This International a) b) c) d) e) f) Standard requires an organization environmental policy, from the organization's past, existing or planned the environmental impacts of significance, to which the organization activities, to

establish an appropriate

identify the environmental aspects arising products and services, in order to determine identify applicable legal requirements

and other requirements environmental

subscribes,

identify priorities and set appropriate

objectives and targets, and meet targets,

establish a structure and a programmed

to implement the policy and achieve objectives

facilitate planning, control, monitoring, preventive and corrective actions, auditing and review activities to ensure both that the policy is complied with and that the environmental management system remains appropriate, and be capable of adapting to changing circumstances.

g)

An organization with no existing environmental management system should, initially, establish its current position with regard to the environment by means of a review. The aim of this review should be to consider all environmental aspects of the organization as a basis for establishing the environmental management system. The review should cover four key areas: -- -- identification of environmental aspects, including those associated abnormal conditions including start-up and shut-down, and emergency identification of applicable. legal requirements and other requirements with normal operating conditions, situations and accidents; to which the organization subscribes;

-- examination of existing environmental management with procurement and contracting activities; -- evaluation of previous emergency

practices and procedures,

including those associated

situations and accidents.

Tools and methods for undertaking a review might include checklists, conducting interviews, direct inspection and measurement, results of previous audits or other reviews, depending on the nature of the activities. An organization has the freedom and flexibility to define its boundaries and may choose to implement this International Standard with respect to the entire organization or to specific operating units of the organization. The organization should define and document the scope of its environmental management system. Defining the

10

1S/1S0 14001:2004

scope is intended to clarify the boundaries of the organization to which the environmental management system will apply, especially if the organization is a part of a larger organization at a given location. Once the scope is defined, all activities, products and services of the organization within that scope need to be included in the environmental management system. When setting the scope, it should be noted that the credibility of the environmental management system will depend upon the choice of organizational boundaries, If a part of an organization is excluded from the scope of its environmental management system, the organization should be able to explain the exclusion. If this International Standard is implemented for a specific operating unit, policies and procedures developed by other parts of the organization can be used to meet the requirements of this International Standard, provided that they are applicable to that specific operating unit.

A.2

Environmental

policy

The environmental policy is the driver for implementing and improving an organization's environmental management system so that it can maintain and potentially improve its environmental performance. This policy should therefore reflect the commitment of top management to comply with applicable legal requirements and other requirements, to prevent pollution and to continually improve. The environmental policy forms the basis upon which the organization sets its objectives and targets. The environmental policy should be sufficiently clear to be able to be understood by internal and external interested parties, and should be periodically reviewed and revised to reflect changing conditions and information. Its area of ap~ication (i.e. scope) should be clearly identifiable and should reflect the unique nature, scale and environmental impacts of the activities, products and services within the defined scope of the environmental management system. The environmental policy should be communicated to all persons who work for, or on behalf of, the organization, including contractors working at an organization's facility. Communication to contractors can be in alternative forms to the policy statement itself, such as rules, directives and procedures, and may therefore only include pertinent sections of the policy. The organization's environmental policy should be defined and documented by its top management within the context of the environmental policy of any broader corporate body of which it is a part, and with the endorsement of that body,
NOTE Top management highest level. usually consists of a person or group of people who direct and control an organization at the

A.3

Planning

A.3.I

Environmental

aspects

Subclause 4.3.1 is intended to provide a process for an organization to identify environmental aspects, and to determine those that are significant which should be addressed as a priority by the organization's environmental management system. An organization should identify the environmental aspects within the scope of its environmental management system, taking into account the inputs and outputs (both intended and unintended) associated with its current and relevant-past activities, products and services, planned or new developments, or new or modified activities, products and services. This process should consider normal and abnormal operating conditions, shut-down and start-up conditions, as well as reasonably foreseeable emergency situations. Organizations do not have to consider each product, component or raw material select categories of activities, products and services to identify their environmental Although there is no single approach example consider a) b) c) d) emissions to air, releases to water, releases to land, use of raw materials and natural resources, for identifying environmental aspects, input individually. aspects. selected They may

the approach

could for

11

1S/1S0 14001:2004

e) f) g) h)

use of energy, energy emitted, e.g. heat, waste and by-products, radiation, vibration,

and

physical attributes, e.g. size, shape, colour, appearance.

In addition to those environmental aspects an organization can control directly, an organization should also consider aspects that it can influence, e.g. those related tb goods and services used by the organization and those related to products and services that it provides. Some guidance to evaluate control and influence is provided below, However, in all circumstances it is the organization that determines the degree of control and also the aspects it can influence. Consideration should be given to aspects related to the organization's activities, products and services, such as

-- design and development, -- manufacturing processes,

-- packaging and transportation, -- environmental -- waste performance and practices of contractors and suppliers,

management, of raw materials and natural resources,

-- extraction and distribution
-- distribution,

use and end-of-life

of products, and

-- wildlife and biodiversity.
The control and influence over the environmental aspects of a product supplied to an organization can vary significantly, depending on the organization's market situation and its suppliers. An organization that is responsible for its own product design can influence such aspects significantly by changing, for example, a single input material, while an organization that needs to supply in accordance with externally determined product specifications may have little choice, With respect to products provided, it is recognized that organizations may have limited control over the use and disposal of their products, e.g. by users, but they can consider, where practicable, communication of proper handling and disposal mechanisms to these users in order to exert influence. Changes to the environment, either adverse or beneficial, that result wholly or partially from environmental aspects are called environmental impacts. The relationship between environmental aspects and impacts is one of cause and effect. In some locations cultural heritage can be an important element of the surroundings in which an organization operates, and therefore should be taken into account in the understanding of its environmental impacts. Since an organization might have many environmental aspects and associated impacts, it should establish criteria and a method to determine those that it considers significant. There is no single method for determining significant environmental aspects. However, the method used should provide consistent results and include the establishment and application of evaluation criteria, such as those related to environmental matters, legal issues and the concerns of internal and external interested parties.
When developing information relating to its significant environmental aspects, the organization should consider

the need to retain the information for historical purposes as well as how to use it in designing its environmental management system.

and implementing

The process of identification and evaluation of environmental aspects should take into account the location of activities, cost and time to undertake the analysis, and the availability of reliable data. The identification of environmental aspects does not require a detailed life-cycle assessment. Information already developed for regulatory or other purposes may be used in this process.

12

lS/lSO 14001:2004

This process organization's

of identifying and' evaluating legal obligations.

environmental

aspects

is not intended

to change

or increase

an

A.3.2

Legal and other requirements
the legal requirements that are applicable to its environmental aspects.

The organization needs to identify These may include a) b) c) national and international state/provincial/departmental local governmental

legal requirements, legal requirements,

legal requirements, to which the organization may subscribe include, if applicable,

Examples of other requirements -- agreements -- agreements --

with public authorities, with customers, guidelines, or codes of practice, Iabelling or product stewardship commitments,

non-regulatory

-- voluntary principles

-- voluntary environmental -- -- -- -- requirements agreements

of trade associations, with community groups or non-governmental organizations,

public commitments corporate/company

of the organization requirements.

or its parent organization,

The determination of how legal and other requirements apply to an organization's environmental aspects is usually accomplished in the process of identi~lng these requirements. It may not be necessary, therefore, to have a separate or additional procedure in order to make this determination.

A.3.3

Objectives,

targets and programmed
wherever practicable. They should cover short-

The objectives and targets should be specific and measurable and long-term issues.

When considering its. technological options, an organization should consider techniques where economically viable, cost-effective and judged appropriate. The reference to the financial requirements of the organization obliged to use environmental cost-accounting methodologies. The creation and use of one or more programmed environmental management system. Each programme targets will be achieved, including timescales, necessary the programmed. This (these) programmed may organization's operations. is not intended

the

use of best-available

to imply that organizations

are

is important to the successful implementation of an should describe how the organization's objectives and resources and personnel responsible for implementing be subdivided to address specific elements of the

The programme should include, where appropriate and practical, consideration of planning, design, production, marketing and disposal stages. This may be undertaken for both current and new activities, products or services. For products, this can address design, materials, production processes, use and ultimate disposal. For installations or significant modifications of processes, this can address planning, design, construction, commissioning, operation and, at the appropriate time determined by the organization, decommissioning.

13

1S/1S0 14001:2004

A.4

Implementation

and operation

A.4.I

Resources,

roles,

responsibility

and authority

The successful implementation of an environmental management system calls for a commitment from all persons working for the organization or on its behalf, Environmental roles and responsibilities therefore should not be seen as confined to the environmental management function, but can also cover other areas of an organization, such as operational management or staff functions other than environmental, This commitment should begin at the highest levels of management. Accordingly, top management should establish the organization's environmental policy and ensure that the environmental management system is implemented, As part of this commitment, top management should designate a specific management representative(s) with defined responsibility and authority for implementing the environmental management system, In large or complex organizations, there may be more than one designated representative, In small or medium-sized enterprises, these responsibilities may be undertaken by one individual. Management should also ensure that appropriate resources, such as organizational infrastructure, are provided to ensure that the environmental management system is established, implemented and maintained, Examples of organizational infrastructure include buildings, communication lines, underground tanks, drainage, etc. [t is also important and communicated that the key environmental management system roles and responsibilities to all persons working for or on behalf of the organization. are well defined

A.4.2

Competence,

training

and awareness and skills needed by any person

The organization should identify the awareness, knowledge, understanding with the responsibility and authority to perform tasks on its behalf. This International a) Standard requires that

those persons whose work could cause significant environmental are competent to perform the tasks to which they are assigned,

impact(s)

identified

by the organization

b) training needs are identified c)

and actions are taken to ensure the provision of training,

all persons are aware of the organization's environmental policy and environmental management system and the environmental aspects of the organization's activities, products and services that could be affected by their work. and competence may be obtained or improved through training,

Awareness, knowledge, understanding education or work experience.

The organization should require that contractors working on its behalf are able to demonstrate employees have the requisite competence and/or appropriate training.

that their

Management should determine the level of experience, competence and training necessary to ensure the capability of personnel, especially those carrying out specialized environmental management functions.

A.4.3

Communication

Internal communication is important to ensure the effective implementation of the environmental management systems, Methods of internal communication may include regular work group meetings, newsletters, bulletin boards and intranet sites. Organizations should implement a procedure for receiving, documenting and responding to relevant communications from interested parties. This procedure may include a dialogue with interested parties and consideration of their relevant concerns. In some circumstances, responses to interested pa tiles' concerns may include relevant information about the environmental aspects and impacts associated with the organization's operations. These procedures should also address necessary communication with public authorities regarding emergency planning and other relevant issues.

14

1S/1S0 14001:2004

The organization may wish to plan its communication taking into account the decisions groups, the appropriate messages and subjects, and the choice of means.

made on relevant target

When considering external communication about environmental aspects, organizations should take into consideration the views and information needs of all interested parties. If the organization decides to communicate externally on its environmental aspects, the organization may establish a procedure to do so. This procedure could change depending on several factors including the type of information to be communicated, the target group and the individual circumstances of the organization, Methods for external communication can include annual reports, newsletters, websites and community meetings.

A.4.4

Documentation

The level of detail of the documentation should be sufficient to describe the environmental management system and how its parts work together, and to provide direction on where to obtain more detailed information on the operation of specific parts of the environmental management system. This documentation may be integrated with documentation of other systems implemented by the organization. It does not have to be in the form of a manual. The extent of the environmental another, depending on a) management system documentation may differ from one organization to

the size and type of organization and its activities, products or services, of processes of personnel. include and targets, aspects, and their interactions, and

b) the complexity c) the competence

Examples of documents statements information procedures, process information, organizational charts,

of policy, objectives on significant

environmental

internal and external standards, site emergency records, Any decision to document procedure(s) should be based on issues such as of not doing so, to which the organization plans, and

-- the consequences,

including those to the environment, compliance

-- the need to demonstrate
subscribes,

with legal and with other requirements

-- the need to ensure that the activity is undertaken consistently, -- the advantages
of doing so, which can include easier implementation through communication and training, easier maintenance and revision, less risk of ambiguity and deviations, and demonstrability and visibility, of this International Standard. management system may be used as

-- the requirements

Documents originally created for purposes other than the environmental part of this system and, if so used, need to be referenced in the system.

15

1S/1S0 14001:2004

A.4.5

Control

of documents

The intent of 4.4.5 is to ensure that organizations create and maintain documents in a manner sufficient to implement the environmental management system, However, the primary focus of organizations should be on effective implementation of the environmental management system and on environmental performance, not on a complex document control system,

A.4.6

Operational

control

An organization should evaluate those of its operations that are associated with its identified significant environmental aspects and ensure that they are conducted in a way that will control or reduce the adverse impacts associated with them, in order to fulfil the requirements of its environmental policy and meet its objectives and targets. This should include all parts of its operations, including maintenance activities. As this part of the environmental management system provides direction on how to take the system requirements into day-to-day operations, 4.4.6 a) requires the use of documented procedure(s) to control situations where the absence of documented procedures could lead to deviations from the environmental policy and the objectives and targets.

A.4.7

Emergency

preparedness

and response

it is the responsibility of each organization to develop emergency preparedness and response procedure(s) that suits its own particular needs, [n developing its procedure(s), the organization should include consideration of a) the nature of on-site hazards, e.g. flammable liquids, storage tanks and compressed to be taken in the event of spillages or accidental releases, situation or accident, to an accident or emergency situation, gases, and measures

b) the most likely type and scale of an emergency c) d) e) f) 9) h) i) j) k) the most appropriate method(s) for responding plans,

internal and external communication

the action(s) required to minimize environmental

damage, situation,

mitigation and response action(s) to be taken for different types of accident or emergency the need for a process actions, for post-accident evaluation to establish and implement

corrective and preventive

periodic testing of emergency training of emergency a list of key personnel services),

response procedure(s),

response personnel, and aid agencies, including contact details (e.g. fire department, spillage clean-up

evacuation routes and assembly points, situation(s) or accident(s) at a nearby facility (e.g. plant, road, railway line),

1) the potential for an emergency and

m) the possibility of mutual assistance

from neighboring

organizations.

A.5

Checking

A.5.1

Monitoring

and measurement

The operations of an organization can have a variety of characteristics. For example, characteristics related to monitoring and measurement of wastewater discharge may include biological and chemical oxygen demand, temperature and acidity.

16

1S/1S0 14001:2004

Data collected from monitoring and measurement can be analysed to identify patterns and obtain information. Knowledge gained from this information can be used to implement corrective and preventive action.
are those that the organization needs to consider to determine how it is managing its Key characteristics significant environmental aspects, achieving objectives and targets, and improving environmental performance. When necessary or prior to ensure to use, valid results, measuring equipment should be calibrated or verified or national at specified measurement

intervals, standards.

against

measurement

standards

traceable

to international

If no such standards

exist, the basis used for calibration

should be recorded.

A.5.2

Evaluation

of compliance
compliance with the legal requirements

The organization should be able to demonstrate that it has evaluated identified, including applicable permits or Iicences. The organization should be able to demonstrate requirements to which it has subscribed.

that it has evaluated

compliance

with the other identified

A.5.3

Nonconformity,

corrective

action and preventive

action

Depending on the nature of the nonconformity, by establishing procedures to deal with these requirements, organizations may be able to accomplish them with a minimum of formal planning, or it may be a more complex and long-term activity. Any documentation should be appropriate to the level of action.

A.5.4

Control of records
records can include, among others, records,

Environmental a) b) c) d) e) f) "g) h) i) j) k) 1) complaint

training records, process monitoring inspection, records, and calibration records,

maintenance

pertinent contractor incident reports,

and supplier records,

records of tests for emergency audit results, management review results,

preparedness,

external communications records of applicable records of significant

decision,

legal requirements, environmental meetings, information, aspects,

m) records of environmental n) o) p) environmental

performance

legal compliance communications

records, and with interested parties. information.
conformity to this International Standard.

Proper account should be taken of confidential
NOTE

Records are not the sole source of evidence to demonstrate

17

1S/1S0 14001:2004

A.5.5

Internal audit
by personnel from within the its behalf. In either case, the impartially and objectively. In being free from responsibility

Internal audits of an environmental management system can be performed organization or by external persons selected by the organization, working on persons conducting the audit should be competent and in a position. to do so smaller organizations, auditor independence can be demonstrated by an auditor for the activity being audited.

NOTE 1 If an organization wishes to combine audits of its environmental management system with environmental complianceaudits,the intentand scope of each shouldbe clearly defined. Environmentalcompliance audits are not covered by this InternationalStandard.
NOTE 2 Guidance on auditing of environmental management systems is given in ISO 19011.

A.6

Management

review

The management review should cover the scope of the environmental management system, although not all elements of the environmental management system need to be reviewed at once and the review process may take place over a period of time.

18

1S/1S0 14001:2004

Annex
(informative)

B

Correspondence

between

ISO 14001:2004

and ISO 9001:2000

Table B. 1 and Table B.2 identify ISO 9001:2000 and vice versa.

broad

technical

correspondences

between

ISO 14001:2004

and

The objective of the comparison is to demonstrate that both systems can be used together organizations that already operate one of these International Standards and wish to operate both,

for those

between subclauses of the two International Standards has only been established if A direct correspondence the two subclauses are largely congruent in requirements. Beyond that, many detailed cross-connections of minor relevance exist which could not be shown here.

Table B.1 -- Correspondence

between ISO 14001:2004

and ISO 9001:2000 1s0 9001:2000

I
Environmental (title only)

ISO 14001:2004 management system requirements 4 4 4.1 Quality

management

system

(title only)

\ General requirements

5.2 7.2.1 7.2.2 Legal and other requirements 4.3.2 5.2 7.2.1 Objectives, targets and programmed 4.3.3 5.4.1 5.4.2 8.5.1 Implementation Resources, and operation (title only) and authority 4.4 4.4.1 7 5.1 5.5.1 5.5.2 6.1 6.3 Competence, training and awareness 4.4.2 6.2.1 6.2.2 Communication 4.4.3 5.5.3 7.2.3 Documentation Control of documents 4.4.4 4.4.5 4.2.1 4.2.3

Customer

focus of requirements related to the product

Determination

Review of requirements Customer rbcus

related to the product

Determination

of requirements

related to the product

Quality objectives Quality management Continual Product improvement realization (title only) system planning

roles, responsibility

Management Responsibility Management Provision

commitment and authority reprasentative

of resources

Infrastructure (Human resources) Competence, General and training

awarenass

Internal communication Customer communication requirements) General

(Documentation

IControl of documants

19

1S/1S0 14001:2004

Table B.1 -- Correspondence
ISO 14001:2004 operational control

between ISO 14001:2004

and ISO 9001:2000 1s0 9001:2000

(continued)

1.4.6

7.1 7.2.1 7.2.2 7.3.1 7.3.2 7,3.3 7,3,4 7.3.5 7,3.6 7.3.7 7.4.1 7.4.2 7.4.3 7.5.1 7.5.2 7.5.5

Planning of product realization Determination of requirements related to the product

Review of requirements Design and development Design and development Design and development Design and development Design and development Design and development

related to the product planning inputs outputs review verification validation changes

Control of design and development Purchasing Purchasing Verification process information of purchased product

Control of production Validation provision
I

and service provision for production and service

of processes of Droduct

preservation

Emergency Checking Monitoring

preparedness (title only)

and response

1.4.7 1.5 1.5,1

B.3 B 7.6 B.1 8.2.3 3.2.4 B.4

IControl of nonconforming Measurement,
onkd

moduct (title

analysis and improvement
and measuring devices

and measurement

Control of monitoring (measurement, Monitoring Monitoring

analysis and improvement) of processes of product

General

and measurement and measurement

Analysis of data Monitoring Monitoring and measurement and measurement of processes of product `

Evaluation

of compliance

1.5.2

3.2.3 8.2,4

Nonconformity, action

corrective

action and preventive

4.5,3

8,3 8.4 8.5.2 8.5.3

Control of nonconforming Analysis of data Corrective Preventive action action

product

Control of records Internal audit Management review

4.5.4 4.5.5 4.6

4.2.4 8.2.2 5.1 5.6 5.6.1 5.6.2 5.6,3 8.5.1

Control of records Internal audit Management Management General Review input Review output Continual immovement commitment review (title only)

20

1S/1S0 14001:2004

Table 6.2 -- Correspondence 1s0 9001:2000 kiality management system (title only)
ieneral requirements documentation ;eneral luality manual ;ontrol of documents ;ontrol of records
I

between ISO 9001:2000

and ISO 14001:2004 ISO 14001:2004

]4 14.1

4 14.1 ] 14.4.4

I Environmental lGeneral ] lDocumentation

management

system requirements

requirements

requirements

(title only)

14.2 14.2.1 4.2.2 4.2.3 4.2.4

4.4.5
1

Control of documents
1

4.5.4

Control of records

flanagement
flanagement

responsibility
commitment

(title only)

]5
5.1 4.2 4.4.1 Environmental Resources, policy and authority

roles, responsibility aspects

;ustomer focus

5.2

4.3.1 4.3,2

Environmental

Legal and other requirements I Management
!

I
luality policy 5.3 5.4 5.4.1 system planning (title ]5.4,2 5.5 !5.5.1 5.5.2 5.5.3 5.6 5.6.1 5.6.2 `Ianning (title only) 2uality objectives luality management

14.6 4.2 4.3 4.3.3 14.3.3

review policy

Environmental Planning Objectives, I Objectives,

targets and programmed targets and programmed

<responsibility, autority and communication rely) ?esponsibilitv and authority

I I
14.4.1 4.4.1 4.4.3 I Resources, Resources, roles, responsibility roles, responsibility and authority and authority Communication 4.6 4.6 Management Management Management review review review

Management representative nternal communication management Seneral ?eview input ?eview output ?esource review (title only)

15.6.3 14.6

management

(title only)

16
16.1 6.2 6.2.1

I
14.4.1 I Resources, roles, responsibility and authority

%ovision of resources +uman resources Seneral Qomptetence, nfrastructure work environment awareness and training (title only)

4.4.2 4.4.2 4.4.1

Com~etence, Competence, Resources,

training and awareness training and awareness roles, responsibility and authority

6.2.2 6.3

Product realization

(title only)

17 17.1

14.4 14.4.6

Implementation Operational

and ooeration

Hannirw -, of croduct realization Customer-related Determination product processes (title only) related to the

control

7.2 7.2.1 4.3.1 4.3.2 4.4.6 Environmental aspects

of requirements

Legal and other requirements Operational control aspects

Review of requirements

related to the product

7.2.2

4.3.1 4.4.6

Environmental Operational

control

Customer communication

7.2.3

4.4.3

Communication

21

1S/1S0 14001:2004

Table 6.2 -- Correspondence

between ISO 9001:2000

and ISO 14001:2004
ISO 14001:2004

(continued)

I

1s0 9001:2000
(title only) planning inputs outputs review verification validation changes 7.3 7.3.1 7.3.2 7.3.3 7,3.4 17.3,5 17.3.6
1

I
4.4.6 4.4.6 4.4.6 4,4.6 \4.4.6
1

I

Design and development Design and development Design and development Design and development Design and development lDesign and development lDesign and development

Operational Operational Operational Operational IOperational
I

control control control control control I

14.4.6 14,4.6

IOperationalkontrol 10~erational control

Control of design and development Purchasing Purchasing I Purchasing lVerification ]Production (title only) txocess information of purchased product

17.3.7 7.4 7.4.1 17.4.2 ]7.4.3

4,4.6 ]4.4.6 ]4.4.6 I /4.4.6 4.4.6

Operational [Operational 10perational / 10perational Operational

control control control I

and service provision

(title only)

17,5 17,5.1 7.5.2 7,5.3
1

I I
I

I Control of production Validation provision

and service provision for production and service

control control

of processes

Identification Customer

and traceability

Dropertv. of product and measuring devices (title

7,5.4

I

1

Preservation

/7.5.5 17.6 8 18.1

/4.4.6 ]4.5.1 4,5 14.5.1 I

/Operational lMonitoring Checking lMonitoring I

control and measurement

I I

]Control of monitoring Measurement, only) [General lMonltoring Customer

analysls

and improvement

and measurement

I
I

and measurement satisfaction

(title only)

18.2 8.2.1 8.2.2

Internal audit Monitoring and measurement of processes

4.5.5 4.5.1 14.5.2 4.5.1 4.5.2

Internal audit Monitoring devaluation Monitoring Evaluation IEmergency and measurement of compliance and measurement of compliance preparedness corrective and response action and preventive action I

8.2.3

I
Monitoring and measurement of product 8.2.4

IControl of nonconforming

product

18.3

14.4.7 \4,5.3 14.5.1

I
[Analysis of data (title only) Improvement Continual

I
18.4 8.5 8.5.1 I I action action 18.5.2 18.5.3

I Nonconformity, !Monitoring

and measurement

improvement

4.2 14.3.3 14.6 14.5.3 14.5.3

Environmental 10bjectives, \Management I Nonconformity, ! Nonconformity,

policy

I

targets and programmed review corrective corrective action and preventive action and preventive action action

I
lCorrective lPreventive

22

1S/1S0 14001:2004

Bibliography

[1] [2] [3]

ISO 9000:2000, ISO 9001:2000,

Quality management Quality management

systems � Fundamentals systems -- Requirements

and vocabulary

ISO 14004:2004, Environmental support techniques ISO 19011:2002, Guidelines

management

systems -- General guidelines

on principles,

systems and

[4]

for quality andlor environmental

management

systems auditing

23

Bureau

of Indian

Standards
institution established to connected under the Bureau of hdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote of standardization, marking and quality certification of

61S is a statutory harmonious goods

development

of the activities matters

and attending

in the country.

Copyright
61S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced

form without the prior permission of implementing designations. Review the standard, Enquiries

in writing of 61S. This does not preclude

in any the free use, in the course and sizes, type or grade BIS. (Publications),

of necessary

details,

such as symbols to the Director

relating to copyright

be addressed

of Indian

Standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are

Amendments

are issued to standards

also reviewed periodically;

a standard along with amendments

is reaffirmed when such review indicates

that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: This Indian Standard has been developed Amendments Amend No. Monthly Additions'.

from Dot: No. CHD 34 (1278). Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones 23230131,23233375,2323 9402 webs~te: www.bis.org. in Regional Central Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELI-II 110002 : 1/1 4 C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892 COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD.

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 AHMEDABAD. GHAZIABAD. NALAGARH. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR.

Branches:

GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

