IS 13028:1991

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

*-em + ?I-& +a f6fMr t\ f+m%m
Indian Standard

GUIDELINES FOR OVERALL PLANNING OF RIVER BASIN '

UDC 627'11 : 338'98

0 BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Group 4 MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI March 1991

River Valley Planning Project Reports and Progress and Completion RVD 6

Reports Sectional Committee,

.

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the River Valley Planning, Project Reports and Progress and Completion Reports Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. A basin development is a co-ordinated programme to develop the use of water and land resources of a river basin to obtain a greater efficiency of use than would be possible, if were developed by unto-ordinated multi purpose projects or a series of unto-ordinated single purpose project. In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and the practices prevailing in different countries in additions to relating it to the practices in the field of this country. The guide for overall planning of the basin has been divided into two sections: a) Section 1 Basin characteristics and inventory of resources, and

b) Section 2 Overall planning of the basin. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding ofi numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13028:1991

Indian Standard

GUIDELINES FOR OVERALL PLANNING OF RIVER BASIN
SECTION 1 BASIN AND INVENTORY 1 SCOPE 1.1 This section broadly covers the characteristics and resources of basin, present status of resources utilization. 2 INTRODUCTION 2.1 This section following: includes the information on the CHARACTERISTICS OF RESOURCES 3.3 River System Brief description given: of the following should be and

a) The main river, its main the sub basins; and

tributaries

b) Drainage

areas of the sub-basins, their identification and their percentage as compared to the main basin and their total.

3.4 Climatic Characteristics a) CZimate - This shall cover commencement and duration of the following: i) Cold, ii) Hot, and iii) Rainy. b) Rainfall -

a) Physical features of the basin; b) Plan of the basin; d Brief description 4 Irrigable d Economics
of climate, precipitation, run off and availability of ground water; land area;

of the basin including the agriculture, forests, trends, population mining and industrial raw materials, industry transportation and power needs; and of water use.

This shall cover the information on the following:

f-1Priority
3 BASIN

CHARACTERISTICS

i) Mean annual rainfall, ii) Seasonal, weighted average rainfall in various sub-basins and the standard deviation, and iii) Rainfall variations during different months and periods. c) Temper&we This shall cover the following:

3.1 Basin Setting This includes the information on the following: with longitude and

a) Basin boundaries latitude, b) Area covered

under the basin, basin area

c) The percentage of the area of the compared to the total geographical of the state and the country, d) Political sub-division state basin, with respect the

i) Mean annual temperature in various parts of the basin and the sub-basins, and minimum ii) Average and maximum mon&y temperature in various parts of the basin and the sub-basins.

4 Evaporation

to interdrainage sub-

evapo-transpiration and Standard ETO's for various important stations of the basin, Humidity, Wind velocity, and

e) State-wise distribution of areas and their total, and f) Description regions. 3.2 Physiography Brief description given: a) Various of the following of physical

and economic

Solar radiation -

Cloudy and sunny days.

3.5 Physiography Geology
should be

This shall following:

include

the

information

on

the

ranges

and ridges; and shape

4 Detailed b) Geology
graphy ations, tics. 1

description

of the topography, stratiform-

b) Topography, its plateau, the general of the basin and its delta; c) Glaciers; d) Lakes. and

of the area dealing with and description of various and structures and their

4 Geological

characteris-

IS 13028: 3.6 Soils

1991

d Average annual
on the following: method

This shall cover the information a) General, b) Principal soil distribution, c) Drainage type and

run off of the basin and of determination; 100 percent

its

f ) 50, 75,
their location/

90 and yield of the basin; Flood estimation;

dependable

d
of soil, on soil formation, types under

characteristics

h) Whether

d) Effect of rainfall

e) Behaviour of different soil irrigation conditions, and f) Crops grown in relation 4 RESOURCES 4.1 Land This shall include information and total area of the following proportions. Gross a> area, area, OF THE

to soil type.

gauging and discharge sites are evenly distributed over the catchment for proper assessment of water resources and whether more gauge and discharge sites be set up so that more representative discharge data is available; projects in operation projects; sites at all important as well as for planned

BASIN

3 Key gauge discharge

on the statewise along with their

k) A report

giving the details of the sites measuring discharge on each important tributary of the river; and rights.
or flow other

In> Existing usages of the established
NOTE - Reconstructed
data is affected by diversions, regulations shall be given. storage,

b) Reporting

flows, in case stream

cl Area under different types of forests, 4 Area not available 4 Culturable f ) Uncultivated
areas, culturable area, for cultivation,

4.2.2

Crowd

Water

.d Net 3

area sown,

h) Area sown more than once,
Total cropped area,

This shall include following to describe availability of water. studies of the basins with a view to assess should be reported in

the in formation on the geology with respect to the Systematic geohydrological and the sub-basins if made the ground water resources, detail:

k) Net area irrigated,
Gross m> area irrigated, of net area sown to culturable to culturto net area

4 Statistics

of existing number of government or private tubewells and their use with details of areas irrigated by them;

4

Percentage area,

b) Existing usages and rights; c) Sub-surface
exploration carried out so far to determine extent, thickness, capacity, hydraulic characteristics, economics and dependable yield of the acquifer; Results ration; of the test wells; of the area for further explo-

P) Percentage of net area able area, and q) Percentage sown.

irrigated

of net area irrigated

4

NOTE-The area sown under forests is not necessarily all wooded as some areas classified as forests were denuded and have not been replanted. 4.1.1 Land holding 4.2 Water Resources 4.2.1
Surfuce Water

4 Description

patterns

-

analysis

of trends.

f > Brief description

about activities in the basin with regard to minor irrigation such as improvement of wells and digging, of new wells; and Recharge statistics.

d

The following

data shall be collected: 4.3 Mineral data; Brief description of the following minerals location, found and shall be given: in the basin with in

a) Description of catchment; b) Raingauge stations and rainfall cl Historical stream flow;

a) Principal
statewise

d) A report giving the details of the sites in the basin where gauge, discharge, and sediment observations are made and their reliability along with the observed data; 2

b) Minerals
different

found in small parts of the basin.

quantities

IS 15028 : 1991 4.4 Forests and Resources This shall include the following information:

h) Irrigation
as

facilities from various sources like canals, tanks, tubewells, wells, etc and areas irrigated by each source; and bacteriological available water; analysis of

a) Area covered under forests in the basin b) Type of forests and their distribution,

compared ti the total area of the basin,

3 Chemical

k) Statewise description about the major and
medium schemes taken up during the plans and areas irrigated by each scheme; and

4 Description of forest and its exploitation, 4 Communication 4 Flora and fauna.
4.5 Demography Information of the following may be collected: in the forest area, and

ml Brief description of minor schemes such as
tanks, wells and tubewells in operation, and under construction and the areas irrigated there from and which would be developed, and

d Water requirements of crops.
5.2 Drainage Description of any existing surface drainage system, drainage of irrigable area and sanitary problem, if any shall be given. 5.3 Industry Description of the following shall be given:

a) On the basis of the latest census, district wise population of the basin; b) Names of the cities with population
more than one lakh persons; Variation c> of

of density of population from densely populated areas to thinly populatin ed area. Rate of increase/decrease population; persons per sq km;

4 Density of population of basin in terms of 4 Percentage
of pbpulation belonging to scheduled tribes and their social, economic of cultivation mode conditions and adopted by them; per-

a) Industrial potential in the basin, b) Existing
heavy cottage and agro-based industries with their location, estimation of their water utilization and sources of supply, potential materials. of raw and finished

4 Mining of ores, and 4 Export

f) Percentage of population living in the rural
areas in the basin and the remaining centage living in cities and towns;

59Percentage of working force ( comprising
the census categories of self-supporting sons and earning dependents of population ); and

5.4 Power Generation Description of the following shall be given: a) Installed capacity of Hydro, Thermal, Gas based and Nuclear Power Generating Plants in operation and under construction and their water requirements, and b) Steps for harnessing solar and wind energy.

perthe

h) Percentage
cultivati&, industries, activities.

of working force engaged in agricultur& mining, cottage and manufacturing tertiary

5 PRESENT
UTILIZATION 5.1 Agriculture

STATUS

OF RESOURCE

5.5 Municipal and Domestic Water Supply Information on the following shall be given:

4 Location of urban centres, source of water
supply and its utilization; and rural population. on the following:

*This shall include information

4 Cultivable area; b) Areas under crops; cl Description of genera1 grouping irrigated areas, statewise;
d) Agriculture practices;
e) Land

b) Sources of water supply and utilization
5.6 Navigation

by

pattern

of

This shall include information

on the following:

suitability agriculture;

areas

under

irrigated

f) Dry land farming; d Irrigation practices and their limitations; 3

giving details of navigable water base and areas served, b) Ivfaximum capacity of country boats and its barges which ply in the navigable areas, and 4 Water required for navigation.

4 Present status of inland navigation

IS 13028 : 1991 5.7 Recreation and Fishery This shall following: include the information on the

b) Terracing and contour bunding,
4 Pasture development and development marginal and submarginal lands, afforestation of

a) Existing recreation facilities in the region, b) State of fishery in the region, d Water requirements, and

4 Stream control measures including fringe
and stream bank control, and

4 Desilting works like check dam, etc.
Specific steps taken for soil and water conservation measures in the basin be dealt with. Sedimentation survey of the reservoirs under operation be reported. It may be stated if the loss of reservoir capacity is in accordance with the loss stipulated or is excessive. If loss of storage capacity is excessive, steps proposed to arrest soil erosion in the catchment area be dealt with. 6 PROBLEMS OF BASIN

4 Existing operational adjustments for such
uses. 5.8 Flood Control Description of the following shall be given: a) Analysis of hydrological flood potential; data to determine

b) History of floods in the basin with their causes, history and economic study of the past and potential flood damages, trends in the affected area; and c) Existing flood control works such as: i) Improvement of river channel, ii) River diversions, iii) Constructing dikes, iv) Reservoirs, and v) Flood protection regulation. 5.9 Watershed Management The information of the following shall be given:

6.1 History of famines, drought and flood in the basin. 6.2 Information on chronically flood, draught and flood prone area and salinity shall be given.
SECTION 2 OVERALL PLANNING THE BASIN OF

7 SCOPE

a) Extent and gravity of erosion problem, b) Silting of reservoirs and drainage, c) Existing soil conservation their efficiency. 5.10 Environmental Control This shall include information on the following: practices and

7.1 Section 2 of this standard covers future trends of development of basin and resources utilization within the constraints, water resources accounting and developmental plan of the basin. 8 FUTURE TRENDS UTILIZATION 8.1 Economic Base Economic base projection for the future should extend at least over the useful life of the projects that are considered, that is, for a period of 50-100 years. It is obvious that any extrapolation of population based on past trends, over such a long future period of say 100 years, is of a highly speculative character and would lead to completely erroneous results. It should be kept in mind that the population growth is related to economic activity, which in turn is related to resource development. Due allowance shall be made for the likely increase in the standard of living of the backward and poverty stricken area, which are under-developed. It may be possible to develop an ultimate water plan by a different approach. Instead of estimating the size of the future population with their economic base, and then preparing a resource development plan to suit their needs, apprise first all available resources in the region and then estimate how many people and what economic activity could be supported by these resources. If
4

OF RESOURCES

a) Changes in the water regime of the river; b) Pollution of river water from industry watershed; c) Major intake to check pollution; d) Waterlogged and saline affected areas. Steps taken such as surface drains, providing pumps and tubewells as anti-waterlogging measures be indicated; and e) Salt water intrusion in the coastal water resources. 5.11 Soil Conservation A brief description of the topography slopes, rainfall intensity and erosion of soil of the basin shall be given. It may be reported, if any of the following steps are being taken for conservation of the storage capacities of reservoirs: a) Afforestation, ground and

IS 13028 : 1991

such an approach is successful, it shall be taking into consideration not only the available water resources, but also the resources of the region, After including space for living and recreation. having developed a tentative plan to make the most effective an& continued use of available resources, then roughly determine how many people could live in the area without competing with one another for the use of the same resources. The last step would be to prepare a water development plan that would meet the demands of such a regional development. 8.2 Agriculture This shall include information on the following: of the areas

d) Water required for dilution of municipal industrial effluent so that adequate sanitary river conditions are maintained, and e) Identification supply. of additional sources of water

It should be noted that the total domestic and industrial water requirements are usually small compared to the available water supplies in the drainage basin. Moreover, only 5 to 10 percent of the total intake is consumptively used, the remaining returning to the river system. Although, the total requirements are relatively small, it shall be emphasized that they are of the highest priority and good quality of water is needed.

a) Soil and moisture

condition proposed for irrigation, pattern

b) Actual development, c) Change
in cropping existing pattern, of crops, from the

d) Use of fertilizers and high yielding varieties

Associated with the domestic and industrial water requirements are the waste disposal requirements. The stream flow requirements to dilute municipal and industrial effluent so that adequate sanitary conditions are maintained. This requirement may be 10 or even 100 times larger than the pure water intake. The exact amount depends largely upon the degree of treatment that industries and municipalities will apply to their wastes. 8.5 Power Generation
.

4 Crop rotation,
f) Proposals for development of irrigation,

This shall include information on the following:

id

Scientific supplies,

management

of

irrigation

h) Estimation of proposed water requirements
of crops and total water requirements irrigation,

4 Power supply position, b) Future needs and proposals for generating
additional power, and power generation.

for

4 Projected water requirements for additional
8.6 Navigation This shall include information on the following:

3 Total output of various crops expected, and
k) Marketing
facilities and development roads in commanded areas. of

8.3 Industrial Development This shall following: include brief description of the

a) Scope of navigation development, b) Proposed development,

4 Estimated water requirements
tion, and

for naviga-

a) Factors influencing industrial development like space for industry, supply of raw materials, finance, power, marketing facilities, etc. b) General scope of development in the region, and c) Projected water needs. 8.4 Municipal and Domestic Water Supply This shall following: include brief growth description of urban of the and rural

d) River training works needed for maintaining a defined navigation channel and possible effect of such works on floods in the river. 8.7 Recreation and Fishery Development This shall include information a) Potentiality recreation, on the following:

of utilizing reservoir for public

a) Anticipated
population,

b) Problems of fish conservation, c) Prospects of fishery development, and d) Operational adjustment to mitigate adverse effect of pisciculture. 8.8 Flood Control This
5

b) Per-capita

requirements of water for household use in urban and rural population depending upon standard of living, needs of urban and rural population,

4 Projected

shall

include

brief

description

of

the

IS 13028: 1991

following: a) Whether comprehensive plan of flood management for the particular river system has been prepared or not, b) Recent ipproaches flood control, to the problem of the

9.1.2 Ground Water This shall following: include the information on the

c) Needs of the region, and d) Proposals for new flood control works, such as, i) Improvement of river channel, ii) River diversions, iii) Constructing dikes, vi) Reservoir, v) Flood plain regulation, and vi) Evaluation/assessment report on performance of some completed schemes and improvements suggested in such reports. 8.9 Watershed Management This shall include information on the following:

a) Estimation of yield of ground b) Distribution of and c) Chemical and ground water. 9.2 Utilization

economic and dependable water for future use, ground water in the basin, bacteriological analysis of

of Water in the Basin

This shall include information

on the following: like

a) Existing consumptive b) Non-consumptive

uses of water irrigation, industrial, domestic uses;

uses of water like hydro power, navigation, etc;

Cl Requirements of water in the basin; and 4 Requirements at various times and pattern
of demand. 9.3 Water Losses This shall following: include the information on the

a) Recognition of watershed management as a pre-requisite in river basin plan, and b) Proposals for conservation like soil abutment, sedimentation, improvement, forests and grass land equipment, run off retardation, etc. 8.10 Environment Control This shall include description of the following: of environment pollution and a) Dangers identification of sources and nature of possible pollution, b) Pr?r~~;i
9 c) Water

a) Permanent

losses occurring in the basin and its estimation like evaporation from water bodies, deep percolation, leakage from reservoirs, hydro-electric plants, and

b) Return flow from irrigated areas, sewages
and industries. 9.4 Projected Utilization This shall include information a) b) c) d) on the following: Future requirements for consumptive uses, Non-consumptive uses, Requirements of water in the basin, and Requirements at various times.

for controlling and

and

protecting channels

storages against pollution.

drainage

9 WATER RESOURCES 9.1 Availability of Water 9.1.1 Surface Water This shall following: include brief

ACCOUNTING

9.5 Surpluses and Shortages This shall include information on the following: of present demand with the available supply at various locations, b) Surpluses and shortages, during various periods of the year, d Comparison of future demand with available supply at various location, and 4 Diversion of water from one sub-basin to another sub-basin to meet shortages.
10 PROBLEMS AND RESTRAINTS IN WATER RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT 10.1 Constitutional Aspects

a) Comparison

description

of

the

a) Criteria for irrigation,
industrial uses, etc;

power generation, for

b) Dependable surface water availability
various performances of water;

4

Rate of availability of water at various project sites at particular time within a year; and of available water in a river basin.

d) Distribution

This shall include description of the following: a) Constitutional 6 provisions with regard to

IS 13028 : 1991

various developments like agriculture, industry, power, transport, etc,

f) Problem of water logging, and g) Water quality.
11 DEVELOPMENTAL PLAN OF THE BASIN

b) Protection of established water rights and
uses;
.

This shall include description of the following:
11.1 Priority Uses of Water

4 Special interest of existing works and plans
envisaged by different state governments under various sectors in the basin; between

4 Need for coordination interests;
presently used;

conflicting

4 Existing riparian use and quantum of water

0 Commitments for identified projects such
as those included and in the Tribunal award; Proposed utilization under development overall river basin with break up utilization under each state. 10.2 Projection Assumption and their Limitation This shall include information on the following: of of

a) Immediate needs of the region, b) Priority of the immediate needs c) Long range needs and reservation of water for such uses, d) Types of structures required, e) Alternative proposals for immediate and long needs, and f) Alternative proposals for rehabilitation of population and environs. 11.2 Multiple Reuse Recycling of Water This shall include information on the following:

4 Possibility

and authenticity of the basin data; b) Assumed trends in economic growth; 4 Employment opportunity; d) Life of project and period considered for basin planning; and Character, sequence and rate of development and distribution of benefit.
10.3 Technological Aspects

a) Availability

of integerating various uses of water, b) Resolution of conflicts between competitive uses like ( space allocation time discharge 1, 4 Adjustment of local and state water utilization plans, and of non-consumptively d) Reuse/recycling consultive used resource.
11.3 Project Economics and Financial Feasibility

This shall include information

on the following:

4 Identification

This shall include information

on the following: water resouces

4 Unified
projects:

operation

of

b) Inter agency cooperation;
its scope; 4 Schemes for inter basin transfer of water; and Scienti6c advancement in water utilization 4 like pumped storage use of sprinklers, reuse of industrial and domestic waste water, etc.
10.4 Submergence 10.5 Environmental of Land, Habitats, Aspects etc

4 Need for augmenting water resources and

and evaluation of costs of various projects, b> Identification and evaluation of benefits and pattern of occurrence with respect to various projects, c) Conversion of costs and benefits to a common time data, 4 Computation of benefit costs ratio including intangible benefits, e) Allocation of costs to various purposes, and f> Costs reimbursement policy.
11.4 Optimum Water Plair. of the Basin

This shall include information

on the following:

4 Inventory

This shall include description of the following: a) Preservation of cultural heritage, b) Problem of land conservation and control, c) Problem of floods, d) Protection of basic resources, e) Disposal of pollutants and pollution of water bodies, 7

of selected water control and utilization works, b) Co-relation of existing projects in a basin, c>Co-ordination of system reservoirs, 4 Co-ordination of ground water and surface water projects, 4 Co-ordination of water plan with other developments, and f ) Outline of a phased programme of water resources development.
11.5 Rehabilitation Settlement

Standard Mark of the Bureau of Indian The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder.

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions

