IS 12967 ( Part 1) : 1990

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

.C

ANALYSISOFHYDRAULICTRANSIENTS INHYDRO-ELECTRICANDPUMPING PLANTS-CODEOFPRACTICE
PART 1 CRITERIA FOR ANALYSIS

UDC

627'844 : 620'162'4

: 621'311'21

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG Price Group 2

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Junua~

1991

Water

Conductor

Systems Sectional

Committee,

RVD

14

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 20 March 1990, after the draft finalized by the Water Conductor Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Projects Division Council. The hydraulic transients are caused due to unsteady discharges resulting from operation of hydroelectric and pumping plants. The hydraulic transients may be .caused both during normal or emergency conditions of operation. There are various devices to reduce or eliminate undesirable transients and it shall be selected after careful study of different alternatives.

IS 12967 ( Part

1) : 1990

Indian Standard

ANALYSIS OF HYDRAULIC TRANSIENTS IN HYDRO-ELECTRIC AND PUMPING PLANTS -CODE OF PRACTICE
PART 1 SCOPE 1.1 This code deals with the hydraulic transient in closed conduits of a Hydro-Electric Plant and discharge line of pumping plant.
2 TERMINOLOGY

1

CRITERIA

FOR

ANALYSIS
Starting pumping and stopping system; due the pumps in a

b) 4 d)
the follow-

Stoppage of pumps failure; and Resonance caused vibration of guide

to sudden

power

by leakage vanes.

from valves,

2.0 For the purpose of this standard ing definition shall apply.
2.1 Hydraulic Transient

4 DATA

4.1 For

In a closed conduit, when the flow is unsteady that is the discharge at each section is varying rapidly from one instant to the next, rapid occur inside the conduit. pressure changes Such pressure changes caused by rapid flow changes are termed as hydraulic transient. 3 CAUSES

calculation of hydraulic transient in a turbine penstock installation and pumping installation, data required is as follows: a) Turbine Penstock Installations

i)

Details of water conductor system such as profile length, shape, material of conduit and size of conduits; of tank

OF TRANSIENTS Penstock Installation

3.1 Turbine

location and characteristics ii) Type, protective devices such as surge and pressure relief valves; of iii) Type characteristics; iv) turbine and like

The following operations produce transient conditions in a turbine penstock installation: a)

turbine torque,

Unit Synchronized
i) Load ii) Load

to a Large System

Generator characteristics inertia and efficiency; of governor discharge

acceptance reduction Unit start up or total load rejection

v) Type and vi) Design

and its characteristics; and head on turbine.

b) Isolated i) Unit ii) Load iii)
C)

b) Pumping Installation i) Details of discharge line, such as, profile, length, shape and size of pipe line including location; ii) Type, location and characteristics of protection devices on pipe line such as surge tanks, air chamber, valves, etc; iii) Pump iv) Design produce discharge transient line of characteristics; discharge and head.

acceptance reduction or total load rejection

Load

Hydraulic transients produced by resonance due to the vibration of runner blade and guide vanes, leakage from valve seal and governor hunting. Pumping Installation

3.2

and pumping

The following operations state conditions in the pumping installations: a) Opening, closing a pipe-line;

5 OPERATIONAL

REQUIREMENTS

5.1 Following
operational hydraulic installation

or chattering

of valves in

are some of the constraints set by requirements for the calculation of transients in turbine-penstock and pumping installation. *

IS 12967 ( Part 5.2 Turbine -

1 ) : 1990 Penstock Installation in electrical from circuit

4

5.2.1 The maximum output that power breaker operation.

reduction can result

Unless the actual turbine characteristics are known the effective flow area through the turbine gates or nozzles during maximum rate of gate movement may be assumed to be linear with respect to time; turbine gates may be moved at any rate of travel by the action of the governor head up to a predetermined rate or at a slower rate by manual control The water through auxiliary relays. hammer effects may be computed on the basis of governor rate which is set by the relay valve stops for speed governor regulation;

5.2.2 The maximum allowable speed rise in the turbine fed by any one penstock. 5.2.3 The maximum rates of load change that generating plant is required to accommodate to satisfy system requirements. 5.2.4 Limitations set over the range of transient pressures. 5.3 Pumping Installation input of variation

e) The

5.3.1 The maximum reduction in power that can result from electrical faults. 5.3.2 Limitation set on the magnitude of variation of discharge. 5.3.3 Limitation pumps. 5.3.4 Limitation column separation 6' OPERATING set on reverse

The penstock alignment shall be checked such that due to load acceptance water column separation shall not cause a penstock failure due to collapse; and When the closure is set at a slow rate, the water hammer caused by runaway when full load discharge reduces to runaway discharge during the speed rise shall be considered. 6.1.2 Emergency Condition of Operation

and rate

rotation

of

set on the in pipe lines. CONDITIONS

formation

of

6.1 The pressure rise due to hydraulic transient conditions in a turbine penstock installations and pumping installations are considered for the following conditions. 6.2 Turbine
Normal

For emergency condition of operation the dynamic pressure rise is due to sudden load rejection. The basic conditions to be considered as emergency operation for an impulse and reaction turbine is as follows: a) Impulse turbine rise due to oil pressure or the needles are at mid-point, shall be taken slam closure of position.

-

Penstock

Installation

6.2.1

Operating Condition

The design criteria for dynamic pressure rise or drop due to water hammer under normal operating conditions shall be due to full load The basic acceptance. rejection or specified conditions to be considered as normal operations are as follows: The a> turbine-penstock installation may be any head between the operated at maximum and minimum water levels in the reservoir or forebay or surge tank;

The dynamic pressure needle slam on loss of mechanical failure. As hydraulically balanced the turbine flow cut-off as instantaneous due to of the needles from half b) Reaction turbine

b) 4

The turbines may be operating at any gate position and be required to drop any or all of the load; Where the turbine-penstock installation is equipped with any of the pressure control devices like surge tanks, relief valves, governor control device and cushioning it is assumed that these stroke device, devices are properly adjusted and function in the manner as contemplated in the design; 2

i) The turbine gates may be closed at any time by the action of the governor head, manual control of the main relay valve or by the emergency selenoid The gate traversing time will device. be taken as the minimum time for which the governor is designed; stroke or pressure ii) Cushioning valve if present, shall be assumed inoperative in one unit; and relief to be

iii) The water hammer shall be computed maximum reservoir head for the condition for final part gate closure to zero gate position on one unit at the maximum governor rate of*seconds. a 9

IS 12967 ( Part 1) : 1990 6.2 Pumping Installation 6.2.1 Normal Conditions of Operation
shall be as follows: Conditions of Operation a) Normal ( one unit ) than b) Normal ( more one unit) c) Emergency Factor of Safe& 2'0 1'6 1'25

i)

Pumps may be started or tripped manually or automatically throughout the entire range of pumping heads specified for the installation;

ii) If there is more than one pump on the line, all are tripped simultaneously, however, only one may be started; iii) Where the pump discharge system is equipped with any of the pressure control devices like surge tanks, air chambers;

7.2 The factor of safety is based on the yield point stress of steel pipe lines, turbine or pump casing. The factor of safety for specials like bifurcation is increased by 125 percent. 8 DEVICES FOR CONTROLLING TRANSIENTS

valve is present in the iv) If a check discharge line, the hydraulic transients will be computed on the basis that the check valves close immediately upon the reversal of flow; is present in the v) If an air chamber pump discharge line system, it is air assumed to have a minimum volume during the power failure; and vi) The alignment of the pump discharge line shall be checked to see that water column separation does not occur at any point, due to power failure. Conditions of Operation

8.1 The devices commonly used to reduce or to eliminate the undesirable transients such as and excessive pressure, column separation pump or turbine over speed following a power failure or load rejection are following:
i) Surge tanks; and

ii) Air chamber; iii)

Valves such as safety valves, pressure relief valve, pressure regulating valve, air inlet valves, check valves and bursting disc.

6.2.2 Emergency

8.2 Surge tank and pressure relief valves are used on a turbine penstock installation to control pressure rise due to hydraulic transient. On a pumping installation all the devices mentioned above are used together or in combination. 8.3 The also be methods: severity reduced changing increasing reducing of of undesirable by any of profile transients can the following

surge tanks or i> If surge suppressors, pressure relief valves are present only one will be assumed to be inoperative; ii) Closure of one of the check valves provided for shutting off return flow through the pumps is delayed and occurs at the time of maximum reverse flow; Air-inlet valves, if present in the system are assumed to be inoperative; and time of a

a) By b) By 4 By

of pipeline; of pipeline; wave velocity; downstream of

diameter water

hammer valves

d) Use
pumps;

check

iii)

failure occurs at any iv) Power during or following the starting pump or pumps. 7 FACTOR

NOTE-Wave velocity depends on elastic parameters and also conduit size, wall thickness and wall material and also external constraints such as type of support and freedom of longitudinal movement of conduit.

4 f)

OF SAFETY Installation

The rotation inertia of turbine or pump and of generator or motor mechanically coupled to turbine or pumps. Dual closing of guidance servomotors.

7.1 Turbine-Penstock

The minimum factor of safety to be adopted for the design of turbine penstock, surge tank and other pressure control devices to withstand normal and emergency condition of operation

8.4 The choice and type of controlling devices to be used shall be decided by various alternative studies. The alternative that gives an acceptable system response as defined by operation requirement and overall economical system shall be selected.

Standrrd Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marke$ products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau

of Indian

Standarda

BIS ir a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Zndtan Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications grade designations. BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

in in or ),

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent possession of the latest amendments or edition. to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No RVD 14 ( 4660 )

Amendments

Issued

Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarter::

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31,331 13 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. CALCUTTA Scheme VII M, V.I.P. 700054 Road, Maniktola 160036 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Officer )

331 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 2 1843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD.

Marol, Andheri (East)

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. .
Printed at Arcee Prerr, New Delhi. India

