( Reaffirmed 2002 )

' .A

Indian Standard

-.HANDLING CARCINOGENICSUBSTANCESCODEOFS/jFETY

UDC

614.878 : 661

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 2 ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI

July 1995

Chemical Hazards

Sectional

Committee,

CHD 007

F_OREWORD Cancer causing agents or substances are called carcinogens, capable of inducing tumors; possible examples are chemicals, viruses and some type of radiations. Exposure over a number of years to small amounts of carcinogens may be sufficient to cause cancer, even though at the time of exposure(s) they \ may not produce any warning signs ( such as odour ) or symptoms ( coughing or nausea ) on entering the body. Human exposure to carcinogens may occur in the work place through exposure to various industrial materials and processes. Seventy five percent cases of human cancer are influenced by extrinsic factors. Given the multiple sources of carcinogens in the work place and environment, it can be extremely difficult to attribute individual case of cancer to a single source. However, the reduction of exposure gens from any source should generally reduce the overall risk of cancer to humans. Effects of to carcinomutagenic and carcinogenic inducer can also be risk to humans. The composition in Annex A. Considerable safety: of technical committee responsible for the formulation publications of this Indian Standard is given in preparing this code of

assistance

has been derived from the following

Annals. Occup. Hyg. ( 1978 a) Alderson M. ( 1978 ) Industrial Cancer Whose Responsibility. Vol 21, 285291. b) Canadian Data Sheet of Occupational Safety and Health ( Rev. 1985 ) I-2, Ontario, Canada. C) Carcinogenic Substances Control and Regulation. NIOSH.

1

IS 14165 : 1995

Indian Standard

HANDLINGCARCINOGENICSUBSTANCBSCODBOFSAFETY
1 SCOPE This code covers _guidelines which followed while handling carcinogenic 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS No. should be substances. should be provided ventilation. with adequate local exhaust 6.3 Continuous general mechanical exhaust ventilation should be provided to ~a11 areas ( including storage ) so that air movement is always from general work areas to the carcinogen-handling areas. Regular certification proccdures must be in place to ensure that all air handling systems are working properly. The exhaust air should be discharged through a scmbber or flare system. In the case of failure of ventilation system, ~alarms and established evacuation procedure should be maintained. 6.4 In work areas where potentially high exposures may occur, it is essential to continuously monitor exposure levels. 6.5 Procedures should be established for removal and decontamination of carcinogens from equipment, material, clothing or other items. 6.6 Warning posted. 6.7 All labelled signs and instructions should be be

Title
Glossary of terms relating to chemical and radiation hazards and hazardous chemicals Glossary pollution of terms relating (fjrst revision ) to air

4155 : 1966

4167 : 1980

3 TERMINOLOGY
For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 4155 : 1966 and 4167 : 1980 shall apply. 4 PREVENTION MEASURES

4.1 The first line of defence is the recognition of the hazard. Maintain a list of known and suspected carcinogens used in the work place. 4.2 The second line of defence should be engineering controls at design stage. These eliminate controls which should strive to closed include a exposure to carcinogens, controls, mechanical seals, remote system, local ventilation or exhaust ventilation system. 4.3 In selecting engineering control measures, a number of factors should be considered by management such as carcinogenic potency; physical state ( gas, vapour, liquid, fume, dust ), particle size; reactivity and corrosiveness of the nature of the industrial process; carcinogen; amount of carcinogens handled; and duration of exposure. 4.4 Personal used wherever 5 HAZARD Carcinogenic less harmful 6 HAZARD 6.1 Processes protective required. ELIMINATION substances substances CONTROL to be Isolated should be used whenever which cannot be contained 1 shall where be replaced feasible. with equipment should be

containers of carcinogens should with instructions for safe handling. be developed

6.8 Appropriate measures should to prevent leakage or spillage. 7 SAFE WORK PRACTICES

7.1 Management, in conjunction with ployees, should establish codes of practice safe storage the use, and disposal carcinogens.

emfor of

7.2 Management should minimize the number of persons exposed and the duration and level of exposure, by job rotation if necessary. 7.3 Emergency procedures, including evacuation of personnel should be develo-ped for areas where it is possible to have serious leaks and spills. 7.4 Adequate hygienic should be established as given below. facilities and for exposed practices ~workers

6.2 Closed systems possible. Operations

7.4.1 A double locker system adjacent to a carcinogen handling area, where each worker has a locker for street clothes in clean locker room and a locker for work clothes.

IS 14165 : 1995 7.4.2 A shower room located between the two locker rooms so that each worker takes a shower before putting on street clothes. 7.4.3 Prior to leaving the carcinogen area, workers should leave their protective clothing At the and equipment at the point of exit. termination of shift workers should be required to place used clothing and equipment in impervious containers at the point of exit for the purpose of decontamination or disposal. 7.4.4 Workers should wash hands, forearms, face and neck on each exit from carcinogenhandling area, using facilities adjacent to the point of exit, and before engaging in other activities such as eating, drinking, smoking and using toilet facilities. 7.4.5 Workers their shift. should shower after the end of 9.2 Provide workers engaged in specific carcinogen-handling operations with suitable respirators, approved for protection against the hazard in question. 9.3 Provision of safety showers fountains, in the work areas. 10 WASTE DISPOSAL and eye wash *

Disposal methods should be used which do not permit carcinogens to be introduced into work areas and which do not pollute the external environment. Discharge to the environment shall be avoided to the extent possible or it shall be avoided in accordance with the relevant rules and regulations. 11 VIRUSES Guidelines on the handling DNA molecules and animal should be followed. 12 RADIATION of recombinant viruses and cells

7.4.6 Drinking fountains in the carcinogen handling 7.4.7 Eating, drinking, to be prohibited in areas.

are not area.

to be placed are

chewing or smoking the carcinogen-handling

Radiation devices in ionizing and non-ionizing frequencies considered to be hazardous to health must be examined and approved. 12.1 Maintenance Only specifically trained employees should be allowed to maintain or repair equipment contaminated with carcinogenic substances ( including leaks, spills, and the replacement of filters in gas or liquid lines ). In the case of an actual or a suspected spill all materials used in the clean up should be disposed off in accordance with an approved method for the particular chemical product involved. 12.2 All contaminated waste material shall be transported in leak-proof containers. The waste container should bear the sign: CAUTIONCANCER CAUSING AGENT. Where such work could result in direct contact with the carcinogen, employees may have to wear clean impervious garments gloves and boots and a hood continuous'y supplied with clean air. Before removing protective gear, employees must first decontaminate its outer surface, then place such clothing and gear in impervious, properly labelled containers for decontamination or disposal. Following removal, employees must take shower. 13 SECONDARY PREVENTION

7.4.8 Dry sweeping is to be prohibited in areas. carcinogen-handling ( Any vacuum cleaners used, should be equipped with high efficiency filters. ) 8 SAFETY PROCEDUR-ES FOR WORKERS

8.1 Approved protective clothing and respiratory equipment such as continuous air-supplied hoods or masks, impervious gloves, boots and overalls, shall be provided. 8.2 Decontamination of the protective ments and hoods should be done after use. 8.3 Workers should use the shower removal of the protective garments. garafter

8.4 Periodic medical check up of all employees should be carried out at a suitable frequency. 8.5 Workers having keratosis, warts or xeroderma ( dryness of the skin ) should not be employed in occupation where there is cancer hazard. 9 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT

If personal protective garments are used, they should be of the type which may be decontaminated or discarded after use. so that the worker may not accidentally inhale or ingest contaminants adhering to his clothing or body or contaminant does not remain in contact with the skin. 9.1 Provide workers protective clothing, etc. with clean, complete shoe, covers and body gloves

This term is used for approaches that do not remove carcinogenic agent, but aim to identify disease at ~a stage when successful treatment can be applied. Screening of workers to identify disease by physical examination includes cytology on a specimen, urine, blood, chest x-ray, or periodic cytoscopy and other internal 2

IS 14165 : 1995

* examination, secondary prevention of cancer requires collaboration between management, individuals and the health Department. 14 EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMME
TRAINING

Before ~being allowed to work with car_cinogens, employees must receive specific training programme regularly in the following subjects; the carcinogenic potential of these substances; the kind of assignments which could result in exposure: decontamination and emergency procedures; the employees specific role in recognizing situations which may result in the release of these substances. This training must be repeated at appropriate intervals following the initial instruction. 14.1 Personnel
14.1.1 Selection Examination Pre-placement

occur. The purpose of this examination is to establish a base line against which changes can be measured and to determine whether there exists any medical or other conditions which may lead to increased risk in the work situation. Specific test for particular torgent organ should be conducted. 14.1.2 It is suggested that while conducting pre-employment and periodical medical examination, patch test should be performed to find out whether a person is allergic to the carcino genie substances. It will avoid skin disorders or any skin cancer. 14.2 Medical Examinations The purpose of periodic medical examination is to determine whether a change in health status has occurred or if other conditions have developed which might lead to increased risk in the work situation. It should be noted, however, that it is unlikely these examinations can prevent the occurrence of cancer in an individual who is exposed to carcinogens. Specific regular biological monitoring test should be conducted for suspected type of cancer.

A pre-placement examination should be completed by a physician who has been expert in ?oxicology of hazardous substances, on each new worker or transferee prior to employment in an area where exposure to carcinogens may

3

IS 14165: 1995

ANNEX ( Foreword

A
)

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 007
Chairman

Refiresenting Defence Recruitment Indian Petrochemical Board, New Delhi Corporation Bombay Advice Service & Labour Institute, Ltd, Vadodara

DR R. K. GARQ Members DR S. K. AWASTHI
SHRI D. C. BHATT (-Altematr DR A. BHASRAR SHRI A. JHAVAR ( Ahnate )

)

Hindustan Directorate Bombay

Lever Limited,

SHRI A. K. CHAKXABORTY

General of Factory

DR J. G. BOM~NE ( Alternate ) Tata Rislr Management Services, New Delhi SHRI A. CHATTERJI SHRI SUBIR GUPTA ( Alternate ) Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani SHRI V. H. CHUDAMANI SHRI A. G. SESHAN ( Alternafe ) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Bombay SHRI P. K. GHO~H Excel Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. M. KARIA SHRI MOHAN PAT~L ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Ordinance Factory Board, Calcutta Sanr K. G. KAIXAL SHRI Y. R. J~ISBIMA ( Alternate ) Southern Petrochemical Industries Corporation Ltd, Tuticorin SHRI T. S. KRIS~NAN SHRI J. P. AZARIAH WINSTON ( Alternate ) Shriram Food & Fertilizers Industries, New Delhi SHRI A. K. MEHRA SHRI SURINDER KUMAR ( Alternate ) Department of Explosives, Nagpur DR H. MUKI<ERJIE SHRI A. S. GHOS~L ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centte, Bombay SHRI L. V. SHASTRX National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmadabad DR D. J. PARIKH DR T. 5. PATEL ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGQA ), New Delhi De S. S. RATHI SHRI R. Das ( Alternate ) National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. A. RAMAKUISHN~N DR AJAY PRAKASIX ( Alternate ) Century Rayon, Kalyan DR K. V. R.~MALJN~AM SHRI JAYANTA AD~IA ( Alternate ) Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, Calcutta REPRESENT~~.IVE National Safety Council, Bombay REPPRES&NTATIVE Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE Oil Industries Safety Directorate, Bombay REPRESENTATIVE Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Virbhadra SERI J. P. SAXENA Dn S. P. SH+.RM~ ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi SERI K. D. SHAHMA SHRI C. D. BANKAR ( Alternate ) Ministry of Environment &Forests, New Delhi DR M. SENQUPTA DR ( SHHIMATI ) INDRANI C~ANDRASEKARAN ( Alternate ) Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow Dn P. K. SETH DR P. N. VISWANATHAN ( Alternate ) Projects & Development India Ltd, Sindri $,HRIA. C. SRIVASTAVA Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, New Delhi SHRIMATI SUNITA KUXAR Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), New Delhi Dn P. S. VENKATARAMANI DR A. K. SAXENA ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI ANJAN KAY, Director ( Chem ) Member Secretary SHRI P. P. MALIK Joint Director (Chem ), BIS

4

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards A&, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No: CHD 007 (9453).

Amendments Issued Since Publicatioo Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160022 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone

I

I

331 01 13 31 75

378626, 37 84 99, 378662 37 85 61 ( 60 38 20 25 43

I 235 02 15 16, 19, 235 23523 04 42 15

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

632 92~95, 632 78 58
I 632 78 91, 632 78 92

BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA.
irinted at New lndla Printing F'reas. Khurja. India

