NAT He IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


safra sit Aart 
th uNa ch Tau forge 
ATT 6 forget oh SAO fete ANTE TAT 


Lifts for the Transport of 
Persons and Goods 


Part 6 Guide for Maintenance of Lifts 


ICS 91.140.90 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2022 Price Group 7 


Lifts, Escalators and Moving Walks Sectional Committee, ETD 25 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Lifts, Escalators 
and Moving Walks Sectional committee was approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


With ageing population and growth of vertical cities, the installation of lifts are multiplying multi-fold year on 
year. In office spaces, shopping centres, department stores, cinemas, airports, train stations and a host of other 
buildings, they are quietly, efficiently, safely and unobtrusively transporting large numbers of people. 


The maintenance of lifts is of utmost importance as: 
a) these installations are used intensively, all over the year; 
b) operating conditions vary widely throughout a typical day: rush hours followed by periods of 
downtime; and 
c) equipments suffer from corrosion and deterioration: winter conditions, sea air, sand, dust, pollution, 
and so on. 
The key to their smooth and successful operation is efficient planning, installation and quality maintenance. 
The objective of this standard is to provide the maintenance requirements for lifts. Only correct and preventive 


maintenance performed by a competent maintenance person in conformity with the maintenance instructions can 
ensure the safe and intended functioning of an installation. 


In this standard it is assumed that the installation to be maintained has already been installed in the market. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Indian Standard 


LIFTS FOR THE TRANSPORT OF 
PERSONS AND GOODS 


PART 6 GUIDE FOR MAINTENANCE OF LIFTS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard is applicable for all new installed 
passenger lifts, goods passenger lifts, goods lifts, 
service lifts, as defined in 3 of IS 14665 (Parts 1 to 4), 
IS 14671, IS 15259, IS 15330 and IS 15785. 


This standard specifies the elements necessary for the 
preparation of the instructions for the maintenance 
operations (see 3.1), which are provided for new 
installed lifts. 


This standard does not cover instructions for the 
installation and the dismantling. 


Existing installations are not covered by this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


14665 (Part 1) : 
2000 


Electric traction lifts: Part 1 
Guidelines for outline dimensions 
of passenger, goods, service and 
hospital lifts 


14665 (Part 2/ 
Sec | and 2): 
2000 


Electric traction lifts: Part 2 
Code of practice for installation, 
operation and maintenance, 
Section 1 Passenger and goods 
lifts, 


Section 2 Service lifts 


14665 (Part 3/ Electric traction lifts: Part 3 
Sec 1 and2): Safety rules, 
2000 


Section 1 Passenger and goods 
lifts 


Section 2 Service lifts 


14665 (Part 4/ 
Sec | to 9): 
2001 


14671 : 1999 


15259 : 2002 
15330 : 2020 


15785 : 2007 


16449 (Part 1): 


2018 


16449 (Part 2) : 


2018 


16449 (Part 3) : 


2018 


IS/ISO 9001 : 
2015 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


Electric traction lifts: Part 4 


Components, 
Section | Lift buffers 


Section 2 Lift guide rails and 
guide shoes 


Section 3 Lift car-frame, car, 
counterweight and suspension 


Section 4 Lift safety gears and 
governors 


Section 5 Lift retiring cam 


Section 6 Lift doors and locking 
devices and contacts 


Section 7 Lift machines and 
brakes 


Section 8 Lift wire ropes 


Section 9 Controller and operating 
devices for lifts 


Code of practice for installation 
and maintenance of hydraulic lift 


Installation and maintenance of 
home lifts — Code of practice 


Requirements of lifts for persons 
with disabilities (first revision) 


Installation and maintenance of 
lift without conventional machine 
rooms — Code of practice 


Graphical symbols — Safety 
colors and safety signs: Part 1 
Design principles for safety signs 
and safety markings 


Graphical symbols — Safety 
colors and safety signs: Part 2 
Design principles for product 
safety labels 


Graphical symbols — Safety 
colors and safety signs: Part 3 
Design principles for graphical 
symbols for use in safety signs 
Quality management systems — 
Requirements (fourth revision) 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS - SYMBOLS 
AND ABBREVIATIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions in all 
the standards referred in 2 above and the following 


apply: 


3.1 Maintenance — All the necessary operations 
to ensure the safe and intended functioning of the 
installation and its components after the completion of 
the installation and throughout its life cycle. 


3.1.1 Maintenance includes: 
a) lubrication, cleaning etc; 


However, the following cleaning operations 
cannot be considered as maintenance: 


1) Cleaning of the external parts of the well, 
2) Cleaning of the inside of the car. 

b) checks; 

c) passenger rescue operations; 

d) the operations of setting and adjustment; 


e) repair or changing of components which may 
occur due to wear and tear and do not affect the 
characteristics of the installation. 


3.1.2 The following are not considered as maintenance 
operations: 


a) changing of major component such as the machine, 
even if the characteristics of the new component 
are the same as the original; 


b) replacement of installation; 


c) modernization of the installation including 
changing of any characteristics of the installation 
(such as load, speed etc.); and 


d) rescue operation carried out by fire brigade. 


3.2 Maintenance Organization — Company or part 
of company where competent maintenance person(s) 
carry out maintenance operation on behalf ofthe owner 
of the installation. 


3.3 Competent Maintenance Person — Designated 
person, suitably trained, qualified by knowledge 
and practical experience, provided with necessary 
instructions and supported within their maintenance 
organization to enable the required maintenance 
operations to be safely carried out. 


3.4 Manufacturer — Person who takes responsibility 
for the design, manufacture and placing on the market 
the safety components for elevators. 


3.5 Installer — Person who takes responsibility for 
the design, manufacture, installation and placing on the 
market of lifts. 


3.6 Installation — Completely installed lift. 


3.7 Owner of the Installation — Person who has the 
power of disposal of the installation and/or takes the 
responsibility for its operation and use. 


4 ELABORATION OF MAINTENANCE 
INSTRUCTIONS 


4.1 General 


The installation covered by this draft Indian standard 
shall be maintained in good working order in accordance 
with the installer’s instructions. To this effect, regular 
maintenance of the installation shall be carried out to 
ensure, in particular, the safety of the installation and of 
those using the installation. The safety of an installation 
shall take into account the ability to be maintained 
without causing injury or damage to health. 


Regular maintenance of the installation shall be carried 
out to ensure the reliability of the installation. 


The access and the associated environment shall be 
maintained in good working order in accordance with 
the installer’s instructions. 


The instructions for maintenance of an installation 
shall be provided by the installer as defined in 3.5, 
after completion of the installation as a result of a risk 
assessment. 


The instructions for maintenance of an installation shall 
be provided by the manufacturer, as defined in 3.4, 
when placed on the market, and be the result of a rise 
assessment. 


In order that the aim of the maintenance instructions 
can be achieved, they shall be formulated so that they 
can be clearly and easily understood by competent 
maintenance person. 


The competent maintenance person within the 
maintenance organization shall be continuously 
updated. 
NOTE — The owner of the installation should be informed 
that the qualification of the maintenance organization is in 
conformity with the regulation applicable in the country/state 
in which the installation operates. If no such regulation exists, 
the qualification can be ensured by the certified quality system 
in accordance with IS/ISO 9001 supplemented if necessary to 
take into account the specific features of the installation. 
The installer/manufacturer shall provide maintenance 
instructions intended for the owner of the installation 
(see 4.3.2) including the information intended for the 
maintenance organization (see 4.3.3). 


4.2 Elements to be taken 
Maintenance Instructions 


into Account for 


When preparing the content of the maintenance 
instructions (see 4.3, 5 and 6), the following elements 
shall be taken into account: 


a) The specifications and the intend use of the 
installation (type of installation, performance, 
etc); 


b) The environment in which the installation and 
its components are installed (weather conditions, 
vandalism etc); 


c) Any restriction of use; 


d) The result of risk assessment (see 5) for every 
working area and for every task undertaken; 


e) The specific maintenance instructions provided by 
the manufacturer of safety components; and 


f) In case of components other than safety 
components, where maintenance is necessary, 
the maintenance instructions provided by the 
manufacturer of these components. 


4.3 Information to be Included in the Maintenance 
Instructions 


4.3.1 General 


The maintenance instructions shall contain information 
relating to the tasks of the owner and respectively the 
maintenance organization. 


4.3.2 Information to the Owner of the Installation 


The information relating to the tasks of the owner of the 
installation shall include the following: 


4.3.2.1 The need for the owner to keep the installation 
in a safe operating condition. To fulfill this the owner 
shall use a maintenance organization complying with 
the requirements of the draft Standard. 
NOTE — It is recommended to inform the owner of the 
installation about the need to use a maintenance organization 


with adequate and proper insurance cover provided by an 
insurance company. 


4.3.2.2 The need for the owner to take care of any 
National/State regulations and other requirements, 
where relevant, and their implications on maintenance. 


4.3.2.3 The need for planned maintenance to be carried 
out by a maintenance organization, at the latest when 
the installation is put into service or if the installation is 
to remain unused for a long period of time before first 
being put into service. 


4.3.2.4 The importance for the owner of the installation 
to have the same maintenance organization in the case 
of several installations having common well/spaces 
and/or machine room. 


4.3.2.5 The need for the owner of a passenger-goods 
passenger lift to keep the two-way means of 
communication efficient and may be linked to a 24 h 
rescue service for the whole of the time that the 
installation can be used. 


4.3.2.6 The need for the owner to remove the 
passenger-/goods passenger lift from service when the 
two-way means of communication is out of order if it is 
not restored within 24 h. 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


4.3.2.7 The need for the owner to put the installation 
out of service in case of dangerous situations. 


4.3.2.8 The need for the owner of the installation to 
inform the maintenance organization: 


a) immediately about any perceived abnormal 
operation of the installation or abnormal change 
in its direct environment; 


b) immediately after putting the installation out of 
service in the case of a dangerous situation; 


c) after any rescue intervention by their authorized 
and instructed person(s) (see 6); 


d) before any modification related to the installation 
and/or its environment or use; 
NOTE — The owner of the installation should obtain from 
the company carrying out the relevant modification the 
maintenance instructions for the maintenance organization. 

e) before any authorized third party inspection or 
works other than maintenance works are carried 
out on the installation; 


f) before taking the installation out of service for a 
prolonged period of time; and 


g) before putting the installation back into service 
after a prolonged period of non operating time. 


4.3.2.9 The need for the owner of the installation to 
take into consideration the consequences of the risk 
assessment carried out by the maintenance organization 
(see 4.3.3.4 and 5.1). 


4.3.2.10 The need for the owner of the installation to 
make sure that the risk assessment for maintenance is 
carried out: 


a) if the maintenance organization is replaced; 


b) if the use of the building and/or the installation 
changes; 


c) after a major modification of the installation or of 
the building; and 


d) if it is the case, after an accident involving the 
installation. 


4.3.2.11 The need for the building owner to ensure, 
through a risk assessment, that: 


a) their premises are safe and free from risk to health 
as far as is practicable. This includes access to the 
premises and installation equipment, and articles 
or substances used according to the regulation for 
the use of work equipment at the workplace; 


b) the persons using the premises are informed about 
any remaining risks; and 

c) any action to be done as a consequence of his risk 
assessment is carried out. 


Regarding the access ways to areas reserved to 
maintenance persons, the need for the owner of the 
installation to inform the maintenance organization, in 
particular about: 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


1) the access ways to be used and fire evacuating 
procedures from the building; 


2) the place where the keys of the reserved areas 
can be found; 


3) if necessary, the persons who shall accompany 
the maintenance persons to the installation; and 


4) if necessary, personal protective equipment 
to be used in the access ways, and, possibly, 
where this equipment can be found. 


The information shall be made available also on site to 
the maintenance organization. 


4.3.2.12 The need for the owner of the installation to 
ensure that the name and the telephone number of the 
maintenance organization are always available to the 
user of the installation, permanently affixed and clearly 
visible. 


4.3.2.13 The need for the owner of the installation to 
ensure that the keys of machine and pulley room doors 
(trap doors) and of inspection and emergency doors 
(trap doors) are permanently available in the building 
and are used only by persons authorized to gain access. 


4.3.2.14 The need for the owner of the installation to 
provide, in all circumstances, safe access to the building 
and to the installation for the maintenance organization 
involved in the rescue of persons. 


4.3.2.15 The need for the owner of the installation to 
keep the access to working areas and working rooms 
safe and free for the maintenance persons and to 
inform the maintenance organization about any hazard 
or change in the workplace and/or the access ways 
(lighting, obstructions, ground conditions, etc.). 


4.3.2.16 In addition to those examinations and tests 
which the owner of the installation entrusts to the 
maintenance organization, there is need for the owner 
to carry out periodically, in their own interests, the 
following: 


A full ascent and descent to assess any changes in the 
quality of the ride or damage to the equipment. 


Typical items to be checked to ensure that they are in 
place, undamaged and functioning correctly are: 


a) landing doors and bottom door tracks; 

b) stopping accuracy; 

c) indicators that are not located in a reserved area; 
d) landing push controls; 

e) car push controls; 

f) door open controls; 


g) two-way means of communication in the car 
which provides permanent contact with a rescue 
service; 


h) normal car lighting; 
j) door reversal device; 


k) safety signs/pictograms. 


m) Automatic Rescue Device/Alternate Power Supply, 
if applicable. 


For goods only and service lifts, the checks to be carried 
out are the same, when relevant. 


4.3.3 Information for the Maintenance Organization 


The information relating to the tasks of the maintenance 
organization shall include the following: 


4.3.3.1 The need to carry out the work of maintenance 
in conformity with the maintenance instructions and 
based on systematic maintenance checks. 


After these checks, the maintenance organization shall 
decide in conformity with the maintenance instructions 
what is required to be done. 


A list of typical examples of maintenance checks to 
maintain the installation is shown in Annex A. 
NOTE — Due to the fact that the components can be different 


in design and operation, it is therefore not possible to give 
specific guidelines in this Standard. 


4.3.3.2 The need to update the original maintenance 
instructions if the installation changes its intended use 
and/or the environmental conditions existing on the 
completion of the installation. 
NOTE — The maintenance organization should be provided 
by the owner of the installation with the relevant maintenance 


instructions where modifications are carried out on the 
installation. 


4.3.3.3 The need for the maintenance organization to 
ensure that a risk assessment for any working area 
and for any maintenance operation has been carried 
out taking into account the installer’s maintenance 
instructions and all information supplied by the owner 
of the installation. 


4.3.3.4 The need for the maintenance organization to 
inform the owner of the installation about any work to 
be carried out as a consequence of a risk assessment 
especially for the access and/or the environment related 
to the building installation. 


4.3.3.5 The need to carry out a maintenance plan so that 
preventive maintenance is suitable for the installation and 
maintenance time is as short as reasonably practicable, 
without reducing the safety of persons, in order to 
minimize the non-operational time of the installation. 


4.3.3.6 The need to adapt the plan for maintenance so as 
to take account of any predictable failures, for example, 
those due to misuse, mishandling, deterioration, etc. 


4.3.3.7 The need to carry out maintenance operations by 
competent maintenance persons (see 3.3) and provided 
with the necessary tools and equipment. 


4.3.3.8 The need to maintain the competency of 
maintenance persons. 


4.3.3.9 The need to carry out the maintenance 
periodically. 


In determining the frequency of maintenance 
interventions, the following non-exhaustive list should 
be considered: 


a) number of trips per year, operating time and any 
non operating periods of time; 


b) age and condition of the installation; 


c) location and type of building in which the 
installation is installed, as well as the needs of the 
users and/or the kind of goods transported; 


d) local environment where the installation is 
situated, as well as external environmental 
elements, for example, weather conditions (rain, 
heat, cold, etc.) or vandalism. 


4.3.3.10 The need to provide a 24 h, all year round 
call-out service for rescue of persons. 


4.3.3.11 The need to keep records of the result of each 
intervention due to a failure of the installation. These 
records shall include the type of failures in order to 
detect any repetition. They shall be available to the 
owner of the installation on request. 


4.3.3.12 The need to put out of service the installation 
ifthe maintenance organization is aware ofa dangerous 
situation, detected during the maintenance, which 
cannot be eliminated immediately, and to inform the 
owner of the installation of the need to keep it out of 
service until repaired. 


4.3.3.13 The need to be organized to provide the 
necessary spare parts for any repair. 


4.3.3.14 The possible need for attendance of a 
competent maintenance person(s), given reasonable 
notice, for any inspection carried out by an authorized 
third party or for building maintenance works to be 
carried out in the areas reserved for the maintenance 
organization. 


4.3.3.15 The need to inform in due time the owner of 
the installation about necessary progressive upgrading 
of the installation. 


4.3.3.16 The need to organize rescue operations, even 
with subcontractor(s), and to make provision for 
circumstances such as fire, panic, etc. 


5 RISK ASSESSMENT 


5.1 General 


Before an installation is placed on the market, it is 
necessary that the installer/manufacturer carries out a 
risk assessment. Every risk shall be limited as much as 
reasonably possible by means of safety measures and 
suitable instructions. The instructions can never replace a 
safety measure which can be provided to reduce the risk. 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


It is necessary to determine the different intervention 
procedures of the maintenance operations and to 
determine the appropriate safety measures for each of 
these procedures. 


The use of diagnostic systems may support fault 
finding, improve the maintainability of the installation 
and reduce the exposure of maintenance persons to 
hazards. 


Safety in maintenance operations of the installation is 
ensured by adopting safety measures and providing 
instructions. Safety measures on the installation and in 
the building shall be provided by the installer and by 
the owner of the installation respectively. 


For any working area, it is necessary to identify the 
list of the specific hazards related to health and safety 
and to carry out a risk assessment for any maintenance 
operation, including access to the working area. 


For this purpose, the following should be taken into 
account: 


a) presence of one or more maintenance persons in a 
working area; 


b) foreseeable actions of persons other than 
maintenance persons (for example, person 
switching on or off power circuits and dependent 
circuits or lighting circuits or trying to use the 
installation during maintenance operations, etc.); 
and 


c) possible states of the installation (normal 
or abnormal due to a foreseeable failure of 
its component parts, external disturbances, 
disturbance of its power supply, etc.). 


Annex B gives a list of examples of elements to be taken 
into account in any risk assessment for maintenance 
operations. However, several methods are available for 
the systematic assessment of risk. 


5.2 Information for the Maintenance Organization 


For safe maintenance and to provide relevant 
instructions, it is necessary, first of all, to identify the 
maintenance operations. 


In particular, maintenance operations are: 


a) those operations considered necessary for a 
correct and safe functioning of the installation 
and its components after the completion of the 
installation; and 


b) those operations considered necessary during the 
“life” of some components, determining, as far 
as possible, the time or condition after which the 
functioning or the integrity of the component is 
not longer ensured even if correctly maintained. 


In carrying out specific maintenance operations, 1f it is 
necessary to neutralize some safety functions (for example, 
an electric safety device), the hazard identification shall 
be taken into account for such a situation. 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


It is necessary to inform and warn the maintenance 
persons about: residual risks, that is, those for which 
risk reduction by design and safeguarding techniques 
are not-or not totally-effective. 


Risks that arise from the necessary removal of certain 
guards to carry out specific maintenance operations. 


The maintenance instructions and warnings shall 
prescribe the procedures and operating modes intended 
to overcome these risks and, if it is necessary, to specify 
personal protective equipment, instruments, tools and 
provisions to be used. 


6 INFORMATION TO THE OWNER FOR LIFT 
RESCUE OPERATIONS 


The information to the owner shall include at least: 


6.1 The need for person(s) authorized by the owner 
of the installation to rescue trapped passengers to be 
trained by the maintenance organization. 

NOTE — As an alternative, the owner of the installation can 


arrange training for their authorized person(s) by a competent 
third party in conformity with the maintenance instructions. 


6.2 The need to ensure that the training is appropriate to 
the specific installation and updated. 


6.3 The need to ensure his authorized person(s) rescue 
people only through landing doors. 


6.4 The need to ensure that the maintenance organization 
is called when the owner’s authorized person(s) are not 
able to move the car through the use of the manual 
and/or electric emergency devices. 


6.5 The need to inform their authorized person(s) 
about any conditions for which only the maintenance 
organization shall carry out a rescue operation. 


7 MARKINGS, SIGNS, PICTOGRAMS AND 
WRITTEN WARNINGS 


If the risk assessment of the maintenance organization 
indicates that additional specific warnings are required 
for the purpose of maintenance, these shall be affixed 
directly on the installation/component or, when this is 
not possible, in the close vicinity. 


Markings, signs, pictograms and written warnings shall 
be readily understandable and unambiguous. Readily 
understandable signs and pictograms shall be used in 
preference to written warnings. 


Signs or written warnings carrying only “DANGER” 
shall not be used. 

Information affixed directly on the installation/component 
shall be permanent and legible. 

Any markings, signs, pictograms and written warnings 
affixed on the installation shall be renewed if they become 
illegible. 


8 FORMAT OF THE MAINTENANCE 
INSTRUCTION HANDBOOK 


8.1 The maintenance instruction handbook for any 
installation shall contain at the front at least the following: 
a) type of installation, with its serial number, to which 
the instructions apply; 
b) title of the handbook; 
c) date of issue; 
d) name and address of the installer/manufacturer; and 


e) name of the publisher, when different from the 
installer/manufacturer. 


8.2 In the handbook: 
a) all units used shall be SI units; 


b) all pages shall be provided with a means to detect 
missing pages (numbers); and 


c) all references to other documents shall be in full. 


Warnings shall state the hazard, the related risks and the 
appropriate safety measure. 


Type and size of print shall ensure the best possible 
legibility. Safety warnings and/or precautions shall be 
emphasized through the use of colors or symbols and/ 
or large print. Where possible, signs shall comply with 
IS 16449 series. 


Documents giving instructions for maintenance shall be 
produced in durable form (that is, they shall be able to 
survive frequent handling) or triplicate copies shall be 
provided. 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.3.3.1 ) 


TYPICAL EXAMPLES OF CHECKS TO BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT IN MAINTENANCE 


A-1 ELECTRIC LIFTS 


INSTRUCTIONS 


i) General Check all components are clean and kept free from dust and corrosion. 
ii) Pit area Check for excess oil/grease at bottom of guides. 
Check the pit area is clean, dry and free from debris. 
ili) Anti-rebound device and Check for free movement and operation. 
switch (where fitted) Check for equal tension of ropes. 
Check switch where fitted. 
Check lubrication. 
iv) Buffers Check oil level. 
Check lubrication. 
Check switch where fitted. 
Check fixings. 
v) Drive motor/Generator Check bearings for wear. 
Check lubrication. 
Check condition of commutator. 
vi) | Gear box Check gear for wear. 
Check lubrication. 
vii) | Traction sheave Check condition and grooves for wear. 
viii) | Brake Check braking system. 
Check parts for wear. 
Check stopping accuracy. 
1x) Controller Check cabinet is clean, dry and free from dust. 
x) Over speed governor and Check moving parts for free movement and wear. 
tension pulley Check operation. 
Check switch. 
xi) | Main rope diverter pulley(s) | Check condition and grooves for wear. 
Check bearings for abnormal noise and/or vibrations. 
Check guarding. 
Check lubrication. 
xii) | Car/Counterweight guides Check for film of oil where required on all guide surfaces. 
Check fixings. 
xiii) | Car/Counterweight guide Check guide shoes/rollers for wear. 
shoes Check fixings. 
Check lubrication where necessary. 
xiv) | Electric wiring Check insulation. 
xv) | Lift car Check emergency lighting, car buttons, and key switches. 
Check fixings of panels and ceiling. 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


xvi) | Safety gear(s)/Ascending car | Check moving parts for free movement and wear. 
over speed protection means | Check lubrication. 
Check fixings. 
Check operation. 
Check switch. 
xvii) | Suspension ropes/chains Check for wear, elongation and tension. 
Check lubrication only where intended. 
xviii) | Rope/chains terminations Check for deterioration and wear. 
Check fixings. 
xix) | Landing entrances Check operation of landing locks. 
Check doors for free running. 
Check door guiding. 
Check door gaps. 
Check wire rope, chain or belt when used, for integrity. 
Check emergency unlocking device. 
Check lubrication. 
xx) | Car door Check door closed contact or lock. 
Check doors for free running. 
Check door guiding. 
Check door gaps. 
Check wire rope or chain when used for integrity. 
Check passenger door protective device. 
Check lubrication. 
xxi) | Floor level Check stopping accuracy at landing. 
xxii) | Final limit switches Check operation. 
xxiii) | Motor run time limiter Check operation. 
xxiv) | Electric safety devices Check operation. 
Check electric safety chain. 
Check correct fuses are fitted. 
xxv) | Emergency alarm device Check operation. 
xxvi) | Landing controls and Check operation. 
indicators 
xxvil) | Well lighting Check operation 
xxviii) | Automatic rescue device Check operation, check batteries 


A-2 HYDRAULIC LIFTS 


1) General 


Check all components are clean and kept free from dust and corrosion. 


ii) Pit area 


Check for excess oil/grease at bottom of guides. 


Check the pit area is clean, dry and free from debris. 


Buffers 


Check oil level. 

Check lubrication. 

Check switch where fitted. 
Check fixings. 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


iv) | Tank unit Check hydraulic fluid level. 
Check tank and valve unit for leakage. 
v) Jack Check for oil leakage. 
vi) | Telescopic jack Check for synchronisation. 
vii) | Controller Check cabinet is clean, dry and free from dust. 
viii) | Overspeed governor and Check moving parts for free movement and wear. 
tension pulley Check operation. 
Check switch. 
ix) | Main rope pulley(s) Check condition and grooves for wear. 
Check bearings for abnormal noise and/or vibrations. 
Check guarding. 
Check lubrication. 
x) Car/Balancing weight/jack | Check for film of oil where required on all guide surfaces. 
guides Check fixings. 
xi) | Car/Balancing weight/jack | Check guide shoes/rollers for wear. 
guide shoes Check fixings. 
Check lubrication where necessary. 
xii) | Electric wiring Check insulation. 
xiii) | Lift car Check emergency lighting, car buttons, key switches. 
Check fixings of panels and ceiling. 
xiv) | Safety gear/Pawl clamping | Check moving parts for free movement and wear. 
devices Check lubrication. 
Check fixings. 
Check operation. 
Check switch. 
xv) . i Check for wear, elongation and tension. 
: Suspension ropes/Chains — - 
xvi) Check lubrication only where intended. 
xvii) | Ropes/Chains terminations | Check for deterioration and wear. 
Check fixings. 
xviii) | Landing entrances Check operation of landing locks. 
Check doors for free running. 
Check door guiding. 
Check door gaps. 
Check wire rope, chain or belt when used, for integrity. 
Check emergency unlocking device. 
Check lubrication. 
xix) | Car door Check door closed contact or lock. 


Check doors for free running. 

Check door guiding. 

Check door gaps. 

Check wire rope or chain when used for integrity. 
Check passenger door protective device. 


Check lubrication. 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


XX) Floor level Check stopping accuracy at landing. 
xxi) | Final limit switch Check operation. 
xxii) | Motor run time limiter Check operation. 
xxili) | Electric safety devices Check operation. 
Check electric safety chain. 
Check correct fuses are fitted. 
xxiv) | Emergency alarm device Check operation. 
xxv) | Landing controls and Check operation. 
indicators 
xxvi) | Well lighting Check operation 
xxvil) | Anti-creep device Check operation 
xxvill) | Rupture valve/One way Check operation. 
restrictor 
xxix) | Pressure relief valve Check operation. 
xxx) | Manual lowering valve Check operation. 
xxxi) | Hand pump Check operation. 
xxxii) | Hose/Pipe work Check for damage and leakage. 


10 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.1 ) 


EXAMPLES OF ELEMENTS TO BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT THE RISK ASSESSMENT FOR 


MAINTENANCE OPERATION 
Elements Car Machinery | Pulley | Areas outside Pit Car roof 
Spaces Spaces the Lift 


Unsuitable access (ladders not secure, no 
hand rails, unsuitable trap-door, obstacle on 
Car roof, etc.) 


Unauthorised entry 


Inadequate lighting ( including access ) 


Uneven floor surface (holes, projections) 


Slippery floor surface 


Strength of the floor 


Unsuitable dimensions (passages, 
maintenance spaces) 


Identification of car position 


Indirect contact with electricity 


Switches 


Contact with moving parts (ropes, pulleys) 


Unexpected movements 


Crushing by moving parts (car, 
counterweight, balancing weight, jack, other 


Voids between car and well 


More than one lift in same area 


Overhead beams and sheaves 


Refuge volume(s) 


manual handling 


More than one maintenance person working 


Absense of means of communications 


Ventiliation and temperature for persons 


Dangerous substances 


Falling objects 


Entrapment 


Means/controls for rescue operations 


Fire 


Relevant 


11 


Y Not Relevant 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Lifts, Escalators and Moving Walks Sectional Committee, ETD 25 


Organization 


Central Public Works Department (CPWD) 
Airport Authority of India, New Delhi 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department (CPWD), 
New Delhi 


Delhi, Land and Finance Limited, Delhi 


Department of Delhi Fire Services, 
Govt of NCT of Delhi 


Government of Assam, Chief Electrical Inspector, 
Guwahati 


Government of Tamil Nadu, Chief Electrical 
Inspectorate, Chennai 


Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Maharashtra 


Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Energy and 
Petrochemical Department, Government of 
Gujarat 


Government of Karnataka, Chief Electrical 
Inspectorate, Bengaluru 


Office of Chief Electrical Inspector, Department of 
Power and Non-Conventional Energy Sources, 
Government of West Bengal , Kolkata 


Electrical Inspectorate, Labour Deptt, 
Govt of NCT of Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited 


Electrical Contractors Association of Maharashtra, 
Pune 


Elevator and Escalator Component Manufacturers’ 
Association of India, Chennai 


Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation 
(MIDC) Fire Service 


Fujitec India Pvt Ltd, Tamil Nadu 


Indian Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Representative (s) 


Suri C. K. VARMA (Chairman) 


SHRI O. P. CHUGH 
SHRI THOMAS MATHEW T. (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR RAJPUT 


SHRI VIMAL KUMAR 
Suri RAJIV Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI VIRENDER KUMAR SHARMA 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
DR G. C. Misra (Alternate) 


SHRI AKHIL CHANDRA KHATANIAR 


SHRI G. JOSEPH AROCKIADOSS 
SHRIP. PALANI B. E. (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH KHONDE 
SHRI ABHIJEET L. KASTURE (Alternate) 


SHRI HAIDERALI H. KHOJA 
SHRI ASHWIN B. CHAUDHARY (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRASHANT N. GANDHI (Alternate II) 


Suri D. H. BASAVARAJU 
SHRI MOHAMMAD JAVED RABBANI (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. DHARA 


SHRI MUKESH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI JOGENDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI MANUJ SINGHAL 
SHRI KAMAL RAM MEENA (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUMIT KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANIL GACHKE 


SHRI SURAJ THODIMARATH 
SHRI VIKAS PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH S. WARICK 
SHRI MILIND V. OGALE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. P. RAO 
SHRI R. RAJESH (Alternate I) 
SHRI S. S. BALAKRISHNAN (Alternate II) 


Ms PRAGATI SOHONI 


12 


Organization 


Johnson Lifts Pvt Limited, Chennai 


Kolkata Metro, Kolkata 


Kone Elevator India Private Limited, Chennai 


Lerch Bates Private Limited, Mumbai 
Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


National Real Estate Development Council, 
New Delhi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 
Otis Elevator Company (India) Limited, Mumbai 


Research Designs and Standards Organization 
(RDSO), Lucknow 


Schindler India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, 
Mumbai 

Tak Consulting Private Limited, Mumbai 

The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


Thyssenkrupp Elevator India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 17900 (Part 6) : 2022 


Representative (s) 


SHRI T. SUBRAMANIAN 
SHRI V. KARTHIKEYAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI SACHIN MORE (Alternate II) 


SHRID. C. Ray 


SHRI BALAJI K. 
SHRI U. VISWANATHAN (Alternate I) 
Suri R. Mant (Alternate II) 


SHRIA. V. RAO 


DR VISHWAS AJNALKAR 
SHRI KUMAR ABHINAV (Alternate) 


BRIG R. R. SINGH 


SHRI SUDHIR PATIL 


SHRI ABHIJIT DANDEKAR 
SHRI SHRIHARI VISPUTE (Alternate I) 
SHRI MADHURENDRA SINGH (Alternate II) 
SHRIMATI JYOTI BHASKAR 
SHRI JITENDER KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI NIMISH DESHPANDE 
SHRI RAJAGOPALAN RENGANATHAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI RONNIE DANTE (Alternate II) 


SHRI SHOEB ANSARI 


SHRI TAK MATHEWS 
SHRI WILLIAM REBELLO (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAY M. PARELKAR 
SHRI PARESH KAPADIA (Alternate) 


SHRI VISHNU PARASHAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BALANI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. M. TIPNIS 


SHRIMATI PRITI BHATNAGAR, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ETD) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI MEGHNA MUDGAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (ETD), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 25 (18475). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


