ts6907:1992

w&r
`qFmr

wm

(Reaffirmed 2002)

mgf - ;r@ 3%*
(
rFprT

wad

~+MJr )

Indian Standard

STBBLCASTINGS-MMCETHODSOF SqMPLING
( First Revision )
UDC 669'14 - 14 : 620'113

0 BUREAU
MANAK BHAVAN,

33rs 1992

OF

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110 002

INDIAN

STANDARDj:
ZAFAR

MARG

April 1992

Price Gmp

2

Sampling of Ores, Metallurgical

and Allied Products Sectional Committee,

BSD 7

FOREWORD This Indian Stand ard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Sampling of Ores, Metallurgical and Allied Products Sectional Committee bad been approved by the Basic Standards, Systems and Services Division Council. The object of this standard steel castings. is to prescribe methods of sampling and friteria for acceptance for

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

IS 6907 : 1992

Indian Standard

STEELCASTINGS -METHODSOFSAMPLING ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE The standard prescribes methods of sampling and criteria for acceptance for steel castings when they are submitted in the form of a batch Broad outlines on or a lot for inspection. statistical aids in the manufacture of steel castings have also been indicated: 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjunct to this standard: IS No.
397

3.2 Batch A group of castings from treated together. 3.3 Lot the same cast, heatr

All the castings of the same shape and size, belonging to the same grade and manufactured at one place under essentially similar conditions of production. 3.4 Specific Inspection Specific inspection means the acceptance procedure carried out on the products to be delivered in order to check whether these products would comply with the requirements of the order. For further details reference may be made to 2.1.17.2 of IS 8800 : 1986. 3.5 Non-specific Inspection Non-specific inspection is inspection carried out by the manufacturer on a cast/batch resulting from the same production process but not necessarily on the products supplied. For further details reference may -be made to 2.1.17.2 of IS 8800 : 1986. 3.6 Defect Failure to meet the requirements imposed on a casting with respect to a single characteristic in the course of `visual, dimensional and other inspections. 3.7 Defective A casting having one or more defects. 3;8 Acceptamce N$nber Maximum permissible number of defectives the sample for acceptance of the lot. in

are necessary Title

( Part 1 ) : 1972
4

4905

_:

1968

statistical Method for quality control during production: Part 1 Control charts for variables ( first revision ) random Methods for sampling Permissible deviations in chemical composition for products analysis of steel castings ( first revision ) Presentation of statistical data: Part 1 Tabulation and summarization ( second revision ) Technical delivery conditions for steel castings ( second m+sion ) Method for estimation process capability of

6601 : 1987

7200 ( Part 1 ) : 1989

8800 _: 1986

10645:1983 12117 :1987

Norms for classification of steel foundries for quality assurance

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Cast ( Melt ) The product of any of the following: crucible heat, or the

3.9 Acceptable Quality Level ( AQL ) It is the maximum percentage of defectives that, far the purpose of sampling inspection can -be considered satisfactory as a process average. 3.10 Copfidenca Interval The interval between two values say, Tl and T1 based upon the sample observations such that the probability of the interval including the true value of the parameter is about 95 percent.

a) One furnace heat,

b) One

cl A number of furnace or crucible heats, of
similar composition mixed in a ladle and used for making a casting.

IS 6907 : 1992 4 STATISTICAL PRODUCTION AIDS IN STEEL CASTINGS

Statistical tools are quite useful at various stages in the manufacture of steel castings. They provide objective methods of estimating quality, valueable guidance in monitoring the process parameters and scientific procedures for sampling and decision making with regard to acceptance or rejection of a lot. For qualityimprovement studies and plant level experiments, statistical methods are very crucial in the course of planning and analyzing experimental results and also arriving at correct inferences at optimum cost. Thus statistical methods form part and parcel of a number of quality assurance activities in steel casting unit ( see IS 12117 : I987 ). The guidelines for checking the input material quality, as well as process control are given in Annex A. 5 LOT 1NSPECTION
5.0 Tbe Inspection and Testiug ( Specific Inspection ) of Steel Castings

and 4'0 percent. The selection of AQL will depend on the criticality of the characteristics and shall be as specified in the enquiry and the order, or as may be agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. The details of sampling inspection shall form part and parcel of the contract along with specifications and drawings.
5.1.3 The castings shall be selected

at random from each lot. For actual methods of selection by random sampling, reference is invited to IS 4905 : 1968. The selected samples shall be properly identified preferably with the initials of the representatived of the purchaser and the supplier ( in case the inspection is ~done at the manufacturer's end ). In any case, the sample castings shall bear the lot, batch or cast number, date of sampling and also other relevant details.
Table 1 Scale of Sampling for Visual, Dimensional and Mass Characteristic ( &uses
No. of Castings in the Lot N up to 50 51-100 101-150 151-300 301-500 501 and above

5.1.2, 5.1.4 nnd 5.3.1 )
s;?$e n 8 8 13 20 32 50 %" 01 0 0 0 1 1 2 ?7SL 0; 0 0 1 1 2 3 A400L ar 1 1 1 2 3 5

The provisionsgiven in IS 8800 : 1986 shall be complied with for all types of steel castings. However, where a material or product speci~fication lays down different conditions, those conditions shall apply. It should be noted that the underlying basis of the stipulations pertaining to acceptance sampling inspection would be ' met provided the process is statistically under control at the manufacturers end. Hence, the purchaser of steel castings should not solely rely on sampling inspection but should also seek evidence of quality assurance as prescribed in relevant clauses of IS 12117 : 1987. 5.1 Visual, Dimensional and Mass Characteristics 5.1.1 All the large and special castings shall be inspected individually for freedom from defects, fettling and dressing, finish, dimensional characteristics and mass of individual items. Castings which are found to be satisfactory with regard to all these characteristics shall be accepted. 5.1.2 In the case of general castings and those which are manufactured in large numbers in a batch, sampling inspection provides an effective and rational method for accepting the lot for visual, dimensional and `mass characteristics. For this purpose, it is necessary to have unambiguous definition of defects and also deviations in dimensions. Any casting which has one ,or more defects with respect to these characteristics as per the relevant specification shall be deemed to be defective. Table 1 gives 3 different sampling plans for AQL 1'5, 2'5 2

NOTE-a,,
number

a, and 01 stands for the for the respective AQL values.

acceptance

5.1.4 The sample castings selected as per co1 2 of Table 1 shall be successively examined for visual, dimensional and mass requirements against relevant specification. The lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of these characteristics if the number of ~defectives does not exceed the corresponding acceptant-e number given in Table 1.

5.2 Chemical Composition 5.2.1 Samp& for chemical analysis from each lot shall be drawn as IS 8800 : 1986. For product analysis 3 samples shall generally be provided and the permissible variation in product analysis from the limits specified in the ladle analysis shall be as given in IS 6601 : 1987. 5.3 Mechanical
Tests

5.3.1 The sampling, sample preparation and testing of samples of steel castings shall be as per IS 8800 : 1986. Tests to be carried out and the requirements shall be as per respective specifications.

IS 6997 : 1992 In case a number of hardness test results are available for each lot or batch, sampling inspection as given in Table 1 may be resorted to at AQL level I `5 percent. In non-destructive testing also sampling may be resorted lo as per Table 1 with prior agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 5.4 The lot shall be considered conforming to respective specifications, if the samples drawn satisfy all the requirements as per 5.1 to 5.3.

ANNEX A ( Clause 4 )
A-l INPUT-MATERIAL QUALITY be increased to 4 or 5, if the testing is simple and not time consuming From the data so collected for 20 or 25 bate h es one can establish X, R charts as per IS 397 ( Part 1 ) : 1972. It has, however, to be borne in mind that these control charts for incoming material are not action oriented as in the case of process control charts but only serve to forewarn the purchaser of the variation of the quality of the procured material so that a proper feedback may be given to the supplier to take remedial action at his end. Such method is especially useful in the procurement of bulk material like coke, ferro alloys, sand, etc. A-2 PROCESS CONTROL

A-l.1 There are a number of input materials, such as ferro alloys, scrap, refractories, sand, binders and additives, welding electrodes, grinding wheels which are regularly procured by steel It is important to get an idea about foundries. the variation within and between the batches of When a number of batches-have raw material. been purchased from a single source, more important physical or chemical characteristics may be studied with the help of histogram to know the pattern of variation. For this purpose, minimum 30 results are required. The data may be summarized in the form of frequency distribution and the mean ( X) and standard deviation (s ) values may be calculated as per IS 7200 ( Part 1 ) : 1989. Most of the industrial measurements follow normal distribution which can be generally verified by plotting the histogram. For normally distributed variables one can state that 95 percent of the individual results lie in the range x & 2s. Thus' if !XAndes are known from the previous data, this confidence interval st f 2s helps us to check the results from the future supply of lot or batches. The declared nominal value may also be used instead of x in case it is known in advance. This method is especially useful when from each batch or a lot only one or two test results are generally available in routine testing. A-l.2 It is still more important to check the variation of vital properties within a batch. There are a number of input materials like scrap, refractories, sand and ferro alloys which are heterogeneous in nature and exhibit variation from sample to sample. After a number of samples are tested for a particular property within a batch, the average quality of the batch can be expressed as X f2s/2/7where n is the number of samples tested. However, it is very unlikely that one gets a large number of samples tested from each incoming batch. In such cases, we may resort to control chart methods for monitoring the variation within a batch. A-1.3 For this purpose, at least 2 samples from each batch shall be tested. The number could

A-2.1 In-process inspection is a vital element in quality assurance and its main thrust is in the prevention of defectives at an early stage. For such inspection, efforts should be made to collect quantitative data at frequent intervals rather than simply recording the passing or failing of samples. For instance, apart from go, no-go gauges actual dimensional results at least for vital dimensions should be made available. Likewise, quality characteristics of sand batches, dimensions of mould while closing, temperature variation between different zones of baking oven, hardened properties of core sand mix, actual pouring temperature of different metals, temperature ranges in heat-treatment furnaces are some of the process parameters which can be monitored by process control charts [ see IS 397 (Part 1 ) : 1972 1. The number of the sample observations and the frequency of sampling will depend on the criticality of the characteristics and it could be reviewed on the basis of the behaviours of control charts over a period of time. A-Z.2 Quality control during production can build quality and reliability into the castings whereas inspection done later on will only sort out the good products from the bad ones. Because of the economy that would result by the former approach, it is recommended that the manufacturer should take representative samples of the material at regular intervals to control the quality fluctuations during the production.

3

IS4907

:

1992
freauencies x of testing are given
NOTE-In case of large castings where the ruling section thickness is more than the thickness of the test block to be provided, it may be advisable to heat-treat such test blocks separately giving the similar heat-treatment cycle as recommended for the parent castings subject to the agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. By similar heat-treatment cycle, it is generally meant that the temperature range, rat< of heating, cooling method, etc. will be the same as that of the parent casting9 but the soaking time will be different depending on the ruling section thickness.

Recommended below. Characteristics

Frequency of Inspection or Testing One from each cast (melt ) Each in case of intricate and special castings One for every 10 or part thereof in case of general castings

Chemical analysis Dimensional check

Mechanical

tests

One for each casting in case of large, intricate and special castings. If the number of such castings from one heat is more than one, an integral test bar shall be provided with one casting and for the remaining castings a general test bar shall be prepared. In such cases, the general test bar shall be heat-treated together with other castings. One for every heat treatment batch in case of general casting.

A-2.3 The data so generated on a sequential basis, can be used for installing the process control charts for myitoring the process variation. In fact, for important characteristics process capability has to be evaluated and has to be checked against specification limits. For estimation of process capability and its interpretation guidance may be had from IS 10645 : 1983. A-2.4 On the basis of process inspection data, the manufacturer may issue relevant test certificate to prove the conformity of a lot to the requirements of any specification. When such test available to the chaser so desires, shall be followed or otherwise of a specification. certificate cannot be made purchaser or when the purthe procedure laid down in 5 for judging the conformity lot to the requirements of any

4

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by RIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checke,d by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions unde$ which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification -of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession -of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. _ Users of lndian Standards should ascertain that they are in latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent following refeience :

Dot : No. BSD 7 ( 279 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF-INDIAN

STANDAR-DS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS i

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone t 331 01 31 331 13 75

*'

37 86 62 53 38 43 235 0216 6 32 92 95

160036 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. I HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

