**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 4889 (1968) : Methods of Determination of Efficiency of 
Rotating Electrical Machines [ETD 15: Rotating Machinery] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 4889- 1968 

( Reaffirmed 1997 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF DETERMINATION OF 
EFFICIENCY OF ROTATING ELECTRICAL 

MACHINES 



Eighth Repnni DECEMBER 2001 

( Intorporaling Amendments No 1 and 2 ) 



UDC 621 313 -621.3 017 8 



® Copyright 1977 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH /AFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 10002 

Gr6 March 1969 



18x4889.1968 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF DETERMINATION OF 
EFFICIENCY OF ROTATING ELECTRICAL 

MACHINES 



Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee, ETDC 15 

Chairman Representing 

StWIT J. S Zaveri Bharat By lee Limited, Bombay 

Members 

Shrt C E Bkabkar Rao ( Alternate to 
Shri J S Zaven ) 
Skri G K Ahuja Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals (Ins- 

pection Wingj (Ministry of Supply, Technical 
Development oc Materials Planning) 
Shki R p. Sehoal ( Alternate ) 
Shei T V Bat AKUiftHNAN Bharat Heavy Electncals Ltd, New Delhi 

SaRt K N Ramaswamy ( Alternate) 
Shri V Balasubkamanian Hindustan Brown Boven Ltd, Bombay 

Shki V 1) Lkande ( Alternate ) 
Shri H U Oada Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, C-alcutta 

SiiRi K R Da8 Gupta Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Calcutu 

Shki I K Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P K GuiTA The General Electric C-o of India P\ t Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri I D Jain Army Headquarters 

Maj R K Mathttr {Alternate) 
ShriG D Joolkkab Carbon Brushes Subcommii tee, ETDC 15 3 ISI 

Joint Dirkctoh, Standahba Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
( Elxtricaj ) 

DfPUTV DlRLCTOH, STAN- 
DARDS ( fcLFCTRir al )-I ( Alternate ) 
SuRi B K MUKHERJEE National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri J P Mukhkkji Wakhandnagar Industru*s Ltd, Walchandnagar 

Shki C S Bulavi ( Alternate ) 
Shri A N Nimkar Jy<^^i Limited, Baroda 

Shri P L Pkauhan( Alternate ) 
Shri K G Parikh Millowneis' Association, Bombay 

Shri S Sarup ( Alternate) 
Shri D P Pati^i. Ciompton Greavts Ltd, Bombay 

SuRi R K Ta*^kau ( Alternate ) 
Shri R R, Patkl Research and Devdopmcnt Orgini/ation for Electfi- 

ral Industiy, Bhopal 
Shri S G Ra^via^ UANnuA Kirloskar Hectnc Co I td. Bangalore* 

Shri G N Paraki ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BRAVAN 9 BAHADUR SHAH /AFAR MARCi 
NHW ni 1 HI I 10002 



ISt4889-1968 

( Omtinmdfrom page 1 ) 

Members R€pre\enting 

Shri K. p. Ramachandran Guest, Keen, Williams, Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K, R. R. Ivmnuar ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Sinclair Heavy Electnrals ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal 

Dr a. K, Goswami ( Alternate ) 
Staff Officer ( Surface Wla- Naval Headquarters 
PON ) 

Staff Officer ( ELKrTRic\i. 
Ekginkerinq ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Vadi Department of Technical Development ( Ministry of 

Supply, Technical Di*voU>pment & Materials 
Planning ) 
Dr Vakil Ahmed ( Alternate ) 
Shri R T. Vaoanta Rohtas Industrips Ltd, Dahmanac^ar 

Shhi S. N. ViNZF Cential Wator and Power Commission ( Powrr Wing ) 

Shri H R Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y S. VrvKATtau ak\n, Direaoi Geneial, ISI { Ex-ajjiiio Mrmher) 

Directoi ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 
Shri jA(iDiSH Raj Mxkajw 
Assistant Director ( Llt^c terh), ISI 



AMENDMENT NO. 3 NOVEMBER 2011 

TO 

IS 4889 : 1968 METHODS OF DETERMINATION 

OF EFFICIENCY OF ROTATING 

ELECTRICAL MACHINES 

{Page 5, clause 3.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'3.1 Reference Temperature — Unless otherwise specified all I^R losses shall 
be corrected to one of the temperatures given below: 

Class B 95"C 
Class F 115°C 
Class H 135°C 

NOTE — The actual class of insulation used for the particular part of the machine need not 
necessarily correspond with the selected limits of temperature -rise.' 



(ET 15) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS: 4889- 1968 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF DETERMINATION OF 
EFUCIENCY OF ROTATING ELJECTRICAL 

MACHINES 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 4 Novenibor V)U\\, after the draft finalized by the RoUiting Machi- 
nery Sectional Coniniittee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

0*2 This standard has been prepared to establish methods of determining 
efficiencies of machines covered by IS:4722-1%B* from tests^ and also 
methods of obtain int; particular losses when these are required for other 
purposes. 

0.3 The choice of tests to be made on a particular machme depends 
on the information and acrutacy requirements, and the type and size of the 
machine involved. Wh(*re alternative methods of testing are available tljie 
preferred methods have been indicated [sec^). 

0.4 While preparing this standard assistance has been derived from the 
following documents: 

lEC document 2D ( United Kingdom ) 5 Comments from the 
British Committee on Document 2D (Secretariat) 7: Draft 
revision of Publication 34-2. 

lEC document 2D ( Secretariat ) 7 Draft revision of Publication 34-2 
Recommendations on methods for determining losses and efficiency 
of rotating electrical machinery from tests ( excluding machines 
for traction vehicles ). International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requiiement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-19b()f. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



♦Specification for loiaung rlcctncal machines. 
fRulrs lor rounclinc; <^fT nuinci iral values { reused \ 



ISi4M9-19b8 

, 1. SCOPE 

!•! This standard covers methods of determining efficiencies of dc- ac 
synchronous and induction machines from tests, and methods of obtaining 
particular losses when these are required for other purposes. 

NoTK — The principles can, howo\)er. be applied to other types of machines^ such as 
rotary convertors, ac commutator motors and single-phase induction motors for which 
other methods of determining losses aie generally applied. 

% TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose ot this standard, the definitions given in IS : 4722-1968* 
and IS : lh85 ( Part XXXV )-1973t. besides the following, shall apply. 

2.1 EflSiciency — The ratio of output to input expressed in the same 
units. It is usually expressed as a percentage. 

2.2 Total Loss — The difference between the input and the output. 

2.3 Braking Test — A test in which the mechanical power output of a 
machine acting as a motor is determined by the measurement of the 
shaft torque, by means of a brake, dynamometer or balance generator, 
together with the rotational speed. Alternatively, a test performed on a 
machine acting as a generator, by means of a dynamometer or balance 
generator, to determine the mechanical power input. 

2.4 Calibrated Machine Test — A test in which the mechanical input or 
output of an electrical machine is calculated from the electrical input 
or output of a calibrated machine mechanically coupled to the machine 
on test. 

2.5 Mechanical Back-to-Back Test — A test in which two identical 
machines are mechanically coupled together, and the total losses of 
both machines are calculated from the electrical input and output of the 
two machines. 

2.6 Electrical Back-to-Back Test ~ A test in which two identical 
machines are mechanically coupied together, and they are both connected 
electrically to a power system. The total losses of both machines are taken 
as the power input drawn from the system. 

2.7 Retardation Test — A test in whirh the losses in a machine are 
deduced from the rate of deceleration of the machine when only these 
losses are present. 

2.8 Galorimetric Test — A test in which the losses in a machine are 
deduced from the heat produced by them. The losses are calculated from 
the temperature-rises produced by this heat in the coolant or in the 
surrounding media^ 



^Specificattt/n for roratitig electrical machines. 
•♦"Ll^ctrotcchnical vocabulary: Part XXXV Rotating machinery. 



IS 1 4889- 1968 

2.9 Open-Circuit Test — A test in which a machine is run as a generator 
with its terminals open-circuited. 

2.10 Short-Gircuit Test — A test in which a machine is run as a generator 
with its terminals short-circuited. 

2.11 No*Load Test — A test in which the machine is run as a motor 
providing no useful mechanical output from the shaft. 

2.12 Zero Power«Factor Test — A no-load test on a synchronous machine 
which is over-excited and operates at a power factor very close to zero. 

3. GENERAL 

3.1 Reference Temperature — Unless otherwise specified all PR losses 
shall be corrected to one of the temperatures given below : 

Classes A, E and B 75^G 

Classes F and H 115 C 

Note — The actual cla« of insulation uicd for the particular part of the machine 
need not necessarily correspond with the selected limits of tcmperature-rise. 

3.2 Tests shall be conducted on a completely assembled and sound 
machme, all devices for automatic regulation not a conip<^site part of the 
machine itself being made inoperative. 

Unless otherwise stated, the tests are taken at rated speed and with 
all covers fitted as required for normal operation. 

3*3 Measuring instruments {^ee IS : 1248-1968*) and their arcessorjos^ 
such as measuring transfoimers [ see IS : 2705 ( Pait II )- 1964t J, shunts and 
bridges used during the tests, unless otherwicie btulrd, sludl be of an 
accuracy class equal to at least I'O, Insliunients u^ed lor deternuMiijg 
dc resistances shall be of \\\ accuracy class rqual to at least U'5. 

3.4 On machines with adjustable brbslit^s, tho hiu^hrs shall be placed 
in the position corresponding to the spenhoJ latjng Fc»r nieasuit^n)( p: or. 
no-load, the brushes may be placed on the neutral axis. 

3.5 Speed of rotation may be measured b^ a strobo^r o}>ic- method a 
digital counter or a tachometer It is peruiissibh* to deduce speed (>f a 
synchronous machine by measuring its ficc[uency. 

3*6 A distinction is made br^tween dire t and indirect rn^asuromrnt of 
efficiency. 

♦Spccificatum for diK'ct acting tlcctrjral indiciting instiurncnts { /ir\t r^: r^cn j . 
tSpccjficatmn for current traniformtTs: Fart II Me«ijunng current tiansiurm^rs. 



ISi4889-l!H» 

The direct measurement of efficiency is made by measuring directly 
the power supplied by the machine and the power absorbed by it. 

The indirect measured efficiency is determined by measuring the 
losses of the machine. These losses are added to the power supplied by 
the machine, thus giving the absorbed power. 

The indirect measurement may be carried out by the following 
methods: 

a) Determination of separate losses for summation. 

b) Determination of total losses. 

3.7 When the overall efficiency of the absorbed power is measured for 
a group of machines comprising two electrical machines, or a machine and 
a transformer, or a generator and its driving machine or a motor and its 
driven machine, there is no need to indicate the individual efficiencies. 
If, however, these are given separately, they should be regarded as 
approximate* 

4. DETERMINATION OF QjUANTITIES FOR do MACHINES 

4.1 Losses — The total losses in a dc machine consist of the following. 

4 J#l Exciting-Circuit Losses 

a) Field I^R loss — The PR loss in the shunt or separately excited 
windings* 

b) Main rheostat loss — The loss in the rheostat in the main exciter 
circuit. 

c) Exciter loss — All the losses in an exciter mechanically driven from 
the main shaft which forms part of the complete unit, and is used 
solely for exciting the machine, together with losses in the rheo- 
stat in the field circuit of such an exciter, with the exception of 
bearing loss which is included in 4.1.2 (b), windage loss which is 
included in 4.1.2 (c), and brush friction which is included in 
4J»2 (d). In case of separate excitation by other means, such 
as a battery, rectifier or motor-generator set, no allowance for 
losses of the e^fccitation source shall be made. 

4*1 .2 Losses Independent of Current 

a) Core loss — Gore loss at no-load and rated speed and rated terminal 
voltage. 



IS:4889*1968 

b) Bearing friction loss — Only losses in bearings supplied with the 
machine shall be included. Losses in common bearings shall be 
stated separately whether or not they are supplied with the 
machine. 

c) Total windage loss — The total windage loss in the machine and 
exciter, if any, including the power absorbed in fans forming 
an integral part of the machine. The losses in external fans 
provided exclusively for the machine in question shall be included 
only by agreement. When the machine is ventilated from a 
common independent air supply, the windage losses in ventilating 
ducts external to the machine housing, and those of the external 
fans supplying air through such external ducts, shall not be 
included. 

d) Brush friction loss — The brush friction, including that of the 
exciter if mechanically driven by the machine itself. 

4. 1.3 Direct-Load Losses 

a) Change in core loss due to load — Change in core loss due to load 
is difference between the core loss on load and the core loss 
on no-load [4.1«2 (a) ]. 

b) PR loss in the armature winding. 

c) PR loss in windings in series with the armature. 

d) The summation for the entire machine of the PR loss in 
brushes and connectors and brush contact loss. 

4J*4 Stray-Load Losses 

a) The stray-load loss in the magnetic circuit and any other metal 
parts other than the conductors. 

b) The stray-load loss in conductors. 

c) The additional brush losses due to commutation. 

4*2 Determinatioii of Efficiency — The efficiency of a dc machine may 
be determined by anyone of the following methods. 

4,2.1 Summation of Losses — The efficiency can be calculated from the 
total losses which are assumed to be the summation of the losses obtained 
in the following manner. 

4«2.1«1 Exciting-circuit losses {see 4.1.1) — These are determined a<9 
follows : 

a) Shunt field PR losses — These losses are calculated from the formula 
PR, where R is the resistance of the shunt field winding (or sepa- 
rately excited winding), corrected to the reference temperature 



18:4889-1968 

and I is the on-lodd excitation current. Lxcept for case [3) 
below, the excitation shall br that coi respond mj^ to lated speed 
at full load. For case ( 3 ) below, it shall be that corresponding to 
rated speed at no-load 

If the current cannot be measured during a test on-joad, it 
shall be taken as: 

1) For shunt-connected or separately excited generators with or 
without commutation poles: 110 percent of the excitation 
current corresponding to no-load at a voltage equal to the 
rated voltage plus the ohmic drop in the ai mature circuit 
(armature, brushes, interpole and compensating windings, 
if any ). 

2) For compensated shunt or separately excited generators, the 
excitation cuirent corresponding to no-load at a voltage equal 
to the lated voltage plus the ohmic drop in the armature circuit 
(armature, brushes, interpole and compensating windings, 
if any ). 

3) For level-compounded generators: the excitation current for 
the rated no-load voltage, 

4) For over-compounded and under-compounded generators, 
and special types of generators not covered by items ( 1 ) 
to (3 j: as agreed between manufacturer and purchaser. 

5) For shunt motors: equal to no-load excitation current coiyes- 
ponding to the rated voltage. 

h) Main rheostat losses — These losses are calculated from the formula 
PR, where R is the resistance of the part of the iheosiat in cii- 
cuit for the rating considcied, and I is the value of the on-load 
exciting current defined as in 4.2.L1 (a) above. They aie also 
equal to the product lU, of the on-load excitation cunont multi- 
plied by U, tlie excitation voltage which shall be absoibed in the 
rheostat. 

The sum of losses 4.2«L1 ( a ) and 4.2J.1 ( b ) is also equal 
to the product lUe of the on-load excitaticm current I and the 
total excitation voltage Ue. 

c) Exciter losses — These losses include the dilforence betwen the 
power absorbed at the shaft by the excitiT and thc^ usi^fu' pown 
at its terminals*, as well as the (^xcitation loss< s in the ' \rjter if 
this is exr ited from a separate source*. 



♦Th^' useful power at thr tormmals ofthr cxcnrr is rcjual to ili< sum of the !<.v' s 4.2.1.1 
(a) and i*2.Ll (b; of the mam macliin<\ 

8 



18:4889-1968 

If the exciter can be unconplrd from the main machine and 
tested separately, the power which it al)S()rbs may be measured 
by usinR the calU)rated machuie method ( 4.2.3 ). 

If it cannot be uncoupled from ihe main nia< huie, the jk)\\( r 
which it absorbs may be measured eith«T by iht* method of work- 
ing as a motor on no-load, or by ihe (alibrated machine method 
(4.2.3), or by the retardation method (7.4), applied to the 
whole unit. In these three methods, the power absorbed by the 
exciter is obtained as the diffiMcnce between the total losses of the 
unit measured under identical conditions, with the exciter on- 
load and with the cxcitei unexcited, th(* excitation of the exciter 
being supplied by an independent source. 

If none of these methods is applicable, the p)ower absorbed 
by tlie ex( iter is obtained by addmg to the power, measured at 
it^ teiminals, the diHerent separate^ losses detennined a:> under 4.1. 
However, mechanic al friction and windige losses which an* nwd- 
suied at th<* same time as those oi the main ma( huie aie not 
taken into account. 

N(nM ' — Tins applus only to the rase where the exciter i^ mechanually dnveii amn 
th< nuMU shall and is used solrly foi excituig the mam niaihine, 

4«2.1.2 A(Au»v independent of current — The sum of these losses shall be 
determined hy running the machine under no-load conditions as a motor 
with rated vrthai^e applied and with rated spewed achieved by adjustment 
of the excitation, which shall preferably be derived from a separate 
source. 

The total electric power absorbed, less the FR losses in the ai ma- 
ture and in the excitation winding or, if necessary, less the {mwer absorbed 
by the exciter, gives the sum of the losses independent ot current. 

The losses 4.1.2(a), 4.1.2(b), 4.1.2fc), and 4.1.2(d) can be 
determined separatc^ly by driving the machine at its rated speed by means 
of a calibrated motor {see 4.2.3). The machine is excited (preferably 
from an independent source), so as to work as a generator undiT no-load 
at a voltage equal to its rated voltage, the pi^wer which it absorbs at its 
shaft and which can be obtained from the electric jx^wer absorbed by the 
calibrated motor giving the sum of the al)ove loSsSes. Ry eliminaMng the 
excitation, the sum of the losses 4.1.2(b), 4.L2(c) and 4.1.2 fd) is 
obtained in the same fashion. The losseii in 4.1.2 (a ) are obtain<Ml by sub- 
traction. Finally^ by lifting the brushes, the sum of losses «n 4.1.2 (bj 
and 4.1.2 (c) is obtained. The losses in 4.1.2 (d) are obtained by 
subtraction. 

In machines with large ineitia, the total losses 4.1.2 ( a ) f 4.1.2 (b) 
4-4.1.2 (c) +4.1.2 (d), as well as the losses 4.1.2 (a)+4.1.2(b) 
4-4.1.2 (c) and 4.1.2(d), can also be det(Tmined separately by using the 
retardation method (^^^7.4). 



IS s 4889- 1968 

4.2*1*3 DirectMad losses — These are determined as follows: 

a) Change in core loss due to load — In general, this variation is con- 
sidered as being negligible. By special agreement for very 
low-voltage machine, the sum 4.1.2 (a) + 4.1.3 (a ) may be mea- 
sured as described above for the core losses 4.1.2 ( a ) by one or 
other of the two methods, by operating as a motor on no-load or 
as a generator on no-load, but instead of making the test at the 
rated voltage, the test is made at this rated voltage increased or 
decreased by the voltage drop in the armature circuit for the 
current considered, accordingly as it is a generator or a motor. 

For the determination of the change in core losses in machines 
with a non-uniform air gap, special agreement between purchaser 
and manufacturer is necessary. 

h) PR losses in armature windings 

c) PR losses in windings in series with the armature — These* losses are 
calculated from the current and the measured resistance, correct- 
ed to the reference temperature, except that where resistance 
measurement is impracticable due to very low resistances, calcu- 
lation is permissible. 

NoTK — Under this heading are included compensating windings, commutating 
pole windings and divertcrs In the case of divcrtcrs in parallrl with a scries winding 
the PR losses should be determined using the total current and the resulting resistance. 

d) Electrical losses in brushes — The sum of these losses shall be taken 
as the product of the main current and a fixed voltage drop. 

The voltage drop allowed for all brushes of each polarity 
shall be TO volt for carbon or graphite brushes and 0'3 volt for 
metal-carbon brushes, that is, a total drop of 2 volts for carbon 
or graphite brushes, and 06 volt for metal-carbon brushes. 

4.2.1.4 Strajhload losses — Unless otherwise specified, it is assumed that 
these losses vary as the square of the current, and that their total value at 
maximum rated current is eqtial to: 

1 percent of the basic output for uncompensated machines, and 
0'5 percent of the basic output for compensated machines. 

For constant-speed machines, the basic output is taken as tlie output 
obtained at maximum rated current and maximum rated voltage. 

For variable-sneed motors where the change in speed is obtained by 
applied voltage, the basic output is defined at each speed as the output at 
the shaft, when the maximum rated current at any speed is associated with 
the applied voltage of the particular speed considered. 

10 



ISt4889.1968 

For variable-speed motors, whether compensated or uncompensated, 
where the increase in speed is obtained by weakening the field, the basic 
output is defined as the output at the shaft when the rated voltage is asso- 
ciated with the maximum rated current, and the allowances for stray-load 
loss at minimum speed shall be as specified above. The allowances at 
other speeds shall be obtained by multiplying the figures specified above 
by the multiplying factor given in Table 1 corresponding to the speed 
under consideration. 

NoTB -— The stray-load loss may be obtained from an input-output test or 
from a pump*baclc test by subtracting from the total measured losses all other 
known losses. 

TABLE 1 MULTIPLYING FACTORS FOR DIFFERENT SPEED RATIOS 

Speed Ratio Mixtiplyino Factor 

(1) (2) 

1-5 : 1 1-4 

2:1 1-7 

3 : 1 2-5 

4 : 1 3-2 

The spefKl ratio of col ( 1 ) in this table shall be the ratio of actual speed 
under consideration to th< minimum rated speed for continuous running. 

For speed ratios other than these given in this table, the appropriate multiply- 
ing factors can be ascertafaied by interpolation. 

4.2.2 Braking Test — The machine is run at rated conditions of speed, 
voltage and current and the efficiency is taken as the ratio of output to in- 
put measured in the same units. 

Note — No winding resistance temperature correction shall be nuule to 
the machine under test. 

4.2.3 Calibrated Machine Test — The machine is run at rated conditions of 
speed, voltage and current and the efficiency is taken as the ratio of output 
to input measured in the same units ( see 7.2 ). 

Note — No winding resistance temperature correction shall be made to the 
machine under test. 

4J2.4 Mechanical Back'to-Back Test — The identical machines are run at 
essentially the same rated conditions, the losses are assumed to be equally 
distributed, and the efficiency is calculated from half the total losses and 
the electrical input. 

4.2.5 Electrical Back-to-Back Test— Th» identical machines are run 
at essentially the same rated conditions, the losses supplied from the elec- 
trical system are assumed to be equally distributed and the efficiency is 
calculated as 4.2.4 above. 

11 



18:4889-1968 

5^ DETERMINATION OF ^^UANTITIES FOR POLYPHASE 
INDUCTION MACHINES 

5.1 Losses — The total loss C(;nsist of the following component losses. 

5.U Losses Independent of Current 

a) Core lo^s — Core lc»ss at no-load speed, with rated terminal 
volt«igo and rated h(*(]uen(y. 

b) Bearing fru linn loss —On\y losses in bearings supplied with the 
machine shall be ifuluded. Losses in common bearings shall 
be stated st'parately whether or not they are supplied with 
the rua( hine. 

c) Tot.d windui^e loss — ^The total windage loss in the machine 
and auxiliary machines, if any, includn)g the power absorbed in 
fans lorniiug an lutotrral part of the machine. The losses in 
external fans provided exclusively for the machine in question 
iihall be includ(^d only by agreement. When the machine is 
\'cn:ilated from a common independent air supply, the windage 
losses m \(»ntilatini( ducts external to the machine housing, 
and those of tlie external fans supplying air through such 
extern^d ducts, shall not be included. 

d) rhe brash fn. turn loss — mcluded when brushes are not lifted. 

5J.2 Dtretl-Load Lossis 

a) The I-R loss m the piitUcU'y windings, 

b) The PR loss n^ i\\r sorondary windings on load, 

c) The summation of the I^R loss in brushes and connectors, 
and brush-co))ta( t loss. 

5,L3 Slrny-^Load I osses 

a) The «lray-k»ad loss in the Ui u^nc tic circuit and any other 
metal paits other than the conductois. 

b) The stiav-load Joss m conductors. 

Non* — In tho <aso of aux»li-ir/ mathiricn, such as phase advancers driven 
mechanually from ih<* mam shaft thr lussis m Sdch auxiliary machines should be in- 
cluded in the same way as the rxrih^i 1<)ns(»8 mp mchidcd for synchronous machines. 
Losses ins<pai4t<Iv driven |>h tse ai)\.uu( ts oi uguUtmgscts should not be tncluded. 

5«2 Determination of ££Bciency 

5*2.1 Summation of Losses — 'l*he e(FKi(*ncy can be calculated from tin* 
total lo^es which are assumed to be the summation of the losses obtained 
in the following manner, 

12 



IS: 4889* 1968 

5J2AA Los^n independenl of current — These are determined as follows: 

a) JVo-tuad test at uUed voltage —The sum of the loss(^s indrpendent 
of currrent is determmed by running the machine as a motor 
on no-load. The machine is fed at its rated voltage and 
heciurncv. The [)0\ver absorbed, d(?cr eased by the PR losses in 
the srator^ givc*s the total of the independent losses, (Ihe 
PR losses m the rotor m-iy be neglected. ) 

b) Calihrated machine test — The losses 5.1.1 (b), 5.1.1 (r) and 5.L1 (d) 
may be determined separately by driving the machine, dis- 
conniTted from the netw(^rk, at its rated speed by means of 
a calibiated niotoi (j^t^ 5.2.3). With the brushes, if any, in 
pla( e, the power absorl)ed at the shaft of the machine, which 
may b(» deduced fiom the electrual power absorbed by the cali- 
brated motor, gives the sum of the loss(\s, 5.1.1 (b) ( 5.1.1 (c) 
+ 5.1.1 (d;. With the brush(»'?, if any, bfted, the sum of the 
losses 5.1.1 (b)4^5.U (c) is obtained in the same manner. 
Losses in 5.1.1 (a) may be obtaiiuHl fiom the preceding by 
subtiaction, 

c) Ko'foad te^t at vartahlr ,)ltai^r — The losse> niay also be separated 
by running th(» nui(hm(* as a mv)l()r at latr^d fiecjuency, but 
at diflerent voltages. Th<* power absorbi d, less the PR losses vn 
tht* primal), i? pioted against the s<|n*»rr of the volt.iid;(*. This 
at low saturation, will give a stiaiglu line which can be 
extrapolati'd to zeio \oItat,a\ 

It should be borne* in nnnd that, at vcnv low vohage, looses 
plotted on the dji»v;jarn nui\ be hi<^h in cause (^f the nu leased 
secondary losses with iihk i ed sup \\h» n \A )ttniL; the stiafght 
line, this pxri o( the dii * \n\ ^] » -!ii .li-' 1m \ }» n ii to ac^ cmnt. 

In the above manntM il.« mj i. ;>,l.l !> f- 5,1.1 ^i.^ , 5.1.1 (^d) 
is obtaui^d and hmce SIT * !f (!) motor is stuied with 
short-( iicu*t( d sr* ( ndary .\?i ' Mm *v i.^lirs .ire hdcMl (which u pos- 
sible if the su|)plv ijennaioi is startled with tlu* molor), 5.1.1(b) 
4- 5-1.1 (c I are obtaim*(l a( /eio \()lia<_;e 

5.2.1.2 Ihrttt-load huis 

a) Load /r\/- The l(>s<;(*s m 5T.2 la) are c<iUulat*'d from the 
resibtan( e o( the pi itna! v w indl'l^^ nu asui t d, usmt; (hrect current, 
and coi rected n> the ief( a in e tt mpeiat'itr, and Ironi the current 
cont»sponding t<» tlu^ load at whir h the losses aie bem^,^ cah ulatc^d. 

To determine the losses 5.1.2 {h ) whc^n an on-load test is 
made, the secondary losses aie takc^n to b(^ crpial to ilu* pioduct of 
the slip and the total power transmitted to theseccmdarv winding, 

13 



18:4889-1968 

that is, the power absorbed decreased by the core losses 5»1#1 (a) 
and the PR losses in the primary winding [see 5#l*2(a)j. 
This method gives directly the sum of the losses 5*1*2 ( b ) -f 5*1*2 
(c) for slipring machines, and the losses 5.1.2(b) for squirrel 
cage machines. For this latter type of machine, this is the only 
applicable method as it is not possible to measure the resistance 
of the secondary winding directly. When use is made of this 
method, the slip may be measured by a stroboscopic method 
or by counting the beats of a permanent-magnet millivohmeter, 
connected between two rings ( for motors with wound secondary 
windings ) or the terminals of an auxiliary coil ( motors with 
short-circuited secondary winding) or between the ends of the 
shaft. 

b) Calculated values — For slipring motors, the losses in 5.1.2 (b) 
may be calculated from the resistance measured by dc and 
corrected to the reference temperature, and from the secondary 
current calculated from a circle diagram, account being taken of 
the true transformation ratio of the machine. 

c) Additional losses — Unless it is possible to make an on-load test, 
the losses in 5.1.2 (c) in the brushes cannot be measured directly 
and these losses shall be taken as the product of the current 
flowing in the brushes and a fixed voltage drop. The voltage 
drop in all brushes of the same phase shall be taken as I'O volt 
for carbon or graphite brushes, and 0*3 volt for metal-carbon 
brushes. 

5*2d3 Stray-load losses — Unless otherwise specified, it is assumed 
that the losses 5*1.3 (a) and 5.1.3(b) vary as the square of the primary 
current and that their total value at full load is equal to 0'5 percent of the 
rated output. 

5.2.2 Braking Test — When the machine is run at rated conditions 
of speed, voltage and current, the efficiency is then taken as the ratio 
of output to input measured in the same units. 

Note — No winding resistance temperature correction shall be made to the 
machine under test. 

5.2.3 Calibrated Machine Test — When the machine is run at rated 
conditions of speed, voltage and current, the efficiency is then taken as the 
ratio of output to input measured in the same units (^^^7.2). 

NoTK — No winding resistance tennperaturc correction shall be made to the 
machine under test. 

5.2#4 Mechanical Back^to-Back Test — When identical machines are 
run at essentially the same rated conditions, the losses are assumed to 
be equally distributed, and the efficiency is calculated from half the total 
losses and the electrical input. The driven machine shall operate as an 
induction generator if a source of magnetizing kVAR is provided, and a 
suitable load is connected to its terminals* 

14 



IS:4889-19fi6 

5.2.5 Electrical Back-to-Back Test — When identical machines are run at 
essentially the same rated conditions, the losses supplied from the 
electrical system are assumed to be equally distributed and the efficiency 
is calculated from half the total losses and the electrical input to one 
machine, 

6. DETERMINATION OF QUANTITIES FOR SYNCHRONOUS 
MACHINES 

6.1 Losses — The total loss consist of the following component losses. 

6.1.1 Excihng-Circmt Losses 

a) Field PR /oji — The PR loss in the field winding. 

b) Main rheostat /oii — The loss in the rheostat m the main exciting 
circuit. 

c) Electrical loss in brushes — The summation of PR losses in brushes 
and connectors, and brush-contact loss. 

d) Exciter loss — All the losses in an exciter mechanically driven 
from the main shaft which forms part of the complete tmit, and 
is used solely for excitmg the machine, together with losses in the 
rheostat in the field circuit of such an exciter, with the exception 
of bearing loss which is included in 6.1.2 (b), windage loss which 
is included in 6.1#2(c) and brush friction which is included in 
6.1.2(d). 

Losses m a gear or rope, or similar drive, between main 
shaft and exciter should be included. 

All the losses m any apparatus for sel f-exr itation and regu- 
lation receiving its input from the ac lines connected to the termi- 
nals of the synchronoui> machine. 

In case of separate excitation by other means, such as a 
battery, rectifier or motor-generator set, no allowance for losses 
of the excitation sourc e is to be made. 

6.1.2 Losses Independent of Current 

a) Core loss — Core loss at no-load and rated speed and rated terminal 
voltage. 

b) Bearing friction loss — Only losses in bearmgs supplied with the 
machine shall be included. Losses m common bearings shall be 
stated separately whether or not th(*y are supplied with the 
machine* 

15 



ISI48II9-1968 

For vertical shaft machinesi losses in a thrust^bearing and if 
combined with a guide-bearing, the total losses in the bearings, 
shall be stated separately. The thrust-load, the temperatures in 
the bearings and grade of oil at which the loss values are valid, 
shall also be given* 

By agreement, the bearing temperature may be measured in 
two pads of the thrust-bearing and two p)ads ( points ) of the guide- 
bearing, and the stated value referred to the highest of the 
measured temperatures. The load on the thrust-bearing should 
be the same as when measuring the losses. For information, the 
bearing losses when the bearing is loaded with total weight of 
rotating parts plus full hydraulic thrust may be given. 

c) Total windage loss — The total windage loss in the machine and 
exciter, if any, including the f)ower absorbed in fans forming an 
integral part of the machine. The losses in external fans pro- 
vided exclusively for the machine in question shall be included 
only by agreement. When the machine is ventilated from a 
common independent air supply, the windage losses in ventilat- 
ing ducts external to the machine housing, and those of the 
external fans supplying air through such external ducts, shall not 
be included. 

d) Brush friction loss — The brush friction, including that of the exci- 
ter if mechanically driven. 

6#L3 Direct-^Load Losses — The PR loss in the primary windings deter- 
mined from the current and the resistance of the windings. 

6.1 #4 StrajhLoad Losses 

a) Stray-load loss in the magnetic circuit and any other metal parts 
other than the conductors. 

b) Stray-load loss in conductors. 

6.2 Determination of EfiBciency 

6«2.1 Summation of Losses — The efficiency can be calculated from the 
total losses which are assumed to be the summation of the losses obtained 
in the following manner. 

6«2*1«1 Exciiing^ircuit losses 

a) Field PR losses — These losses are calculated from the formula 
PR, taking for R the resistance of the field winding corrected to 
the reference temperature and for I the value of the exciting cur- 
rent for the particular rating of the machine, measured directly 
during the on-load test or calculated when this test is not possi- 
ble. Where such a calculation is made, the method is for agree- 
ment between manufacturer and purchaser. 

16 



15:4889-1968 

b) Main rheostat losses — These losses are calculated from the formula 
PR, v/here R is the resistance of the part of the rheostat in cir- 
cuit for the rating considered, and I is the value of the exciting 
current for the rating considered defined as in 6.2-l.l(a). They 
are also equal to the product lU of the excitation current at the 
particular rating and the voltage U at the terminals of the 
rheostat, 

c) Brush electrical losses — The sum of these losses shall be taken as 
the product of the excitation current at the rating considered and 
a fixed voltage drop. The voltage drop allowed for all brushes 
of each polarity shall be TO volt for carbon or graphite brushes and 
03 volt for metal-carbon brushes, that is, a total drop of 2*0 volts 
for carbon or graphite brushes, and 0"6 volt for metaUcarbon 
brushes. 

The sum of the losses 6.2-1.1 ( a ) + 6.2J.1 ( b ) -f 6.2-1-1 ( c ) 
is also equal to the product lUe of the exciting current I and the 
total excitation voltage Ue- 

d) Exciter losses 

These losses iitclude the difference between the power absorb- 
ed at the shaft of the exciter and the useful power which it 
furnishes at terminals of the exciter, and the excitation losses 
of the exciter if this machine itself is excited by a separate source. 
The useful p<^wer at the terminals of the exciter is equal to t^e 
sum of the losses 6.2.1.1 (a ) 4 6.2.1.1 ( b) + 6.2.1.1 ( c ) of the 
main machine. 

If the exciter can be uncoupled from the main machine and 
tested separately, the power which it absorbs may be measured 
by the calibrated machine method {see 6.2.3). 

If the exciter cannot be uncoupled from the main machine, 
the power which it absorbs may be measured either by the 
calibrated machine method (^^^ 6.2.3) or by the retardation 
method {see 7.4) applied to the complete group. In these two 
methods, the power absorbed by the exciter is obtained as the 
difference between the total losses of the group measured under 
identical conditions, first with the exciter on load, secondly 
with the exciter unexcited, the excitation of the exciter being 
furnished by an independent source. 

If none of these methods is applicable, the power absorbed 
by the exciter is obtained by adding to (he power measured at 
its terminals the several separate losses determined as described 
under 4.1. Nevertheless, mechanical losses due to friction and 
windage which are measured at the same time as those of the 
main machine are not taken into account. 

17 



18:4889-1968 

The method of determining the losses in apparatus for self 
excitation and regulation, receiving their input from the ac lines 
connected to the terminals of the machine shall be a matter of 
agreement between manufacturer and purchaser. 

Note — The above methods of obtaining exciter losses apply only to the 
case where the exciter is mechanically driven from the main shaft and is used 
solely for exciting the synchronous machine, 

6.2#1«2 Losses independent of current 

a) Unity power factor test at rated voltage and frequency — The sum 
6-1.2 (aj + 6X2 (b) + 6.L2 (c) + 6.1-2 (d) of the losses 
indepenaent of current is generally determined by the method 
of running the machine as a motor on no-load. The synchro- 
nous machine is fed at its rated voltage and rated frequency, so as 
to work as a motor on no-load. The excitation is adjusted so 
that the machine absorbs the minimum alternating current. The 
electrical power absorbed, decreased by the I*R loss in the 
stator windings, and, if appropriate, by the power absorbed by 
the exciter gives the sum of the losses independent of current. 

b) Open^rcuit test — The sum of the losses 6.1.2( a ) -f 6.1-2( b ) 
-f 6.1.2 (c ) 4- 6.1.2 ( d ), the losses 6.2.1 ( a ) and the sum of 
the losses 6.1.2 ( b ) + 6.1.2 ( c ) -f 6.1.2 ( d ) may also be deter- 
mined by driving the machine at its rated speed by means of 
calibrated machine {see 7*2). The machine is excited by an 
independent source so as to work as a generator on no-load at 
a voltage equal to its rated voltage. The power which it absorbs 
at its shaft, and which may be calculated from the power ab* 
sorbed from the calibrated motor, gives the sum of the losses 
6.1.2 ( a ) 4- 6.1.2 ( b ) f 6.1.2 ( c ) + 6.1.2 ( d ). By removing the 
excitation, the sum of the losses 6.1.2 (b) + 6.1.2 (c) 
-f 6.1.2 ( d ) is obtained in the same manner. The core losses 
6LI.2 ( a ) are obtained by subtraction. Given the small number 
of brushes used of synchronous machines^ it is generally not 
possible to separate the losses 6.1.2 ( d ) from the sum of the 
losses 6.1.2 (lb) + 6.1.2 (c) + 6.1.2 (d), by means of a test 
with the brushes lifted, 

c) Retardation test ---The sum of the losses 6.1.2 ( a ) + 6.1.2 ( b ) + 
6.1.2 ( c ) + 6.1.2 ( d ), the losses 6.1.2 ( a ) and the sum of the 
losses 6J.2 (b) + 6.1.2 (c) + 6.1.2 (d) may be determined by 
using the retardation method ( see 7.4 ). 

d) Unity power feu tor test at variable frequency — The losses may be 
separated by running the machine as a motor at rated frequency, 
but at different voltages as described under 5. 

18 



IS:4889-1968 

e) VariahU hydrogen density test — The total windage losses 6#L2 (c) 
may be separated from bearing friction losses 6.L2(b) and 
brush friction losses 6.1#2 (d) by tests at different densities of 
cooling gas for hydrogen cooled machines* 

Note — Tests at different speeds are under consideration, 

f ) Catorimetric test — The losses 6*1*2 ( b ) may be separately deter- 
mined when possible by using the calorimetric method. 

Note — Test on losses in thrust-bearings, possibly combined with guide-bearings, 
in vertical shaft machines, should only be carried out by agreement. 

6.2.1.3 Direct4oad losses — I*R loss in armature windings is normally 
measured during the short-circuit test described in 6.2AA. 

When it is to be given separately, the loss is calculated from the 
current and the resistance of the windings corrected to the reference 
temperature. 

6.2.1.4 Stray4oad losses — Unless otherwise specified, the sum of the 
losses 6.1.4 (a) + 6.1.4 (b) is measured by means of the short-circuit 
test. The machine to be tested, with its armature winding short-circuited, 
is driven at its rated speed and so excited that the current in the short- 
circuited armature is equal to the rated current. The power absorbed at 
the shaft, decreased by the mechanical losses 6.1.2 ( b ) to 6.1.2 ( d ), and 
the power absorbed by the exciter, if appropriate, presents the suin of 
the PR losses 6.1.3 and the stray-load losses 6.1.4 (a) and 6.1.4 (b)^ 
The losses 6.1.3, 6.1.4 (a) and 6.1.4 (b) vary in different senses tis a 
function of the temperature. The sum of the losses 6.1.3 + 6.1.4 ( a ) 
-f 6.1.4 ( b ) is assumed to be independent of the temperature, an<J no 
correction is made to the reference temperature. 

Note — It is recognized that the sum of the losses 6.1.4(a) + 6.1.4(b), thus 
detemiined, is generally a little higher than the losses which actually exist at full lead. 

The power absorbed at the shaft of the njachine during the short- 
circuit test may be measured by the calibrated machine method or by 
the retardation method ( see 7.4 ). 

6.2.2 Braking Test — When the machine is run at rated conditions of 
speed, voltage and current, the efficiency is taken as the ratio of output to 
input measured in the same units. 

Note — No winding resistance temperature correction shall be made to the 
machine under test. 

6.2.3 Calibrated Machine Test — When the machine is run at rated con- 
ditions of speed, voltage and current, the efficiency is taken as the ratio 
of output to input measured in the same units- {see 1.2). 

Note — No winding resistance temperature correction shall be made to the 
machine under test. 

19 



ISt 4889-1968 

6.2.4 Mechanical Back'to-Back Test — When the identical machines are run 
at essentially the same rated conditions, the losses are assumed to be 
equally distributed, and the efficiency is calculated from half the total 
losses and the electrical input. 

6.2.5 Electrical Back-to-Back Test — When the identical machines are run 
at essentially the same rated conditions, the losses supplied from the 
electrical system are assumed to be equally distributed and the efficiency is 
calculated from half the total losses and the electrical input. 

6.2.6 JZ^o Power Factor Test — The machine operates as a motor at 
no-load and at rated speed with a power-factor in the neighbourhood of 
zero whilst the excitation current is adjusted so as to have the rated 
primary current. 

The supply voltage is such that the magnetic losses have the same 
value as in no-load operation under rated voltage. In principle, the 
reactive power supplied should be positive (that is, over-excited), but 
when this is impossible because the exciter voltage is not sufficient, the 
test can be made with absorption of the reactive power ( that is, under- 
excited). 

The total losses are equivalent to the absorbed power during the 
test corrected for the exciting-circuit losses. 

7. METHODS OF TEST 

7,1 Tests can be grouped in one of tHe following three categories: 

a) Input-output measurement on a single machine. This usually 
involves the measurement of mechanical f>ow^ into, pr out of 
a machine. 

b) Input and output measurement of two mafchines connected back- 
to-back, for example, two identical macihines or a test machine 
coupled to a calibrated machine. 

c) Measurement of the actual loss in a machine under a particular 
condition. This is usually not the total loss, but comprises 
component losses. The method may, however, be used to calculate 
the total loss. 

The choice of tests to be made depends on the information required, 
the accuracy required, and the type and size of machine involved. Where 
alternative methods are available for a particular type of machine, the 
preferred method shall be in accordance with 8. 

20 



IS:488»-1968 

When the efficiency or total loss is. derived from the measured input 
and output power, any inaccuracy in these measurements appears as a 
direct error in the efficiency ( for example, with an accuracy of power 
measurement not better than 1 percent, the efficiency can be 2 percent in 
error or the total losses car be in error by 2 percent of the total input 
power). On small machines or machines with relatively low efficiencies 
(say, below 90 percent), this method may be quite acceptable and forms a 
convenient form of test for such machines. On these and on other 
machines, efficiency can be obtained with high ac ruracy by the calculation 
of losses from direct measurements. 

1.2 Calibrated Machine Test— The machine of which the losses are 
to be measured is separated from the network, uncoupled from its driving 
motor, if necessary, and driven at its rated speed by a calibrated motor, 
that is, by an electric motor of whic h the losses have been previously 
determined with great accuracy, such that It is possible to determine 
the mechanical power which it furnishes at its shaft, knowing the electric 
power which it absorbs and its speed of rotation. The mechanical 
power transmitted by the calibrated motor to the shaft of the machine 
under test is a measure of the losses of this latter machine for the working 
conditions under which the test is made. In this method, the machine 
tested may be on no-load, excited or unexcited, with or without brushes or 
short-circuited, which enables categories of losses to be separated. 

7.2.1 As an alternative, the calibrated motor may be replaced by a dyna- 
mometer or by any other motor driving the machine under test through 
an appropriate torsionmeter, which enables the torque transmitted to the 
machine under test to be known, and hence the mechanical power ab|Drb- 
ed by this latter machine. 

When use is made of this alternative, the speed of rotation Which 
comes directly into the calculation of the torque shall be measured with 
extreme care. 

7.3 Zero Power Factor Te«t — Under consideration, 

lA Retardation Method — This method is applicable to large machines 
with considerable inertia. It consists of measuring the retardation time 
when the machine is slowing down under different conditions between 
two predetermined speeds, say, from 1 10 percent to 90 percent or from 105 
percent to 95 percent of the ratpd spoed. This time varies inversely 
with the average losses durinc; tlu^ same time, 

The method enables the measurement of the mechanical loss ( bear- 
ing friction, total windage loss and brush friction ) with any machine, 
core loss at different excitation and load loss at short-circuit under diffe- 
rent excitation only with dc and synchronous machines^ 

21 



IS}4889.1968 

During the test, the machine is run as a motor at no-load fed from 
a separate generator. The machines are accelerated to a speed sufficiently 
above the speed from which the retardation time is measured. The test 
machine is then disccnnected from its feeding machine and the excitation 
and connection conditions, which are to be studied, are established. 
This should be done with sufficient rapidity for the electrical test condi- 
tions to have been reached at the moment when the speed of the machine, 
which is decreasing constantly during this interval, passes through the 
upper limit, from which the retardation time is measured. 

The time between the two limits should be measured with an accu- 
racy of preferably 1 to 2 percent. The interval between the two limits 
chosen depends on the accuracy of measurement. A permanent-magnet 
generator or an exciter may be used as a tachometer. 

The test should be carried out for several excitations, both with 
open-circuit and short-circuit connections. In the open-circuit retarda- 
tion tests, the excitation current and the stator voltage are measured as 
the machine passes through the rated speed. In the short-circuit retarda- 
tion tests, the excitation current and the stator current are measured at 
the same instant. 

Before the measurements, the machine is run for a sufficient time for 
the temperature of the bearings to be stabilized. If the bearing losses are 
guaranteed at a certain temperature of the bearing, the amount of cooling 
water to the bearing cooling system should be adjusted so that the agreed 
temperature is attained. 

To obtain the absolute value of the losses, which are present in the 
machine during the corresponding open-circuit retardation test at the 
moment of passing through the rated speed, measurements are made 
with the machine running as a motor at no-load, normal speed and unity 
power>factor, and at the same voltage as in one of the retardation mea- 
•urements preferably at normal voltage. The input, that is the losses, is 
to be measured with great accuracy. 

The measurement is repeated several times and the average value 
calculated. Instead of measuring several times at the same voltage, 
several points can be measured at different voltages in the range of 
95 to 105 percent to obtain a curve of losses venus voltage around 
the rated voltage. Retardation measurements should have been made in 
the same voltage range. The relation between losses P and retardation 
time is now established. 

The losses at any condition (for example, at no-load, at short- 
circuit, etc ) are calculated as the input value P measured in the above test 
multblied by the ratio between the retardation time in the above test 
and the retardation time in the actual test. 

22 



IS:4889-1968 

The mechanical loss is obtained from a retardation test without 
excitation, the core loss from the open-circuit tests with mechanical 
loss subtracted and loss in short-circuit from a retardation test in short- 
circuit with mechanical loss subtracted. 

When the intertia of the machine is not known with sufficient 
precision, it may be determmed by a retardation test with known 
losses, measured by another method. 

The moment of inertia is calculated from the results of the retar- 
dation test by the equation: 

45600 /P 

where 

J ^ moment o( inertia in kgm^ 

/ :== time in seconds for retardation from the speed n{\ +8) 
to the sj>eed w ( 1 — 8 ) , 

P = in losses icW, and 

n - rated sp<>ed in rev/min. 

In retardation test, the excitation for the machine under test sho](ild 
preferably be from a separate source- A directly coupled excitei nuiy, 
however, be used- if the interval in speed at retardation 'S small, for 
example, 105-95 percent. An appropriate correction for the loss in 
the excitation circuit shall then be made taking into account also that 
the excitation current at the retardation test, and the no-load test 
may be a little different, although the voltage is the same. Separate 
excitation of the exciter is, however, necessary. 

Instead of using the no-load method for obtaining the absohite 
value of the losses, the calibrated motor method may be used. 

7.4J The on-load retardation test is conducted with the machine 
operating as a motor and supplying the load. The speed of rotation 
of the unit before disconnecting from the network should approximately be 
equal to the rated speed. The power input before disconnecting should be 
not less than 0-6 of the latcd power; and for synchronous machines 
the power factor should be close to unity. The excitation of dc and 
synchronous machines during the test is unchanged. 

After disconnecting the supply source, the change of speed of 
the unit during the first few seconds is determined. 

23 



ISt4889-1968 

The speed-time curve is plotted and a tangent to the initial point 
of the curve is drawn* This tangent is used to determine the change 
in speed for the time interval. 

7.5 Calorimctric Te»t— -Under consideration. 

7*6 Electrical Bmck*to-Back Test 

ISA This method is applicable when two identical machines are 
available, especially in the case of direct current. The machines are 
coupled mechanically and electrically so as to operate at rated speed, 
one as a motor and the other as a generator. The actual temperature 
at which the measurements are carried out should be as close as possible to 
the working temperature and no further correction should be made- 
The losses of the assembled machines are supplied either by a network 
to which they are connected, or by a calibrated driving motor, or 
by a booster, or by a combination of these various means. 

7*6%2 The average value of the armature currents is adjusted at the 
rated armature current value, the average of the voltage of the two 
armatures is above or below the rated voltage by an amount equal to 
the voltage drop, according to whether the machines are meant to be 
used respectively as generators or as motors. 

7*63 Where two induction machines are electrically connected, they 
should be mechanically coupled with a speed adjusting device such 
as a gear box to ensure the circulation of power. The magnitude of 
power circulated depends upon the difference in speed. The electrical 
system supplying the losses to the two machines shall be required to 
|:MX>vide magnetizing kVAR to both machines. 

TSA When two synchronous machines are electrically connected, they 
should be mechanically coupled with a correct angular phase relationship. 
The magnitude of the power circulated depends upon the difference in 
phase angle between them. 

7«7 Mixed Freqaency Teat — Under consideration. 

8. SCHEDULE OF PREFERRED TESTS 

S.0 The schedule of preferred tests for various machines shall be as 
follows. 

8 J For dc Machinee — The preferred test shall be in accordance 
with 7.6, with the efficiency calculated in accordance with 4«2J. 

8«2 For Iiid«ctioii Mmchines — The preferred test shall be in accordance 
with 5«2«l»l(a) and 5«2«L2(a), losses independent of current being 
determined in accordance with 5.2.1J. 

8*3 Fo» Synchronous Machines*— The preferred test shall be in accor- 
dance with 6.2AJ2{h) and €»2.1«4, losses independent of current bieng 
determined in accordance with 602«1«2. 

24 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 1 10002 

Telephones 323 0131. 323 3375 323 9402 Fax + 91 01 1 3234062, 3239399 3239382 

E • Mail bisOvsnl com Website http //www bis org in 



Central Laboratory: 

Plot No 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 

Regional Offices: 

Central Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 10002 

•Eastern 1/14 CIT Scheme VII, V I P Road. Kankurgachi, CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern C t T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

t Western Manakalaya. E9, MIDC. Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, 
Andhen (East), MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 

Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 
BANGALORE 560058 

Commercial-cum-Office Complex, Opp Dushera Maidan, E-5 Arera Colony, 
Bittan Market. BHOPAL 462016 

62-63. Ganga Nagar. Unit VI. BHUBANESHWAR 751001 

5lh Floor, Kovai Towers, 44 Bala Sundaram Road. COIMBATORE 641018 

Plot No 58, Neelam Bata Road, NIT, FARIDABAD 121001 

Savitn Complex, 116 G T Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 

53/5 Ward No 29, R Q Barua Road, 5th By-lane, Apurba Smha Path, 
GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8-56C L N Gupta Marg. Nampally Station Road. HYDERABAD 500001 

E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 

117/418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 
LUCKNOW 226001 

NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 

Mahabir Bhawan, 1st Floor, Ropar Road, NALAGARH 174101 

Patliputra Industnal Estate, PATNA 800013 

First Floor. Plot Nos 657-660. Market Yard, Gultekdi, PUNE 411037 

'Sahaianand House' 3rd Floor, Bhaktinagar Circle, 80 Feet Road, 
RAJKOT 360002 

TC No 14/1421. University PO Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 



Telephone 
477 0032 

323 76 17 
337 86 62 
60 38 43 
254 13 15 
832 92 95 



550 13 48 
839 49 55 

72 34 52 



40 36 27 


21 88 35 


542 82 61 


471 19 98 


54 1 1 37 


320 10 84 


37 38 79 


21 68 76 


21 89 23 


52 51 71 


2 14 51 


26 26 08 


426 86 59 


37 82 51 



*Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, PO Princep Street, 
CALCUTTA 700072 

t Sales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 



32 21 04 
23710 85 
309 65 28 



Printed at Stmoo Pnnting Press, Delhi 



