**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 4586-1-1 (1987) : Dimensions of Spindles and Mounting 
Arrangements for Spindle Operated Electronic Components, 
Part 1: Spindles, Section 1: General and Definitions [LITD 
3: Electromechanical Components and Mechnical Structures 
for Electronic Equipment] 



k^v i imj£2>*$^a is^arrrF^ 



£«> \\ i %?9F50&*ssi&: 



^^CVVVfa^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621-88-088429*3 : 006'78 | S . 4586 ( p art 1/Sec j ) _ 198? 



Indian Standard < Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

DIMENSIONS OF 
SPINDLES AND MOUNTING ARRANGEMENTS FOR 
SPINDLE OPERATED ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS 

PART 1 SPINDLES 
Section 1 General and Definitions 

(Second Revision) 



t. Scope — Covers definitions and general requirements for spindles for manual operation of 
components including rotary switches, variable resistors (potentiometers) and variable capacitors, 
tuning spindles and coupling spindles, primarily intended for use in equipment for telecommunication 
and in electronic devices employing similar techniques. 

1.1 It does not cover sophisticated spindles, such as stepped-flatted spindles, and splined spindles. 

2. Terminology 

2.1 Spindle Length — The distance between the reference plane and the end of the spindle. 

2.2 Bush Length — The distance between the reference plane and the end of the bush. 

2.3 Stepped Flatted Spindle — Flatted spindles in which a portion of the flatted part is further milled 
to form a step. 

2.4 Splined Flatted Spindle — Spindles in which a portion of the spindle length has splines cut on 
its outer diameter with a slotting along nearly the entire spindle length. 

2.5 Tuning Spindle — A spindle, by the operation of which a pointer can be moved on a scale 
indicating frequencies and wavelengths or both, to which the apparatus is tuned and is also coupled to 
the relevant variable electrical components. 

2.6 Coupling Spindle — A spindle of suitable length and fixing arrangement so that another spindle 
of standard dimensions can be fixed by the user. 

2.7 Reference Plane — The inner face of the spmdle head with reference to which all dimensions 
along the spindle axis are measured. 

Note — This is a plane which normally rests on the mounting panel. 

3. General 

3.0 Essential dimensions and tolerances for different types of spindles and bushes shall be in accordance 
with the relevant Sections of this standard. 

3.1 Dimensions apply to spindles after suitable finish. 

3.2 Mechanical Fixing Devices — See Appendix A. 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.2 ) 

DETAILS OF MECHANICAL FIXING DEVICES 

A-1- Fixing Arrangement — The following three types of fixing arrangements have been detailed 
in Fig. 1: 

a) Single-hole panel fixing (see Fig. 1B ), 

b) Multiple-hole panel fixing (see Fig. 1A), and 

c) Chassis fixing ( see Fig. 1C ). 



Adopted 6 May 1987 



March 1988, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 4586 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) - 1987 



SPINDLE LENGTH 'B- 



BUSH LENGTH '0- 



#- 



FIXING PANEl 



vr 



1A Single-Hole Panel Fixing 



REFERENCF 
PLANE 



-SPINDLE LENGTH *B y 



BUSH LENGTH -0- 



tr 



j- 



\ 



FIXING PANEL 



-REFERENCE 
PLANE 



1B Multiple-Hole Panel Fixing 



^SPINDLE LENGTH *B- 



BUSH LENGTH *G- 



G 



r 



REFERENCE PLANE- 



COMPONENT 



'L 



EgzS 



c'hassis-1 



1C Chasls Fixing 
FIG. 1 TYPES OF FIXING 



A-2. Dimensions of Holes — The preferred diameter of threaded hole ( axial or radial ) for fixing the 
component on to the fixing panel/chasis may correspond to the following screw thread sizes: 



Spindle Diameter 
mm 



Screw Thread Size 
See IS : 4218 (Part II )-1 976* 



3 
4 
6 
8 
10 



M1-6 

M2 

M3 

M4 

M5 



A-2.1 For non-threaded holes, the hole size shall be in accordance with the relevant Indian Standard. 



♦ISO metric screw threads: Part II Diameter pitch combinations (first revision ). 

2 



IS : 4586 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) - 1987 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The object of this Indian Standard is to specify the essential dimensions of spindles for manual 
operation of electronic components and to ensure interchangeability, variety reduction and easy fixing 
of the knobs, and also to provide mechanical fixing details for the mounting of single hole, bush 
mounted, spindle operated electronic components on the panel. 

The standard was originally published in 1968 and revised in 1978 to align it with IEC Pub 390 
(1972) 'Dimensions of spindle ends for manually operated electronic components', issued by the 
International Electrotechnical Commission. The second revision of Part 1 of the standard has been 
undertaken to include additional sizes of spindles for professional usage, such as for defence purposes 
and also to align it as far as practicable with IEC Pub 390A (1976) 'First supplement ' to IEC Pub 390 
(1972). 

This standard consists of two parts, Part 1 covering different types of spindles, and Part 2 
covering various types of mounting arrangements. Part 1 has the following sections: 

Section 1 General and Definitions, 

Section 2 Plain Round Spindle, 

Section 3 Flatted Spindle, 

Section 4 Slotted Spindle, 

Section 5 Hallow Spindle, 

Section 6 Coupling Spindle, 

Section 7 Concentric Spindle, 

Section 8 Double Flatted Spindle, 

Section 9 Knurled Spindle, and 

Section 10 Slotted and Knurled Spindle. 



Printed at Arete Preee, New Delhi, India 



