( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS: 6134 ( Part 11 ) -1973

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS MICROWAVE TUBES
PART II OSCILLATOR
E1cctron Tubes Sectional

ON

TUBES
ETDC 39

fJommittee,

Chairman

PROPS. SAI.SPATES Indian Institute of Technology, hfadras

Members
DR S. S. S. AGARWALA

Representing
Central Electronics Engineering Research Instiiute ( CSIR ), Pilani AH India Radio & Electronics Association, Bombay

SHRIH. K L. ARORA SriRIR. C. KrtawANr (. Altmate ) ( Bombay) SHRIARUP GSAUDSSCRI (,41ternuit ) (Calcutta) SHRIL. S.V. EASWAR (Alternate j ( Madras) Directorate General of Technical Developmcnt SHRIBALRAJBSiANOT DERECTOR,ELECTRICALENOINEE- Naval Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ) Rrstff Development Directorate General of Research DIRECTOR, ELECTRONICS & RADAR ( DGRD ) ( Ministry of Defence ) DEVELOPSSENT ESTABLISHMENT N'ational Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' &5Rl R. K. Jm Association ( RETMA ), Calcutta SHRI S. B. PAI( .4[/errr/fe ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of Sr-rRI S. Cl MAjukfDAR Tourism & Chil Aviation) Directqate of Technical Development & Production SHR? A. V. RAJU { Air) . [ . Ministrv of Defenee ) SESR? P. M. SEANKAR R~o ( Alternate) Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of %rrtr P. K. RAO Defence ) (Altarnde) KU~ARI V. SERYA:ANTHI .411India Radio, New Delhi SHRt S. N. SEN Bhabba Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Ssmr~. H. VAZE Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalorc DR R. P. WADHWA Srirsr N. SRINWASAN, Director General, 1S1 ( -&@cirr Member) Elec tech) Deputy Dlrcctor ( Secreta~ ) ( Corstirrrd m page 2 )
@

copyright 1973

of 1957I and This reprodttction in whole or in part by any meansexceptwith written $sertnission of the publishershall be deemed to be an irrfrm~ementof copyright under the said Act.

INDIAN STANDARDSINSTITUTION publication is protmed under the Zfrdim WVr@t Act (XIV

IS: 6134 ( Part II ) - 1973
( Continuedfrom page 1 )

Panel Convener
DR S. S. S. AGARWALA

for Microwave

Tubes,

ETDC

39 : P5
Research Institute

Representiq Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ), Pilani

Members Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI B. L. GUPTA Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI A. K. MAJUMDAR DR D. S. VENKATESRWARULU ( Alternate ) Civil Aviation Department, New Delhi SHRIK.V.NARAYANAMURTHY Telecommunication Research Centre ( P & T Board ), SHRI P. S. SARAN New Delhi Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. SRIDHAR SHRI M. D. SANTHANAM ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of LT-COL B. D. VERMA Defence ) SHRI N. CHANDRAPAL(Alternate )

IS: 6134 ( Part 11 ) -1973

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS MICROWAVE TUBES
PART II OSCILLATOR TUBES

ON

O. FOREWORD
0.1 This Institution Intiia:l Slandard ( Part 11 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards on 23 April 1973, after the draft finalized by the Electron

Tubes Sectional Committee had been approved Division Council.

by the Electrotechnical

0.2 This standard deals with the methods of measurements of characteristics of micro~tave oscillator tubes which are common to the farnily of oscillator tubes. The measurements described in this standard are either in additiou to or alternate to those given in Part 1 of this series of standards on microwave tubes measurement. Specific types of oscillator

tubes \vill be dealt with separately to which this standard and Part I of
this series will form necessary adjuncts. assistance has been de~ived from O.3 TYhile preparing this standard, Pub 235-2 `Nleasurement of the electrical properties of micro~vave tubes, `, issued by the International Electrotechnical Part 2 GeneraI Measurements Commission. 0.4 This standard is one .+ list of standards tubes. on fourth cover. O.5 For standard the purpose of a series published of Indian Standards so far on microwave a particular on microwave tubes is given of this

of deciding

whether

requirement

ing IS: 2.1 960*.
off value

is complied witll, the final value, observed or calculated, expressthe result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with
should The number of significant places retained be the same as that of the specified value in the rounded in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (ePart II ) deals with nlethods of measurements of characteristics of nucrowave oscillator t~be~ Whic!l are common to the family of oscillator tubes. -- ----
*Rules for rounding off numerical ~alues ( revised).

3

IS : 6134 ( Part II ) - 1973

1.1.1 Specific types of oscillator tubes, such as klystron diskseel tubes are dealt with separately.
`2. TERMINOLOGY the terms 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 1885 ( Part IV/Set 3)-1971" shall apply. 3. GENERAL 3.0 The CONDITIONS of IS : 6134 ( Part I/Set 1 )-1971t

oscillator

tubes,

and definitions

given

in

provisions

shall apply.

4. FREQUENCY 4.1 Frequency Pulling Figure

4.1.1 This is measured with the tube operative under stated conditions when coupled into a load causing a stated voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR). 4.1.2 The frequency pulling figure is the difference between the extremes of frequency of oscillation which occur when the phase of the reflection coefficient of the load is varied through 27~ radions.
NOTEIt should be ensured that the range for the phase variation is fully covered.

4.1.3 Precautions- Care should be taken that the VSWR remains between stated limits during variation of the phase of the reflection coefficient of the load, and that the rate of change of phase is rapid enough to avoid thermal drift effects. It may be necessary to state the distance between the output plane of the tube and the reference plane of the load.
4.2 Frequency Pushing FigureThis is measured by varying the electrode current periodically under the stated operating conditions. The difference between the extremes of frequency of oscillation throughout the stated current variation is measured. The frequency pushing figure is computed as the ratio between this difference in frequency, and the magnitude of the current variation. 4.2.1 Pulse Operation-The amplitude of the electrode currznt pulse is periodically modulated, usually sinusoidally, at such a rate that thermal effects may be neglected, provision being made to measure the difference in The frequency change the peak values of the current due to modulation. may be measured by a spectrum analyser or by a microwave receiver. The result is expressed as the ratio between the change in frequency, and the maximum difference between current peaks during a modulation cycle.
*Electrotechnical vocabulary

: Part IV Electron

tubes,

Section I General

3 Microwave measurements,

tubes. Section 1

tMethods of measurement on microwave tubes : Part General conditions and precautions for measurements.

4

IS : 6134 ( Part II) - 1973 4.2.2 CW Operation- The electrode current is modulated smoothly, at least over the required range, at such a rate that thermal effects may be neglected. A frequency discriminator of high enough resolution to resolve the expected frequency difference is required. The output of the frequency discriminator is applied to one axis of a cathode-ray oscilloscope and the electrode current signal is applied to the other axis. The axis representing current is calibrated in such a way that the instantaneous frequency at all values of current can be observed.
4.3 Temperature Coefficient of Frequency -- When operated under stated conditions, the frequency of oscillation is measured at two stated temperatures observed at a prescribed point on the body of the tube. The temperature variations can be produced by external means. The result is expressed as the ratio of the difference in frequency to the difference in temperature.

5, SPURIOUS MODE 5.1 The existence

OSCILLATION

of oscillation in spurious modes in the output and the power of this oscillation, may be checked by a spectrum analyser or by a If an attenuator is used, it is inserted before the microwave receiver. In comparing the output in desired and spurious modes, the first mixer. sensitivity versus frequency characteristics of the entire system including waveguide components and the spectrum analyser of receiver should be carefully calibrated. 6. PULSE STABILITY

6.1 Missing Pulses 6.1.1 Missing rf pulses may be recorded during a known time interval activated by a circuit that detects missing rf by an electronic counter The rectified rf pulse input to the circuit may be sampled from pulses. the tube load through a frequency selective device of suitable passband. The reference input to the circuit should be representative of the input pulse applied to the tube. The missing pulse detector empIoyed should be capable of recording random and occasional deficient pulses, as well as consecutive clusters of deficient pulses.
6.1.2 The modulator, the load and other operating conditions should be kept constant during the measurement so that missing pulses are caused only by the tube being measured. 6.2

Pulse Mismatch
a VSWR

Stability

6.2.1 Mismatch
having

stability is measured as described in 6.1 with the load A maximum value of the missing pulse of stated value. 5

1S: 6134( Part 11) -1973 factor is found by varying the phase of the reflection corfficimt cf :he load at least by 2X radians.
NOTE -- It should be ensured that the range for the phase variation is fully covered

6.2.2 It may be necessary to state the distance bet~vcen the output plnne of the tube and the wferencc plane of the load, because this influences the Q-factor ( long line effect) of the circuit ~vhich in turn can affect the stability of an oscillator. 6.3 Starting Stab$lity of Snap-on-Stability -- Measurelnent of starting stability of a pulsed generator is performed as the first measurement following a stated perioci of inactivity. The stated pulse voltage is applied instantaneously and observations of the missing puke factor are made m described in 6.1.

6

