Waa AT IS 1982 : 2015 
Reaffi d 2020 
Indian Standard (Reaffirme ) 


We et aiet UR cr -nN 
ait Une-aién frao — ofa 
ateat 


(FART YAO ) 


Ante-Mortem and Post-Mortem 
Inspection of Meat Animals — Code 
of Practice 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 67.120.01 


© BIS 2015 


ada AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 gae WHC Art, we feeei-110002 
mw MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2015 Price Group 6 


Slaughterhouse and Meat Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Slaughterhouse 
and Meat Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Proper ante-mortem inspection of all animals before slaughter and proper post-mortem inspection after slaughter 
of food animals is essential to ensure that they are not affected with any disease or other condition which may 
render the flesh unwholesome. There are some diseases which are communicable from animals to human by 
contact and, therefore, ante-mortem inspection is also necessary for safeguarding the health of the consumer as 
well as other meat handlers. Post-mortem inspection is essential to detect carcasses, parts of carcasses and organs 
which may be diseased and, thereby, rendered unfit for human consumption. 


Veterinary science and the science of meat hygiene should be applied throughout the food chain, starting at the 
farm of origin, so that fresh meat produced from slaughtered animals is safe and wholesome. Traditional practices 
may permit departures from some of the requirements when fresh meat is produced for local trade. 


This standard was first published in 1962 and revised in 1971 with a view to modify the earlier requirements in 
the light of experience gained by various government and private agencies in the ante-mortem and post-mortem 
inspection of meat animals. The first revision of is standard incorporated number of important modifications 
such as; (a) camel, horse, mare, ass and mule were excluded from the scope of the standard as those animals were 
not slaughtered in the country; (b) the terminology was aligned with that of the ‘The Meat Food Products Order, 
1973’; and (c) detailed instructions on dealing with anthrax infected carcasses were included. 


This second revision is undertaken to align the standard with the Recommended International Code of Hygienic 
Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58 : 2005) and Food Safety and Standard (Licensing and Registration of Food 
Businesses) Regulations, 2011. 


IS 1982 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


ANTE-MORTEM AND POST-MORTEM INSPECTION OF 
MEAT ANIMALS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the code of practice for the 
ante-mortem and post-mortem inspection of meat 
producing animals. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Abattoir/Slaughterhouse — Any establishment 
where specified animals are slaughtered and dressed 
for human consumption and that is approved, registered 
and/or listed by the competent authority for such 
purposes. 


2.2 Approved as Fit for Human Consumption — It 
means the meat has been inspected and passed without 
any restrictions, and branded accordingly. 


2.3 Animals — It Includes: 


a) Large ruminants — Cattle (bull, bullock/steer, 
calf, cow, heifer, stag) ; Buffalo (bull, bullock/ 
steer, calf, cow, heifer, stag) 

b) Small ruminants — Sheep (lamb, ram, ewe, 
gimmer, wether); goat (doe, kid, buck) and; 

c) Pig — barrow, boar, piglet, gilt, and sow 


2.4 Ante-Mortem Inspection — Any procedure or 
test conducted by a competent person on live animals 
for the purpose of judgement of safety and suitability 
and disposition. 


2.5 Branding — It means any mark or stamp approved 
by the controlling authority and also includes any tag 
or label bearing such mark or stamp. 


2.6 Carcass — The body of any slaughtered food 
animal after bleeding, flaying and dressing. 


2.7 Chemical Residues — The residues of veterinary 
drugs, insecticides, pesticides and heavy metals or other 
crop contaminants, as described in the definitions of 
the Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins 
and Residues) Regulations, 2011. 


2.8 Competent Authority — The official authority 
charged by the government with the control of meat 
hygiene, including setting and enforcing regulatory 
meat hygiene requirements. In this case Food Safety 


and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). 


2.9 Competent Body — A body officially recognised 
and overseen by the competent authority to undertake 
specified meat hygiene activities. 


2.10 Competent Person — A qualified veterinary 
doctor who has the training, knowledge, skills and 
ability to perform an assigned task, and who is subject 
to requirements specified by the competent authority. 


2.11 Condemned — Inspected and judged by a 
competent person, or otherwise determined by the 
competent authority, as being unsafe or unsuitable for 
human consumption and requiring appropriate 
disposal. 


2.12 Dressing — The progressive separation of the 
body of an animal into a carcass and other edible and 
inedible parts. 


2.13 Emergency Slaughter — Slaughter by necessity 
of any animal that, 


a) has recently suffered traumatic injury and is 
judged to be in pain; or 

b) is affected by a condition that does not 
preclude its partial or conditional fitness for 
human consumption, but that is likely to 
deteriorate unless slaughter takes place 
immediately. 


2.14 Meat — All edible parts (including edible offal) 
of any food animal slaughtered in an abattoir that are 
intended for or have been judged as safe and suitable 
for, human consumption. 


2.15 Meat Inspector — A qualified veterinary doctor. 


2.16 Post-Mortem Inspection — Any procedure or 
test conducted by a competent person on all relevant 
parts of slaughtered/killed animals for the purpose of 
judgement of safety and suitability and disposition. 


2.17 Veterinary Inspector — Duly qualified 
veterinarian appointed or employed by a local authority 
or by the Central/State Government. 


3 ANTE-MORTEM INSPECTION 


3.1 Animals described below should be subject to 
special controls, procedures or operations imposed by 


IS 1982 : 2015 


the competent authority (which may include denial of 
entry to the abattoir) when, 


a) animals are not sufficiently clean; 
b) animals have died in transit; 


c) azoonotic disease posing an immediate threat 
to either animals or humans is present, or 
suspected; 


d) ananimal health disease subject to quarantine 
restrictions is present, or suspected; and 


e) animal identification requirements are not 
met; or declarations from the primary 
producer, if required by the competent 
authority (including compliance with good 
veterinary practice in the use of animal 
medicines) are absent or inadequate. 


3.2 All animals presented for slaughter should be 
subjected to ante-mortem inspection, by a competent 
person whether on an individual or a lot basis. 
Inspection should include confirmation that the animals 
are properly identified, so that any special conditions 
pertaining to their place of primary production are 
considered in the ante-mortem inspection, including 
relevant public and animal health quarantine controls. 


3.3 Pregnant animals should be rejected. 


3.4 Animals presented for slaughter should be 
examined and judged for general pathological 
conditions and symptoms of communicable diseases 
so that entry of such animals into the sheds is prevented. 


3.5 Ante-mortem inspection should support post- 
mortem inspection by application of a specific range 
of procedures and/or tests that consider the behaviour, 
demeanour and appearance, as well as signs of disease 
in the live animal. 


3.6 Such ante-mortem inspection shall be made on the 
premises (Yards and Lairage) attached to the abattoir 
in which the animals are about to be slaughtered. 


3.7 All animals meant for slaughter should be rested 
at least for 24 h and should not be fed for at least twelve 
hours before slaughter but they should be provided with 
abundant water. In addition, all the precautions for 
animal welfare shall be followed as per FSSAI 
Regulations, 2011. 


3.8 The format for reporting Ante-Mortem Inspection 
for meat animals is given at Annex A. 


3.9 The following should be followed in ante-mortem 
inspection procedures: 


a) Ante-mortem inspection should be included 
as an integral component of an overarching 
risk-based system for the production of meat, 
with systems for process control incorporating 


appropriate components. Relevant 
information on the slaughter population, for 
example animal class, health status, 
geographical region of origin, should be 
utilised in both the design and implementation 
of ante-mortem inspection systems. 


b) Ante-mortem inspection, including 
procedures and tests, should be established 
by the competent authority according to a 
science and risk- based approach. In the 
absence of a risk-based system, procedures 
will have to be based on current scientific 
knowledge and practice. 


c) Ante-mortem procedures and tests may be 
integrated and implemented together so as to 
achieve public health and animal health 
objectives. In such cases all aspects of ante- 
mortem inspection should be science- based 
and be tailored to the relevant risks. 


d) Where indicated by public health concerns, 
measures additional to routine ante-mortem 
inspection may be required. 


3.10 Characteristics of a risk-based ante-mortem 
inspection programme are: 


a) Procedures for confirmation of proper animal 
identification in accordance with national 
legislation; 

b) Design and application of organoleptic 
procedures and tests that are relevant and 
proportional to meat-borne risks associated 
with clinical signs of illness and grossly- 
detectable abnormalities; 


c) Designing of procedures to the spectrum and 
prevalence of diseases and defects reasonably 
likely to be present in the slaughter 
population, taking into account the type of 
animal, geographical origin and primary 
production system; 

d) Integration with HACCP based process 
control to the extent practicable, for example, 
application of objective criteria for ensuring 
appropriate cleanliness of animals presented 
for slaughter; 

e) On-going designing of procedures to 
information received from the primary 
production unit, where practicable; 


f) Use of laboratory tests for hazards that are 
unaddressed by organoleptic inspection when 
their presence is suspected, for example, 
chemical residues and contaminants; and 


g) Return of information to the primary producer 
so as to seek continuous improvement in the 
safety and suitability status of animals 
presented for slaughter. 


3.11 Implementation of Ante-Mortem Inspection 
3.11.1 Role of the Competent Authority 


The competent authority should determine how ante- 
mortem inspection is to be implemented, including 
identification of the components that may be applied 
at primary production rather than the abattoir. The 
competent authority should establish the training, 
knowledge, skills and ability requirements of all 
personnel involved, and the roles of the official 
inspector, including the veterinary inspector. 
Verification of inspection activities and judgements 
should be undertaken as appropriate by the competent 
authority or competent body. The final responsibility 
for verifying that all regulatory requirements are met 
should lie with the competent authority. 


3.11.2 The responsibilities of the establishment 
operator in respect of ante-mortem inspection include, 


a) providing verifiable information required by 
the competent authority with respect to ante- 
mortem inspection carried out at primary 
production; 


b) segregation of animals if, for example, they 
have recently given birth during transport or 
in lairages, or have recently aborted and/or 
show retained foetal membranes; 

c) applying identification systems for individual 
animals or lots of animals until the time of 
slaughter that document the outcome of ante- 
mortem inspection, and after slaughter in the 
case of suspect animals; 


d) presentation of animals that are sufficiently 
clean; and 


e) prompt removal of animals that have died in 
the lairage, for example, from metabolic 
disease, stress, suffocation, with the 
permission of the competent person 
undertaking ante-mortem inspection. 


3.12 Ante-mortem inspection at the abattoir should 
occur as soon as is practicable, after delivery of 
slaughter animals. Only animals that are judged to be 
sufficiently rested should proceed to slaughter, but 
should not be withheld from slaughter any longer than 
necessary. If ante-mortem inspection has occurred and 
there is a delay of more than 24 h before slaughter, 
ante-mortem inspection should be repeated. 


3.12.1 Ante-mortem inspection systems required by 
the competent authority should include the following: 


a) All relevant information from the level of 
primary production should be taken into 
account on an on-going basis, for example, 
declarations from the primary producers 
relating to the use of veterinary drugs, 


IS 1982 : 2015 


information from official hazard control 
programmes; 


b) Animals suspected as being unsafe or 
unsuitable for human consumption should be 
identified as such and handled separately from 
normal animals; 


c) Results of ante-mortem inspection are made 
available to the competent person undertaking 
post- mortem inspection before animals are 
inspected at the post-mortem stations so as to 
augment final judgment. This is particularly 
important when a competent person 
undertaking ante-mortem inspection, judges 
that a suspect animal can proceed to slaughter 
under special hygiene conditions; 


d) In more equivocal situations, the competent 
person undertaking ante-mortem inspection 
may hold the animal (or lot) in special 
facilities for more detailed inspection, 
diagnostic tests, and/or treatment; 


e) Animals condemned as unsafe or unsuitable 
for human consumption should be 
immediately identified as such and handled 
in a manner that does not result in cross- 
contamination of other animals with food- 
borne hazards; and 


f) Reason for condemnation should be recorded, 
with confirmatory laboratory tests being 
carried out if deemed necessary. Feed back 
of this information to the primary producer 
should take place. 


3.13 Slaughter of animals under an official or 
officially-recognized programme for the eradication 
or control of a specific zoonotic disease, for example, 
salmonellosis, should only be carried out under the 
hygiene conditions specified by the competent 
authority. 


3.14 Ante-mortem judgment categories include, 


a) passed for slaughter; 


b) passed for slaughter subject to a second ante- 
mortem inspection, after an additional holding 
period, for example, when animals are 
insufficiently rested, or are temporarily 
affected by a physiological or metabolic 
condition; 

c) passed for slaughter under special conditions, 
that is deferred slaughter as suspects, where 
the competent person undertaking ante- 
mortem inspection suspects that post-mortem 
inspection findings could result in partial or 
total condemnation; 


d) condemned for public health reasons, that is 
due to: meat-borne hazards, occupational 


IS 1982 : 2015 


health hazards, or likelihood of unacceptable 
contamination of the slaughter and dressing 
environment following slaughter; 


e) condemned for meat suitability reasons; 


f) emergency slaughter, when an animal eligible 
for being passed under special conditions 
could deteriorate, if there was a delay in 
slaughter; and 


g) condemned for animal health reasons, as 
specified in relevant national legislation. 


3.15 Information on Animals Presented for 
Slaughter 


The competent authority may require monitoring of 
animals presented for slaughter to establish baseline 
information on the prevalence of hazards in the 
slaughter population, for example, specified meat- 
borne pathogens, chemical residues greater than 
maximum residue limits. The competent authority 
should design and implement these monitoring 
activities according to national public health goals. 
Systems should be in place that provide on-going 
information on animals presented for slaughter for 
incorporation into HACCP plans and/or quality 
assurance programmes that are part of process control, 
information back to the primary producer on the safety 
and suitability status of animals presented for slaughter 
and information to the competent authority that 
facilitates on-going review. 


4 POST-MORTEM INSPECTION 


4.1 All carcasses and other relevant parts should be 
subjected to post-mortem inspection, which preferably 
should be part of an overarching, risk-based system 
for the production of meat. 


4.2 Post-mortem inspection should be carried out 
without delay after dressing of the carcass is complete. 
Some lesions may fade with time. Conversely, it should 
be possible to set suspect carcasses aside for re- 
inspection later, as some lesions will intensify with 
time. 


4.3 The design of post-mortem inspection systems: 


4.3.1 Post-mortem inspection of carcasses and other 
relevant parts should utilise information from primary 
production and ante-mortem inspection, together with 
the findings from organoleptic inspection of the head, 
carcass and viscera, to make a judgement on the safety 
and suitability of parts intended for human 
consumption. 


4.3.2 Post-mortem procedures and tests may be 
integrated and implemented together so as to achieve 
public health and animal health objectives. In such 
cases, all aspects of post-mortem inspection should be 


science based and be tailored to the relevant risks. 


4.3.3 Relevant information on the animal population, 
for example animal type, health status, geographical 
region of origin, should be utilised in both the design 
and implementation of post-mortem inspection 
systems. 


4.3.4 Where indicated by public health concerns, 
routine screening of carcasses and other relevant parts 
by methods other than organoleptic inspection may be 
required for suspected hazards, for example testing for 
Trichinella spp. The format for reporting Post-Mortem 
Inspection for meat animals is given at Annex B. 


4.3.5 The guidelines for post mortem inspection 
requirements for Heads, Viscera and Carcasses in given 
at Annex C. 


4.3.6 Characteristics of a risk-based post-mortem 
inspection programme are, 


a) design and application of organoleptic 
procedures and tests that are relevant and 
proportional to meat-borne risks associated 
with grossly-detectable abnormalities; 


b) tailoring of procedures to the spectrum and 
prevalence of diseases and defects reasonably 
likely to be present in the particular slaughter 
population, taking into account the type (age), 
geographical origin and primary production 
system of the slaughter animals, for example 
multiple incisions of relevant muscles in all 
pigs from geographical regions where Taenia 
solium is present; 


c) procedures that minimize cross-contamination 
through handling to the greatest extent 
practicable, and may include procedures that 
are limited to visual observation of carcasses 
and other relevant parts in the first instance, 
if justified by risk assessment; 


d) inspection of non-edible parts of animals 
where they may play an indicator role in the 
judgement of edible parts; 


e) modification of traditional procedures where 
scientific investigation has shown them to be 
ineffective, or, of themselves, hazardous to 
food, for example, routine incision of lymph 
nodes of young animals to detect 
granulomatosus abnormalities; 


f) application of more intensive organoleptic 
procedures on a routine basis when a disease 
or condition capable of general distribution 
is found in a single part of a carcass and other 
relevant parts, for example, cysts of Taenia 
saginata in cattle, xanthosis; 


g) application of additional risk-based inspection 
procedures on a routine basis when live 


animals are positive to a diagnostic test, for 
example, tuberculin test in cattle, mallein test 
in horses; 


h) use of laboratory tests for hazards that are 
unaddressed by organoleptic inspection, e.g., 
Trichinella spp., chemical residues and 
contaminants; 


j) application of measurable outcomes of 
organoleptic inspection that reflect a risk- 
based approach; 


k) integration with HACCP plans for other 
process control activities; 

m) on-going tailoring of procedures to take into 
consideration information received from the 
primary producer on a lot-by-lot basis; and 


n) return of information to the primary producer 
so as to seek continuous improvement in the 
safety and suitability status of animals 
presented for slaughter. 


4.4 Implementation of Post-Mortem Inspection 
Procedures 


4.4.1 Inspection should take into account all relevant 
information from the level of primary production and 
ante-mortem inspection, for example, information from 
official or officially-recognised hazard control 
programmes, information on animals slaughtered as 
suspects. 


4.4.2 The competent authority should determine: how 
post-mortem inspection is to be implemented, the 
training, knowledge, skills and ability required of 
personnel involved (including the role of the official 
inspector, the veterinary inspector, and any personnel 
not employed by the competent authority), and the 
frequency and intensity of verification activities. The 
competent authority should have the legal power to 
set and enforce regulatory meat hygiene requirements. 
The competent authority should, 


a) establish regulatory systems for recall, 
traceback, product tracing and requirements 
for training, knowledge, skills and ability of 
personnel. 


b) undertake specified meat hygiene controls 
like official sampling programmes, ante and 
post-mortem activities and official 
certification. 


c) verification of the compliance of the 
regulatory requirements for food safety by the 
establishment operator, as prescribed by 
FSSAI. 


4.4.3 Carcasses and other relevant parts condemned 
by the competent person undertaking post-mortem 
inspection, as unsafe or unsuitable for human 


IS 1982 : 2015 


consumption should be identified as appropriate and 
handled in a manner that does not result in cross- 
contamination of meat from other carcasses and 
relevant parts. The reason for condemnation should 
be recorded, and confirmatory laboratory tests may be 
taken, if deemed necessary. 


4.4.4 Responsibilities of the Establishment Operator 


a) Maintenance of the identity of a carcass and 
other relevant parts (including blood as 
appropriate) until inspection is complete; 

b) Skinning and dressing of heads to the extent 
necessary to facilitate inspection, for example, 
partial skinning to allow access to sub- 
maxillary lymph nodes, detaching of the base 
of the tongue to allow access to the 
retropharyngeal lymph nodes; 


c) Skinning of heads to the extent necessary to 
allow hygienic removal of edible parts, when 
this is a processing option; 

d) Presentation of a carcass and other relevant 
parts for inspection according to the 
requirements of the competent authority; 


e) Retention in the inspection area of all 
carcasses and other relevant parts required for 
inspection, until inspection and judgement has 
been completed; 


f) Provision of facilities for identifying and 
retaining all carcasses and other relevant parts 
that require more detailed inspection and/or 
diagnostic tests before a judgement on safety 
and suitability can be made, in a manner that 
prevents cross-contamination of meat from 
other carcasses and other relevant parts; 


g) Condemnation of parts of the carcass trimmed 
from the region of the sticking wound; 


h) Use of identification marks (as specified 
by the competent authority) that 
communicate the outcome of post-mortem 
inspection; and 

j) Co-operation with competent persons 
undertaking post-mortem inspection, in all 
other ways necessary to facilitate effective 
post-mortem inspection, for example, access 
to processing records, and easy access to all 
carcasses and other relevant parts. 


4.4.5 Post-Mortem Inspection Systems 


a) Procedures and tests that are risk-based to the 
extent possible and practicable; 

b) Confirmation of proper stunning and 
bleeding; 

c) Availability of inspection as soon as is 
practicable after completion of dressing; 


IS 1982 : 2015 


d) Visual inspection of the carcass and other 
relevant parts, including inedible parts, as 
determined by the competent authority; 


e) Palpation and/or incision of the carcass and 
other relevant parts, including inedible parts, 
as determined by the competent authority 
according to a risk-based approach; 


f) Additional palpation and/or incisions, as 
necessary to reach a judgement for an 
individual carcass and other relevant parts, 
and under appropriate hygiene control; 


g) More detailed inspection of edible parts 
intended for human consumption compared 
with inspection of those parts for indicator 
purposes alone, as appropriate to the 
circumstances; 


h) Systematic, multiple incisions of lymph nodes 
where incision is necessary; 


j) Other organoleptic inspection procedures, for 
example, smell, touch; 


k) Where necessary, laboratory diagnostic and 
other tests carried out by the competent 
authority or by the establishment operator 
under instruction; 


m) Performance objectives or performance 
criteria for the outcomes of organoleptic 
inspection, if available; 

n) Regulatory authority to slow or halt 
processing so as to allow adequate post- 
mortem inspection at all times; 


p) Removal of specified parts, if required by the 
competent authority, for example, specified 
risk materials for BSE; and 


q) Proper use and secure storage of equipment 
for health marking. 


4.5 Post-Mortem Judgement 


4.5.1 Post-mortem judgment of edible parts as safe 
and suitable for human consumption should primarily 
be based on food-borne risks to human health. Other 
risks to human health, for example from occupational 
exposure or from handling of meat in the home, also 
are an important consideration. Judgments in relation 
to suitability characteristics of meat should reflect 
consumer acceptability requirements appropriate to 
intended end use. 


4.5.2 Post-mortem inspection programmes may be 
utilized to identify and judge carcasses and other 
relevant parts according to risks to animal health, as 
specified in relevant national legislation. 


4.5.3 Judgement of edible parts as safe and suitable 
should take into account information from the 
following sources: 


a) Information from primary production; 
b) Observations made of animals in the lairage; 
c) Ante-mortem inspection; and 


d) Post-mortem inspection, including diagnostic 
tests, where required. 


4.5.4 Judgments should be based on science and risks 
to human health to the greatest extent possible, with 
guidelines being provided by the competent authority. 
Judgments should only be made by competent persons. 
The level of training, knowledge, skills and ability 
required for judgment may be less in situations where 
edible parts demonstrating a specific abnormality are 
always judged to be unsafe or unsuitable for human 
consumption and appropriately disposed of. 


4.5.5 Where the initial results of post-mortem 
inspection are insufficient to accurately judge edible 
parts as safe or suitable for human consumption, a 
provisional judgment should be followed up with more 
detailed inspection procedures and/or tests. Pending 
the outcome of more detailed inspection and/or 
diagnostic tests, all parts of the animal that are required 
for further investigation should be held under the 
control of the competent person undertaking these 
activities. 


4.5.6 Judgement Categories for Edible Parts 


a) Safe and suitable for human consumption; 


b) Safe and suitable for human consumption, 
subject to application of a prescribed process, 
for example cooking, freezing; 


c) Held on suspicion of being unsafe or 
unsuitable, pending the outcome of further 
procedures and/or tests; 


d) Unsafe for human consumption but able to 
be used for some other purpose, for example, 
pet-food, feed and feed ingredients, industrial 
non-food use, providing there are adequate 
hygiene controls to prevent any transmission 
of hazards, or illegal re-entry to the human 
food chain; 


e) Unsafe for human consumption and requiring 
condemnation and destruction; and 


f) Unsafe for animal health reasons as specified 
in national legislation, and disposed of 
accordingly. 


4.5.7 When edible parts are judged to be safe and 
suitable for human consumption subject to application 
of a prescribed process, the specifications for that 
process should be verified by the competent authority 
as sufficient to eliminate/reduce or adequately remove 
the hazard or condition of concern, for example 
specifications for retorting, high temperature rendering 
and freezing. 


5 DISPOSITION AND BRANDING 


5.1 After a decision has been made by an inspector 
that meat is fit for human consumption, conditionally 
fit for human consumption or unfit for human 
consumption, it is necessary that it be marked in a 
systematic manner to show the result of inspection. This 
is to enable control and proper handling/disposal prior 
to its reaching the consumer as well as to assure 
consumers of the official guarantee of safety and 
wholesomeness of meat. 


5.2 The size, shape, and wording of any brand, as well 
as the colour and composition of marking ink used for 
the branding of meat, should be laid down by the 
competent authority and should be uniform throughout 
the country. Consideration should be given at the design 
stage to the need to achieve legible impressions of brands 
under working conditions. Brands comprising suitable 
permitted ink shall be applied to the meat and the brand 
shall contain FSSAI License Number. 


5.3 Carcasses, heads, organs and viscera that as a result 
of ante-mortem and post-mortem inspection are passed 
as fit for human consumption without further restrictions 
should be legibly and appropriately branded. 


5.4 Any meat (including heads, organs and viscera) 
that requires treatment by heat or by freezing to render 
it fit for human consumption should be suitably 
identified and, if necessary, branded as such and kept 
under the supervision of an inspector until the necessary 
treatment has been completed and the carcass and any 
parts can be passed as fit for human consumption. 


5.5 All carcasses, parts of carcasses, organs and viscera 
that as a result of ante-mortem and post-mortem 
inspection are found to be unfit for human consumption, 
should be held securely to the satisfaction of the 
inspector until they are branded, stained, rendered, 
denatured or otherwise destroyed, so excluding them 
from the human food chain. 


5.6 Brands and stamps used to apply the marks of 
inspection should be kept clean while in use. They 
should be held under the control of an inspector and 
used only under an inspector’s supervision. 


5.7 The stamping ink may be prepared based on the 
following procedures: 


a) A solution containing 1 to 2 percent of 
fuchsine in acetic acid may be used. The 
fuchsine is dissolved in just enough acetic acid 
to bring about the solution and then glycerine 
is added to make up the required quantity. 


IS 1982 : 2015 


b) Alternatively, a stamping ink prepared 
according to the following formula may be 


used: 

Methyl violet 35g 
Cane sugar 450 g 
Ethyl alcohol 1 363 ml 
Water 1 636 ml 


The sugar is dissolved in water, the alcohol, then-added 
and finally the methyl violet. The solution is stirred 
and allowed to stand for 12 h before use. Stamps 
preferably bearing heads of different animals should 
be used. 


6 CHEMICAL RESIDUES 


If there is any suspicion about the chemical residues 
during inspection, then the sample shall be sent for 
residue analysis to any NABL accredited laboratory. 


7 UTILIZATION OF MEAT INSPECTION 
FINDINGS 


7.1 The controlling authority should make meat 
inspection findings available to assist other agencies 
involved in human health and animal health. 


7.2 In meeting this objective, the controlling authority 
should ensure that surveillance activities are 
distinguished from normal meat inspection activities, 
and do not jeopardize the efficient delivery of meat 
inspection services or the efficient operation of the meat 
industry. 


7.3 Where possible the controlling authority should 
take an active role in animal health management 
programmes that assure a safe and wholesome food 
supply and information on zoonotic disease should be 
provided to the appropriate agencies. 


7.4 The controlling authority should closely 
collaborate with the authorities responsible for animal 
disease control and with public health authorities so 
that the greatest possible use can be made of meat 
inspection findings. 


7.5 Research and surveillance activities should be 
distinguished from routine meat inspection and from 
those laboratory examinations that may be required 
for the immediate purpose of decision making, and 
should have no delaying effect upon the normal course 
of post-mortem judgement. 


7.6 Notifiable animal disease detected at ante-mortem 
or post-mortem inspection should be reported directly 
to the veterinary authority responsible for animal 
disease control. 


IS 1982 : 2015 


SI No. 


POO SE Ee ee 


= 
m 


Coe Or oe 
BR BN 


10. 


Place: 


Date: 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 3.8) 
ANTE-MORTEM INSPECTION REPORT 


Examination 


Owners name and address 

No. of animals in the lot and arrival time 
Species and sex of the animal 

Diseases and treatment history 

Time and date of ante-mortem inspection 
Clinical signs and body temperature (if relevant) 
Reasons why the animal was held 


Ante-mortem inspection of animal at 
rest and motion (Individual and collective) 


Nutritional status 

Cleanliness 

Signs of diseases and abnormalities 
Abnormalities found in 

a) Respiration 

b) Behaviour 

c) Gait 

d) Posture 

e) Structure and conformation 

f) Discharge or protrusion from body opening 
g) Abnormal color 

h) Abnormal odour 

Judgement 


Remarks (if any) 


Signature of veterinarian (with office seal) 


Name and registration number 


Report 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.3.4) 
POST-MORTEM INSPECTION REPORT 


IS 1982 : 2015 


SI No. Examination Report 
1. Owners name and FSSAI 
License No. 
2. Time and date of post-mortem Inspection 
3. Identity of the carcass (age and tag number) 
4. Condition of the carcass 
5. Status of rigor mortis 
6. Serous infiltration 
7. Colour of the carcass 
8. Presence of off-odours 
9. Presence of external wounds 
10. Examination of head and tongue 
11. Examination of lungs 
12. Examination of spleen 
13. Examination of heart 
14. Examination of stomach 
15. Examination of liver 
16. Examination of mesentery 
17. Examination of mammary glands 
18. Examination of kidneys 
19. Examination of uterus 
20. Examination of bladder 
21. Examination of lymph nodes 
22. Judgement 
Place: 
Date: 


Signature of meat inspector (with office seal): 


Name and registration number: 


IS 1982 : 2015 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.3.5) 


(A) GUIDELINE POST-MORTEM INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS — HEADS 


These are guideline inspection requirements. Inspection can be made more intensive or less intensive depending 
upon the outcome of risk analysis. 


Cattle Sheep and Goat Pigs 
(Includes Calves) (Includes Lambs) 

General View external surfaces. For cattle and pigs view the oral and nasal cavities. 
Lymph nodes 

Submaxillary Incise (a) — Incise 

Parotid Incise (a) — — 

Retropharyngeal Incise (a) — — 
Tongue Palpate (a) — — 
Other Inspection for C. bovis (b) Inspection for C. 

cellulosae (c) 
NOTES 


1 ‘incise’ as used above means to examine by viewing and multiple incision or slicing. 
2 ‘palpate’ as used above means to view and palpate. 
3 (a) means inspection is view only in calves up to 6 weeks of age. 


4 except in calves up to 6 weeks of age, the oesophagus of all cattle and calves should be separated from its attachment to the trachea, 
and viewed. 


5 (b) the muscles and the lymph nodes (lymphonodi sub-rhomboidei) beneath one of the two scapular cartilages of all grey or white 
horses should be examined for melanosis after loosening the attachment of that one shoulder. 


(B) GUIDELINE POST-MORTEM INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS — VISCERA 


These are guideline inspection requirements. Inspection can be made more intensive or less intensive depending 
upon the outcome of risk analysis. 


Cattle Sheep and Goats Pigs 
(Includes calves) (Includes lambs) 
Lymph Nodes 
mesenteric View View Palpate (b) 
portal Incise (a) Palpate Palpate 
bronchial and mediastinal Incise (a) Palpate Incise 

Gastro-intestinal tract View (a) View View 

Spleen Palpate View View 

Liver Palpate. View the gall bladder (does not apply to horses). For cattle over 6 
weeks of age, incision as deemed appropriate to detect liver fluke. 

Lungs Palpate. Except in sheep and goats, the bronchi should be opened up by a 
transverse incision across the diaphragmatic lobe. For horses, the larynx, trachea 
and main bronchi should be incised. 

Heart View after removal of the pericardium. Additional inspection requirements for 
cattle over 6 weeks of age are in (b). Conditional additional inspection 
requirements for pigs are set out in (c). 

Kidney View after enucleation. 

Uterus (Adults) Palpate View View View 

NOTES 


1 ‘incise’ as used above means to examine by viewing and multiple incision or slicing. 
2 ‘palpate’ as used above means to view and palpate. 
3 (a) means inspection is view only in calves up to 6 weeks of age. 


4 (b) means incise if any lesions were observed in the submaxillary lymph nodes. 


10 


IS 1982 : 2015 


5 (c) the hearts of all cattle and calves over the age of 6 weeks should be inspected for Cysticercus bovis either by making one or more 
incisions from base to apex or by everting the heart and making shallow incisions that enable the cardiac valves and muscle tissue to 
be inspected — this inspection of the heart should also be undertaken in calves up to 6 weeks of age from areas where Cysticercus 
bovis is a common post-mortem inspection finding. 


6 (c) the heart of all pigs derived from areas where there is a risk of Cysticercus cellulosae being present should be opened up and a 
deep incision made into the septum. 


(C) GUIDELINE POST-MORTEM INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS — CARCASSES 


These are guideline inspection requirements. Inspection can be made more intensive or less intensive depending 
upon the outcome of risk analysis. 


Cattle Sheep and Goats Pigs 
(Includes calves) (Includes lambs) 
General Examine carcases (including musculature, exposed bone, joints, 


tendon sheaths etc) to determine any disease or defect. Attention 
should be paid to bodily condition, efficiency of bleeding, colour, 
condition of serous membranes (pleura and peritoneum), cleanliness 
and presence of any unusual odours. 


Lymph nodes 
superficial inguinal Palpate (a) Palpate Palpate 
external and internal Palpate Palpate Palpate (b) 
Iliac Palpate Palpate — 
Pre-pectoral — Palpate — 
Popliteal Palpate — Palpate 
Renal 
Others Palpate castration site. 
NOTES 


1 (a) means incise as a routine when udder is, or has been, in lactation. 


2 (b) means iliac nodes in pigs. 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 18 (2826). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


