July 2013 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 
(Superseding IS 9583 : 1981) 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


Indian Standard 


LUMINAIRES 


PART 5 PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 8 EMERGENCY LIGHTING 


ICS 29.140.40 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI 110002 


Price Group 6 


Illumination Engineering and Luminaires Sectional Committee, ET 24 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5/Sec 8) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Illumination Engineering and Luminaires Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 


This standard covers the requirements of luminaires for emergency lighting chains. This standard covers safety 
and performance requirements. 


This standard (Part 5/Sec 8) is one among the series of Indian Standards which deals with luminaries. The others 
parts and sections are as follows: 


Part 1 General requirements 

Part 5 Particular requirements 

(Part 5/Sec 1) General purpose luminaires 

(Part 5/Sec 2) Recessed luminaires 

(Part 5/Sec 3) Luminaires for road and street lighting 
(Part 5/Sec 4) Portable general purpose luminaires 
(Part 5/Sec 5) Flood lights 

(Part 5/Sec 6) Handlamps 

(Part 5/Sec7) Lighting chains 


This standard is to be read in conjunction with IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2010 ‘Luminaires : Part 1 General requirements’. 
For the sake of convenience, the clauses of this standard correspond to those of IS 10322 (Part 1), instead of 
reproducing full text of each clause; reference to relevant clauses of IS 10322 (Part 1) has been given. 


This standard is based on IEC 60598-2-22, (1997) + Amendment 1 (2002), ‘Luminaires — Part 2 : Particular 
requirements, Section 22 Luminaires for emergency lighting’, issued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission (IEC). 


After the publication of this standard, IS 9583 : 1981 shall be treated as withdrawn since the requirements given 
in IS 9583 has been covered in this standard. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


LUMINAIRES 


PART 5 PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 8 EMERGENCY LIGHTING 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5/Sec 8) specifies requirements for 
emergency lighting luminaires for use with electrical 
light sources on emergency power supplies not 
exceeding 1 000 V. 


This standard does not cover the effects of non- 
emergency voltage reductions on luminaires 
incorporating high pressure discharge lamps. 


This standard also includes relevant requirements and 
tests that shall be conducted and complied with for 
control gears, as specified in relevant Indian Standard, 
that incorporate additional facilities such as remote 
control devices, indicators, changeover devices, etc. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards are necessary adjunct to this 
standard: 


IS No. Title 

1416: 1972 Safety transformer (first revision) 

2215 : 2006 Starter for fluorescent lamps (first 
revision) 

9457 : 2005 Safety colours and safety signs 

10322 (Part 1): Luminaires: Part 1 General 

2011 requirements and tests 

14218 : 1994 Sealed cylindrical type rechargeable 
nickel cadmium cells 

15549 : 2005 Stationary valve regulated lead acid 
batteries 

15885 Safety of lamp controlgear: 


(Part 1): 2011 General requirements 
(Part 2/Sec 3): Particular requirements, Section 3 ac 


2011 supplied electronic ballasts for 
fluorescent lamps 
SP 30: 2011 National Electric Code 
IS/IEC 60079 Electrical apparatus for explosive gas 
atmospheres 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 1) and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Emergency Lighting — Lighting for use when 
the supply to the normal lighting fails; it includes 
emergency escape lighting, high-risk task-area lighting 
and standby lighting. 


3.2 Emergency Escape Lighting — That part of 
emergency lighting that provides illumination for the 
safety of people leaving an area or attempting to 
terminate a dangerous process before vacating an area. 


3.3 Standby Lighting — That part of emergency 
lighting that enables normal activities to continue 
substantially unchanged. 


3.4 High-risk Task-area Lighting — That part of 
emergency lighting provided to ensure the safety of 
people involved in a potentially dangerous process or 
situation and to enable proper shut down procedures 
for the safety of the operator and occupants of the 
premises. 


3.5 Maintained Emergency Luminaire — Luminaire 
in which the emergency lighting lamps are energized at 
all times when normal or emergency lighting is required. 


3.6 Non-maintained Emergency Luminaire — 
Luminaire in which the emergency lighting lamps are 
in operation only when the supply to the normal lighting 
fails. 


3.7 Combined Emergency Luminaire — Luminaire 
containing two or more lamps, at least one of which is 
energized from the emergency lighting supply and the 
others from the normal lighting supply. A combined 
emergency luminaire is either maintained or non- 
maintained. 


3.8 Self-contained Emergency Luminaire — 
Luminaire providing maintained or non-maintained 
emergency lighting in which all the elements, such as 
the battery, the lamp, the control unit and the test and 
monitoring facilities, where provided, are contained 
within the luminaire or adjacent to it (that is, within 
1 mcable length). 


3.9 Centrally Supplied Emergency Luminaire — 
Luminaire for maintained or non-maintained operation 
which is energized from a central emergency power 
system that is not contained within the luminaire. 


3.10 Compound Self-contained Emergency 
Luminaire — Self contained luminaire providing 
maintained or non-maintained emergency lighting and 
also providing emergency supply for operating a 
satellite luminaire. 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


3.11 Satellite Emergency Luminaire — Luminaire 
for maintained or non-maintained operation which 
derives emergency operation supply from an associated 
compound self-contained emergency luminaire. 


3.12 Control Unit — Unit or units comprising a supply 
changeover system, a battery charging device and, 
where appropriate, a means for testing. 


NOTE — For tubular fluorescent lamp luminaires, this unit 
may also contain the lamp controlgear. 


3.13 Normal Supply Failure — Condition in which 
the normal lighting can no longer provide a minimum 
illuminance for emergency escape purposes and when 
the emergency lighting should become operative. 


3.14 Emergency Luminaire Rated Lumen Output — 
Lumen output as claimed by the luminaire manufacturer 
60 s (0.25 s for high-risk task-area lighting luminaires) 
after failure of the normal supply, and continuously to 
the end of rated duration of operation. 


3.15 Rated Duration of Emergency Operation — 
Time, as claimed by the manufacturer, that the rated 
emergency lumen output is provided. 


3.16 Normal Mode — State of a self-contained 
emergency luminaire that is ready to operate in emergency 
mode while the normal supply is on. In the case of a 
normal supply failure, the self-contained luminaire 
automatically changes over to the emergency mode. 


3.17 Emergency Mode — State of a self-contained 
emergency luminaire that provides lighting when 
energized by its internal power source, the normal 
supply having failed. 


3.18 Rest Mode — State of a self-contained emergency 
luminaire that has been intentionally extinguished 
while the normal supply is off and that, in the event of 
restoration of the normal supply, automatically reverts 
to normal mode. 


3.19 Maximum Overcharge Rate — Maximum 
continuous charge rate that may be applied to a fully 
charged battery. 


3.20 Remote Inhibiting Facility — Means for 
inhibiting remotely a luminaire associated with an 
emergency lighting system. 


3.21 Remote Inhibiting Mode — State of a self- 
contained emergency luminaire which is inhibited from 
operating by a remote device while the normal supply 
is on and in case of a normal supply failure the 
luminaire does not change over to emergency mode. 


4 GENERAL TEST REQUIREMENTS 


The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 0) shall apply. 
The tests described in each appropriate section of 


IS 10322 (Part 1) shall be carried out in the order listed 
in this standard. 


When testing combined emergency luminaires 
according to the requirements of this section, the tests 
shall be limited to those parts of the luminaire which 
are involved with providing emergency lighting. The 
components and parts of the luminaires designed to 
provide only normal lighting shall be subjected to the 
tests according to the requirements of the relevant 
section of IS 10322 (Part 5) (for example, if the 
luminaire is recessed, it shall be tested according to 
the requirements of the section dealing with recessed 
luminaires). 


If some elements of an emergency luminaire are 
adjacent (within | m cable length) to the main part of 
the luminaire all the elements of the luminaire, 
including the means of inter-connection, shall satisfy 
the relevant requirements of this section. 


5 CLASSIFICATION OF LUMINAIRES 


Emergency lighting luminaires shall be classified in 
accordance with the provisions of IS 10322 
(Part 1/Sec 2) except that all emergency lighting shall 
be classified as suitable for direct mounting on 
normally flammable surfaces (F-marked). 


Emergency lighting luminaires shall also be classified 
as specified in Annex A. 


6 MARKING 


The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 3) shall apply 
together with the requirements of 6.1 to 6.19. 


6.1 Luminaires shall be clearly marked with the rated 
supply voltage or voltage range(s). 


6.2 Luminaires shall be clearly marked with details of 
their classification according to 5 of IS 10322 
(Part 5/Sec 8) (see Annex A). 


6.3 Luminaires shall be clearly marked with details of 
the correct replacement lamp in a position visible 
during lamp replacement. This ensures that the rated 
emergency lumen output can be achieved. 

NOTE — The information relating to correct lamp replacement 


may include the number, type, rated voltage and rated wattage, 
etc. 


6.4 Where appropriate, in addition to t, marking, the 
range of ambient temperature shall be marked or given 
in the instruction leaflet supplied with the luminaire. 


6.5 Emergency luminaires employing replaceable fuses 
and/or replaceable indicator lamps shall be marked 
with the details of fuse ratings and/or details of the 
indicator lamps. 


6.6 Test facilities to simulate normal supply failure, 
where provided, shall be clearly marked so that the 
marking is visible during routine testing. 


6.7 Self-contained luminaires shall be clearly marked 
with the details of correct battery replacement including 
the battery type and rated voltage. 


6.8 In self-contained luminaires, the batteries shall be 
marked with the year and month or year and week of 
manufacture and the correct battery disposal method 
to be followed. 


Space shall be provided on the battery label to permit 
the marking, by the installer or commissioning 
engineer, of the date of commissioning of the battery. 


6.9 Combined emergency luminaires shall be marked 
with details relating to correct lamp replacement for 
all lamps. If the lamps used in the emergency circuit 
and the normal supply circuit differs, the type shall be 
clearly identified. 


Lampholders for emergency lighting lamps in 
combined luminaires shall be identified by a green dot, 
at least 5 mm in diameter, which shall be visible when 
replacing the lamp. 


6.10 In the instruction leaflet supplied with the self- 
contained emergency luminaire, the manufacturer shall 
state that the replacement of batteries is needed when 
the self-contained luminaire no longer meets its rated 
duration of operation. 


6.11 In the instruction leaflet supplied with the 
luminaire the manufacturer shall give details of test 
facilities incorporated in the luminaire or appropriate 
instructions, if these test facilities are supplied 
separately. The instructions shall include details of test 
procedures. 


6.12 In the instruction leaflet supplied with the 
luminaire, the manufacturer shall give details of the 
connection leads to be used between a compound self- 
contained luminaire and an associated satellite 
luminaire. The maximum length of cables that limits 
the voltage drop to 3 percent shall be specified. 


6.13 In the instruction leaflet supplied with the 
luminaire, the manufacturer shall give details of the 
rated emergency lumen output in the emergency mode. 


6.14 In the instruction leaflet supplied with self- 
contained emergency luminaires, the manufacturer 
shall give details of any device which changes the mode 
of operation. 


6.15 The manufacturer shall make available the 
photometric data in accordance with 17. 


6.16 Any normal preparation procedure for use of the 
luminaire shall be stated in the manufacturer’s 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


installation instructions. This preparation shall be 
carried out before type tests are made. 


6.17 The marking required by 6.1 and 6.2 shall be in a 
position such that the information can be seen when 
the luminaire has been installed. 

NOTE — For recessed luminaires, this information may be 


marked on the interior of the luminaire so that it is visible 
when the light controlling cover is removed. 


6.18 The mounting instructions for luminaires intended 
for external plug and socket connections, without 
provisions to prevent accidental disconnection, shall 
be provided with the following warning: 


This luminaire is intended only for mounting in 
locations where the plug and socket are protected 
from unauthorized disconnection. 


6.19 Compliance with the requirements of 6.1 to 6.18 
is checked by inspection. 


7 CONSTRUCTION 


The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 4) shall apply 
together with the requirements of 7.1 to 7.19. 


7.1 In emergency luminaires, fluorescent lamps used 
to provide emergency lighting shall start in the 
emergency mode without the aid of glow starters as 
specified in IS 2215. Such starters shall not be in circuit 
during the emergency mode. The emergency lighting 
shall not be provided by means of fluorescent lamps 
with built-in glow starters. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.2 Lamp control gear for operating the emergency 
lamp(s) and control units incorporated into emergency 
luminaires shall comply with IS 15885 (Part 1). 


Compliance is checked by the tests specified in the 
relevant sections of this standard. 


7.3 The failure of any one luminaire connected to a 
circuit shall not affect other luminaires connected to 
the same circuit. 


NOTE — This requirement can be satisfied by means of a fuse, 
relay or other protective devices incorporated in each luminaire, 
or by protection against excessive fault currents being inherent 
in the design of the luminaire circuitry/components. 


Compliance is checked by measurement and 
inspection. 


7.4 For emergency luminaires, the mechanical strength 
tests given in 4.13 of IS 10322 (Part 1) shall be applied 
with minimum impact energy of 0.35 Nm to all external 
parts. 


7.5 Whilst connected to a live supply, self-contained 
emergency luminaires shall have adequate separation 
between the normal supply and live parts in the circuit 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


for battery charging. When there are exposed live parts, 
double insulation, reinforced insulation, earth screen 
or other equivalent techniques can be used. 


Additionally, in the event of bare contacts in the battery 
charging circuit a safety isolating transformer shall be 
used. If a separating transformer is used as insulation 
between the normal supply and the battery charging 
circuit, the insulation in the battery charging circuit 
shall consist of at least basic insulation. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
of 8 and 15. 


7.6 In centrally supplied combined emergency 
luminaires, electrical separation between normal and 
emergency supplies shall be ensured by double 
insulation, reinforced insulation, earthed screen or 
other equivalent means. 


NOTE — The use of basic insulation only, for both circuits, 
and double/reinforced insulation on the normal supply circuit 
fulfils this requirement. The connection of both circuits to a 
terminal block where the required creepage/clearances are 
obtained by leaving one terminal free, without the possibility 
of connection between the circuits, is also acceptable. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.7 Self-contained emergency luminaires shall have 
adjacent to them or incorporated in them a device for 
charging the battery from the normal supply and an 
indicator visible in normal use, for example a lamp, 
which shows the following conditions: 


a) Battery is being charged; and 

b) Circuit continuity exists through the tungsten 
filament of emergency lighting lamps where 
appropriate. 


When a single indicator provides dual functions, either 
red or green is acceptable. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.8 Self-contained emergency luminaires shall 
incorporate a battery that meets the requirements of 
Annex B and is designed for at least four years of normal 
operation. This battery shall be used only for emergency 
related functions within the luminaire or its satellite. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and the tests of 
Annex B. 


7.9 Internal wiring and electronic circuits in self- 
contained emergency luminaires shall be protected 
from excessive discharge currents that may occur 
during fault conditions by incorporation of a safety 
device between the batteries and the electronic circuits. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


NOTE — A test to check compliance with this requirement is 
under consideration. 


7.10 In self-contained emergency luminaires there shall 
be no switch between the battery and emergency 
lighting lamps other than the changeover device. 


Self-contained emergency luminaires and centrally 
supplied emergency luminaires shall not contain any 
manual or non-self-resetting switch isolating the 
emergency circuit(s) from the mains supply other than 
rest mode or inhibition mode testing facilities. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.11 In self-contained emergency luminaires the failure 
of one or more emergency lighting lamps shall not 
interrupt the charging current to the battery and shall 
not cause an overload that could impair the operation 
of the battery. 


Compliance is checked by simulation of lamp failure 
during the test of 13.7. 


7.12 All self-contained emergency luminaires utilizing 
lead-acid batteries, and self-contained emergency 
luminaires utilizing a battery of three or more nickel 
cadmium cells in series, shall be protected against 
polarity reversal of individual cells. This protection 
shall be achieved by the incorporation of an electrical 
system that limits further battery discharge to 
the current specified in 7.12 (a) when the battery 
voltage has fallen to V ., determined in 7.12 (b). 


a) For lead-acid batteries: 10° x C,,A where C,, 
is the battery capacity in ampere hours for a 
20 h constant current discharge. 
For nickel-cadmium batteries: 0.001 5 x C;A 
where C, is the battery capacity in ampere 
hour for 5 h constant current discharge. 


b) V 


min 


=X.n 

where n is the number of cells, 

1) for lead acid batteries: 

X = 1.6 V for 1 h duration or less; 


X = 1.7 V for greater than 1 h duration; 
and 


2) for nickel-cadmium batteries: 
X = 0.8 V for all duration values. 


The protection system shall prevent any further 
discharge of the batteries by a lamp or inverter, even 
where a battery voltage rise due to natural regeneration 
occurs, until the normal supply has been restored. 


Compliance is checked by measuring the battery 
voltage and discharge current during the emergency 
mode cycle of the test given in 13.7. The battery voltage 


shall not fall below V pin and the discharge current shall 


not exceed that specified above. 


7.13 The operation of a self-contained emergency 
luminaire in the emergency mode shall not be 
influenced by a short-circuit, a contact to earth or an 
interruption, in the wiring of the normal supply. 


Compliance is checked by simulation of these supply 
wiring faults during the emergency mode cycle of the 
test given in 13.7. The luminaire shall function 
normally during the test. 


7.14 Self-contained emergency luminaires with rest 
mode facility shall be provided with either a control 
device or a means of connection of a remote facility 
for changing from emergency mode to rest mode and 
vice-versa. 


Self-contained emergency luminaires intended for use 
with remote inhibiting facilities shall be provided with 
a means of connection to the remote inhibiting circuit. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.15 The operation of a self-contained emergency 
luminaire with a remote inhibiting facility in the 
emergency mode shall not be influenced by a short 
circuit or a contact to earth in the wiring to a remote 
control device. 


Compliance is checked by simulation of these wiring 
faults in conjunction with the test of 7.13. 


7.16 The operation of a remote control device for 
luminaires with rest mode or remote inhibiting facilities 
provided with the luminaire shall be independent of 
the battery of the luminaire and the normal mains 
supply. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.17 The operation of a self-contained emergency 
luminaire with rest mode facility in the emergency 
mode shall not be influenced by a short-circuit, a 
contact to earth or an interruption in the wiring to a 
remote control changeover device. 


Compliance is checked by simulating these wiring 
faults in conjunction with the tests given in 7.13. 


7.18 In self-contained emergency luminaires with a 
rest mode or inhibiting facility, the current drain from 
the batteries with the luminaire in the rest mode shall 
not exceed the following: 


a) For lead-acid batteries 4 x 10° x C,,A where 
C is the battery capacity in ampere hours 
for a 20 h constant current discharge; 

b) For nickel-cadmium batteries 0,0015 x C;A 
where C, is the battery capacity in ampere 
hours for a 5 h constant current discharge. 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


Compliance is checked by measurement of the battery 
discharge current with the self-contained luminaire in 
the rest mode during the tests given in 13.7. 


7.19 In self-contained emergency luminaires providing 
emergency lighting by means of tungsten filament 
lamps, the lamp voltage, after 30 percent of rated 
duration of operation has elapsed in the emergency 
mode, shall not exceed 1.05 times rated lamp voltage. 


Compliance is checked by measuring lamp voltage 
during the first 10 cycles of the endurance tests given 
in 13.1. 


8 CREEPAGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES 
The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 11) shall apply. 


9 PROVISION OF EARTHING 
The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 7) shall apply. 


10 TERMINALS 


The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 14 and 15) shall 
apply. 


11 EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL WIRING 


Electrical connections to the mains, between separate 
parts of the luminaire (for example, remote control gear 
box) and between luminaire components shall be 
protected against the risk of accidental disconnection. 
Electrical connections shall be permanent or have a 
provision to prevent accidental disconnection. Internal 
plug and socket connections not having a provision 
against accidental disconnection are accepted, if direct 
access to them is prevented (for example, protected by 
a cover that cannot be removed by a single action with 
one hand). External plug and socket connections not 
having a provision against accidental disconnection are 
accepted, if the luminaire is provided with a warning 
as required by 6.18. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


12 PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC SHOCK 
The provisionsof IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 8) shall apply. 


13 ENDURANCE TEST AND THERMAL TEST 


The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 12) shall apply 
together with the requirements of 13.1 to 13.7. 


Luminaires with an IP classification greater than IP20 
shall be subjected to the relevant tests given in 12.4, 
12.5 and 12.6 of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 12) after the 
test(s) given in 9.2 but before the test(s) given in 9.3 of 
IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 9) specified in 14. 


13.1 For self-contained emergency luminaires the 
endurance test shall be as specified in 12.3.1 of 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec12) except that the requirements 
of items (c) and (d) shall be replaced by the following: 


c) The luminaire shall be tested in the enclosure 
for a total duration of 390 h, made up of 10 
successive cycles of 36 h and a final normal 
operation for 30 h, at maximum rated supply 
voltage. The luminaire shall be operated 
normally from maximum supply voltage for 
30 h and for 6 h in the emergency mode, in 
each of the 10 cycles. 


d) Compliance is checked by the requirements 
of 12.3.2 of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 12). 


Additionally the luminaire shall operate satisfactorily 
during 50 supply voltage switching operations after 
the endurance test. Each switching operation shall 
consist of connection to the normal rated supply for 
60 s and disconnection from the supply for 20 s. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


NOTES 


1 For luminaires with short-rated durations or with an inbuilt 
delay after restoration of the normal supply and before the 
emergency lamp extinguishes, the duration of the 50 switching 
operations test should be modified as follows to ensure that 
the batteries are not fully discharged before the completion of 
the test: 


a) mains off = 20 s; 

b) mains on = delay + { (20 + delay) x Idmax} + (0,65x 
I); 

c) delay = time of delay (s); 


d) Idmax = maximum discharge current (A), according to 
A-4.2d; 


e) I. = charge current (A). 
For luminaires with an inbuilt delay, the emergency lamp may 


be switched off after 20 s using the appropriate device, for 
example rest mode facility, switch, push-button, etc. 


2 The 11th (30 h) charge at the end of the endurance test is so 
that the 50 switching operations test can be started with the 
batteries fully charged. The luminaire could not otherwise be 
expected to perform satisfactorily with discharged batteries. 


13.2 The thermal tests given in 12.4 and 12.5 of 
IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 12) shall be carried out in both 
the normal operating mode and the emergency lighting 
mode. Luminaires designed to have pictograms applied 
to translucent parts shall be tested with those 
pictograms applied that give the most unfavourable 
thermal effect. 


13.3 The conditions of test for luminaires in the 
emergency mode shall be as follows: 


a) for self-contained emergency luminaires: the 
temperature limits of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 12) 
shall apply at any time between switch-on of 
the emergency mode and complete battery 
discharge; 


b) for combined emergency luminaires: the two 
circuits shall be tested together unless it is 
evident from the construction that the two 
circuits are not designed for operation 
together. 

13.4 For the purpose of 13.3, complete battery 

discharge shall be indicated as given in Table 1. 
NOTE — The values given apply at an ambient temperature 
of 20 + 5°C. 

13.5 The temperature allowance of 5°C specified in 

the first sentence of 12.4.2(a) of IS 10322 

(Part 1/Sec 12) shall be reduced to 2°C for the limiting 

temperature of batteries. 


13.6 Self-contained emergency luminaires shall be 
subjected to an additional thermal test according 
to 12.5 of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 12) except that the 
abnormal service condition shall be the replacement 
of the internal batteries with a short-circuit link across 
the battery charger output. The luminaire shall 
comply with 12.5.2 of IS 10322 (Part 1), shall not 
become unsafe, and after removal of the short-circuit 
link, reconnection of the batteries and replacement 
of fuse-links where necessary, shall function 
normally. 


13.7 On completion of the thermal test that is, having 
complete battery discharge according to 13.4, a self- 
contained emergency luminaire shall be allowed to cool 
to its rated ambient temperature (f,) or to 25°C 
whichever is the higher and shall be subjected to a 24h 
charging cycle at 0.9 times rated supply voltage after 
which the luminaire, with the lamp as tested, shall 
provide the rated lumen output at the end of the rated 
duration of operation. 


14 RESISTANCE TO DUST AND MOISTURE 


The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 9) shall apply. 
For luminaires with IP classification greater than IP20, 
the order of tests specified IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 9) shall 
be as specified in 13. 


15 INSULATION RESISTANCE AND ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH 


The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 10) shall 
apply. 


16 RESISTANCE TO HEAT, FIRE AND 
TRACKING 


The provisions of IS 10322 (Part 1/Sec 13) shall apply 
together with the following requirements. 


The enclosure of an emergency lighting luminaire shall 
withstand the test given in 13.3.2 of IS 10322 (Part 1) 
but at a test temperature of 850°C. 


17 FUNCTIONAL SAFETY 


17.1 All emergency luminaires shall provide the rated 
lumen output claimed by the manufacturer during the 
emergency mode. In addition, the following 
requirements shall be met. 


Emergency luminaires shall provide 50 percent of the 
rated lumen output claimed by the manufacturer during 
operation in emergency mode 5 s after failure of the 
normal supply, and full rated lumen output after 60 s 
and continuously to the end of rated duration of 
emergency operation. 


Emergency luminaires used for high-risk task-area 
lighting shall provide the necessary lamp current in 
order to achieve the rated lumen output claimed by the 
manufacturer during operation in emergency mode 
within a maximum 0.25 s after failure of the normal 
supply, and continuously to the end of rated duration 
of emergency operation. 


Compliance is checked by measurement and by the 
following tests: 


a) For self-contained luminaires in emergency 
mode during operation from the internal 
batteries after a 24 h charge at 0.9 times the 
minimum rated voltage. 


b) For centrally supplied luminaires during 
operation at 0.85 times the minimum rated 
supply voltage when stable thermal conditions 
have been reached. 


Measurements for both self-contained emergency 
luminaires and centrally supplied emergency 
luminaires shall be made using a new lamp. 


NOTE — When measuring the lumen output of centrally 
supplied luminaires, the minimum rated supply voltage should 
be reduced to include an allowance for cable volt drop. 


17.2 The manufacturer shall make available the 
photometric distribution data for the luminaire in 
emergency mode of operation. 


This data shall be corrected for the conditions of 
minimum luminous flux resulting from the combined 
effects of, 


a) the minimum discharge voltages as specified 
in Table | or switch-off voltage specified by 
the manufacturer; and 

b) the minimum operating voltage, including 
cable voltage drop for centrally supplied 
luminaires, 60 s (0.25 s for high-risk task- 
area lighting luminaires) after interruption 
of the normal supply and subsequently 
during continuous operation to the end of the 
stated duration of the emergency lighting 
system. 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


Table 1 Voltage Limits for Discharge Durations 
up to the End of Declared Battery Life 
(Clauses 13.4 and 17.2) 


SI Battery Discharge Conditions 
No. Type 
Up to 1 h Duration Greater than 1 h 
V/cell Duration V/cell 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Nickel cadmium 1.0 1.0 
ii) Lead acid 1.75 1.80 


17.3 Photometric measurements on the luminaire shall 
be made in accordance with the requirements of the 
relevant Indian standards, if any. 


NOTE — Indian Standard on photometric measurements of 
luminaires for emergency lighting is under consideration. 


Compliance is checked by measurement of the 
following: 


a) Light output ratio; and 

b) Intensity distribution table of the luminaire, 
constructed in 5° steps of gamma in the C- 
planes C) and C, where every value 
measured shall be at least 95 percent of the 
value claimed by the manufacturer. 


NOTE — During the measurement of the photometric 
properties it might be necessary to feed the luminaire 
by a power supply providing the same voltage/current 
as the battery at the end of rated duration. 


17.4 In order to identify safety colours, the minimum 
value for the colour-rendering index of the light source 
in an emergency escape lighting luminaire shall be 
R, > 40. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


17.5 Internally illuminated emergency safety signs 
shall meet the following illuminance and luminance 
requirements in the emergency mode: 


a) Colour — It shall conform to the requirements 
of IS 9457; 


b) Luminance — The luminance of any area of 
safety colour of the sign shall be at least 
2 cd/m? in all relevant viewing directions. 


NOTE — The following values are currently under 

consideration: 

a) Luminance ratio, Lmax’ Lmin Within either white or the 
safety colour; 


IL 


‘colour? 


b) Luminance ratio L and 


‘white’ 


c) Disability glare. 


Compliance is checked by measurement in accordance 
with Annex C. 


18 CHANGEOVER OPERATION 


18.1 Changeover from normal to emergency mode shall 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


occur at not less than 0.6 times rated supply voltage. It 
shall not occur at greater than 0.85 times rated supply 
voltage. 


Compliance is checked by the tests described in 18.2. 


18.2 Following complete battery discharge according 
to 13.4, the luminaire shall be subjected to a 24h 
charging cycle at 0.9 times the rated supply voltage in 
its normal lighting mode, if applicable. 


The supply to the luminaire shall then be reduced 
within 0.5 s to 0.6 times rated voltage after which the 
emergency lamps shall operate and remain operating 
to provide the declared rated luminaire emergency 
lumen output after 60 s, or lamp current after 0.25 s 
for high-risk task area lighting luminaires. 


The luminaire supply shall be switched Off and On 
500 times, each cycle consisting of 2 s Off and 2 s On 
(at 0.85 times supply rated voltage). After these cycles 
the supply shall again be reduced to 0.6 times rated 
voltage and the luminaire shall provide rated lumen 
output after 60 s or respective lamp current after 0.25 s 
for high-risk task area lighting luminaires. 


The luminaire shall operate satisfactorily during and 
after the test. 


NOTE — For luminaires with short-rated durations of operation 
or with an inbuilt delay after restoration of the normal supply 
before the lamp extinguishes, the 500 switching operations test 
may have to be adapted to ensure that the batteries are not 
fully discharged before the completion of the test. This can be 
achieved by the incorporation of additional charging periods 
between the switching operations (see 13.1, Note 1). 


18.3 In self-contained emergency luminaires with rest 
mode facility, changeover from rest mode to normal 
mode shall occur automatically at not greater than 0.9 
times rated supply voltage. 


Compliance is checked by the test described in 18.2 
but with the self-contained emergency luminaire put 
into the rest mode halfway through the 2 s supply off 
periods in the 500 switching cycles. 


After the final lumen output measurement in 
accordance with 18.2, the self-contained emergency 
luminaire shall be put in the rest mode and the supply 
slowly increased to 0.9 times rated voltage. The 
changeover from rest mode to normal mode shall 
operate automatically. 


19 HIGH TEMPERATURE OPERATION 


Emergency luminaires shall be capable of operating 
satisfactorily in the emergency mode at an ambient 
temperature of 70°C for at least half of the rated 
duration. 


Compliance is checked by satisfying the following test. 


The relative light outputs of the luminaire operating in 
the emergency mode at f, and at an ambient temperature 
of 70°C shall be compared. 


The battery shall be charged for 24 h at rated supply 
voltage. The emergency luminaire shall then be 
placed in a test chamber incorporating a remote light 
meter with fixed geometry in relation to the 
luminaire. With the ambient inside the chamber at t, 
the luminaire shall be disconnected from the supply 
and the relative light output measured 60 s after 
interruption of the supply. 


The luminaire shall be removed from the chamber and 
the battery charged for 24 h at rated supply voltage. 
The test chamber shall be pre-heated to give an 
internal ambient temperature of 70°C. The emergency 
luminaire shall be returned to the same position as 
for the previous test. After 1 h the luminaire shall be 
operated from the emergency supply. The light output 
reading shall not fall below 50 percent of the initial 
60 s result at any time from 60 s to half the rated 
duration. 


For central battery systems the voltage is considered 
constant and the battery may be substituted with a power 
supply. 


NOTE — The light meter should have the photometer head 
outside of the enclosure so that it is not affected by the ambient 
temperatures. This can be achieved by the use of a clear glass 
window, fibre optic light guides, etc. 


20 BATTERY CHARGERS FOR SELF- 
CONTAINED EMERGENCY LUMINAIRES 


20.1 The battery charger shall provide the rated charge 
performance specified by the battery manufacturer 
(see Annex B) to charge batteries within 24 h over 
the rated ambient temperature range and when 
operating at voltages within the range of 0.9 times 
the rated supply voltage and 1.06 times the rated 
supply voltage. 


Compliance is checked by test and measurement. 


20.2 Transformers built into self-contained emergency 
luminaires for charging the batteries shall comply with 
the relevant requirement specified in IS 1416. 


21 TEST DEVICES FOR EMERGENCY 
OPERATION 


21.1 Self-contained emergency luminaires shall be 
provided with an integral test facility, or with the means 
of connection to a remote test facility, for simulating 
failure of the normal supply. Manual operated test 
switches shall be self-resetting or key operated. 


The device shall be tested for compliance according to 


the manufacturer’s operating instructions. 


21.2 Any remote test device used in conjunction with 
emergency lighting luminaires shall not influence the 
normal operation of the luminaire, other than for testing. 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


22 REST MODE AND INIHIBITION MODE 
FACILITIES 


Self-contained emergency luminaires shall be provided 
with facility for rest mode and inhibition mode facilities 
as given in Annex D. 


ANNEX A 


LUMINAIRE CLASSIFICATION 
(Clauses 5 and 6.2) 


A-1 Emergency lighting luminaires shall be classified 
and marked as to their construction as follows. 


A unique designation denoting the type, mode of 
operation, the facilities included and the rated duration 
of the luminaire shall be clearly affixed to the 
luminaire. 


The designation consists of a rectangle divided in three 
or four segments each containing one or more 
positions. Relevant to the construction a position shall 
obtain a letter or a figure, or a point if no indication 
has to be given. 


The shape of the emergency lighting luminaire 
designation is as follows: 


oR eK KR | kkk 


The segments and positions have to be completed by 
letters and figures indicating the intended 
constructions. 


a) First segment containing one position: 
TYPE 


X self-contained 
Z central supply 


b) Second segment containing one position: 
MODE OF OPERATION 


0  non-maintained 
maintained 

combined non-maintained 
combined maintained 


e © N = 


compound non-maintained 


5 compound maintained 
6 satellite 


c) Third segment containing four positions: 
FACILITIES. To be completed where 
appropriate at the time of installation 


A including test device 
B including remote rest mode 
C including inhibiting mode 
D high-risk task-area luminaire 
d) Fourth segment containing three positions: 


FOR SELF-CONTAINED LUMINAIRES. To 
indicate the minimum DURATION of the 
emergency mode expressed, in minutes; 

10 to indicate 10 min duration 
60 1h duration 

120 2 h duration 

180 3 h duration 


Two examples of a marking given to elucidate 
a selection: 


xX | 1] *B *60 
*D 
Meaning: self-contained maintained luminaire 
including a remote rest mode and which is suitable for 


a high-risk task-area and having emergency mode 
duration of 60 min. 


Meaning: central supplied maintained luminaire. 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


ANNEX B 


BATTERIES FOR EMERGENCY LUMINAIRES 
(Clause 7.8) 


B-1 Batteries incorporated in emergency lighting 
luminaires shall be one of the following types: 


a) 
b) 


Sealed nickel cadmium; and 
Valve regulated lead acid. 


NOTE — Other battery types may be allowed provided 
they conform to their relevant safety and performance 
standard and the relevant requirements of this standard. 


B-2 To comply with the requirements of 7.8, two 
aspects shall be met; firstly the battery shall conform 
to its relevant standard and secondly the luminaire shall 
operate within specific tolerances to ensure that the 
required performance can be maintained by the battery 
throughout its design life. 


B-3 A battery’s capacity shall be chosen so that the 
luminaire shall achieve its rated duration up to the time 
of battery replacement. 


Compliance is checked by the following tests in B-4 
and B-5. 


B-4 SEALED NICKEL CADMIUM BATTERIES 


B-4.1 The battery shall conform to IS 14218 for cells 
intended for permanent charge at elevated temperatures. 


B-4.2 The battery in the luminaire shall operate within 
the following limits: 


a) Maximum continuous ambient air 
temperature, measured by a thermocouple 
within 5 mm of but not touching the cells 
within the battery compartment of the 
luminaire, shall be 50°C; 


b) Maximum continuous overcharge rate shall 
be 0.08 C.A (at 1.06 rated mains voltage); 

c) Minimum continuous ambient temperature of 
the cells within the luminaire shall be C 
(occasional outage to 0°C); 

d) Maximum discharge rates shall be for | h: 


0.6 C;A and for 3 h: 0.25 CA (excluding the 
initial starting period). The maximum 
discharge rates for other time periods may be 
interpolated from these values. 


B-5 VALVE REGULATED LEAD ACID 
BATTERIES 


B-5.1 The battery in the luminaire shall conform to 
the relevant requirements of IS 15549. 


B-5.2 The battery in the luminaire shall operate within 
the following limits: 


a) Maximum continuous ambient air 
temperature, measured by a thermocouple 
within 5 mm of but not touching the cells 
within the battery compartment of the 
luminaire, shall be, 

1) 30°C with temperature compensation of 
float charge voltage normally between 
—3 mV/cell/°C and —4 mV/cell/°C or as 
recommended by the cell manufacturer, 
or 

2) 25°C without temperature compensation. 
The float charge voltage at 25°C shall be 
between 2.22 V/cell and 2.4 V/cell as 


recommended by the cell manufacturer; 
b) 
c) 


Maximum recharge current shall be 0.4 C,,; 
Maximum discharge rates shall be for 1 h: 
0.4 C, and for 3 h: 0.17 C, (excluding the 
initial starting period). The maximum 
discharge rates for other time periods may be 
interpolated from these values; 

d) Maximum rms ripple current shall be not 
more than 0.1 C,,; 

e) Minimum continuous ambient temperature 
close to but not touching the cells within the 
luminaire shall be 5°C (occasional outages 
to 0°C). 


B-6 The ambient air temperature of the cells within 
the luminaire shall be measured after 48 h from start 
of recharge. 


B-7 If operating outside the limits given in B-4 and B-5, 
alternative operating parameters and evidence of the 
four-year design life for the cells shall be supplied by 
the battery manufacturer. 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 17.5) 


LUMINANCE MEASUREMENTS 


C-1 CONTRAST 


Illuminances are measured normal to the surface over 
a 10 mm diameter field for each coloured surface of 
the sign. The minimum and maximum luminance is 
measured over the areas, for each colour for the 
coloured background a 10 mm wide outer border is 
excluded from the measurements. In order to measure 
the luminance ratio between two adjacent colours, 
the luminance measurements shall be taken at a 
distance of 15 mm on either side of the junction of 
two colours, if the area of colour is less than 30 mm, 


the 10 mm diameter measurement field shall be 
reduced. Typical example is given in Fig. 1 


C-2 On site photometric tests: All illuminance 
measurements shall be made with a photopic V , 
corrected meter and all luminous measurements shall 
be made with a photopic, V , corrected meter. 


The meter shall have an error tolerance of not greater 
than 10 percent. 


At all times, the measured values shall be not less than 
those specified in this standard. 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL EXAMPLE OF MEASUREMENT POSITIONS 


ANNEX D 


REST MODE AND INHIBITION MODE FACILITIES 
(Clause 22) 


D-1 Emergency luminaires need an unswitched supply 
so that when the power is switched off to the normal 
lighting luminaires, the emergency luminaires do not 
change over and the batteries remain connected to the 
supply and continue to be charged. In order to avoid 
unwanted discharges, rest mode or inhibiting mode 
facilities can be provided (see 22.4) to protect the 
integrity of batteries when the normal supply fails but 
emergency lighting is not needed at that time (or when 
the batteries are included with the luminaire and stored 
before installation). For both facilities, remote control 
devices must be installed via proper wiring. 


The main characteristics of rest mode are: 


a) It can only be operated when the normal 
supply has failed, enabling battery capacity 


to be conserved, if not needed; 


b) The remote control wiring is fail-safe against 
short circuit, contact to earth or interruption; 
c) At the restoration of the normal supply, the 


luminaire reverts to normal mode. 


NOTE — At the moment, remote control devices for 
rest mode operation are not standardized. 


The main characteristics of inhibition mode are: 


IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 8) : 2013 


a) 


b) 


It can be set independently from the condition 
of the normal power and therefore when the 
building is unoccupied, a supply failure or 
disconnection shall not cause an unwanted 
discharge; 

The protection against the interruption of the 
wiring to the remote control should be 
provided by a proper installation according 
to the relevant wiring rules of SP 30 
concerning safety services that is, 


1) circuits of safety services should be 
independent of other circuits (see 
Note 1); 


2) circuits of safety services should not pass 
through locations exposed to fire risk 
unless they are fire-resistant. The circuits 
should not in any case pass through zones 
exposed to explosion risk; 


12 


3) the protection against overload may be 
omitted; 


4) overcurrent protective devices should be 
used so as to avoid an overcurrent in one 
circuit impairing the correct operation of 
other circuits of safety services; 


5) switchgear and controlgear should be 
clearly identified and grouped in locations 
accessible only to competent persons; 


6) alarm devices should be clearly identified 
(see Note 2). 
NOTES 


1 This means that an electrical fault or any intervention 
or modification in one system shall not affect the correct 
functioning of any other circuits. This may necessitate 
separation by fire-resistant partitions, different routes 
or enclosures. 


2 If service facilities are provided to inhibit output, they 
should comply with these requirements. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ET 24 (6124). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 60 3843 
60 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


