UR AT ATP IS 19000 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Saas SUUlea Valens — 
GAP GI, ASW Si WHER & 
fore Raia six stan 


Online Consumer Reviews — 
Principles and Requirements for 
their Collection, Moderation and 

Publication 


ICS 03.080.30, 97.020 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG SRI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS UA, 9 ag Vs VHX HPT, Ag facet - 110002 
S ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 8 


Business Services Sectional Committee, SSD 09 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Business 
Services Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Service Sector Division Council. 


Online review sites offer consumers the chance to give feedback about their experience of using products and 
services for the benefit of other consumers who might be considering buying or using them, as well as valuable 
feedback for the suppliers/sellers that provide the products and services. 


The consumer transactions and interactions have been increasing day by day via the internet, and millions of 
consumers each year read and write online reviews. The rapid growth of consumer review sites covering a wide 
range of products (for example clothes, electrical appliances, toys, cars, etc) and services (for example services 
by restaurants, hotels, builders, plumbers, electricians, lawyers, etc) have the potential to empower consumers and 
drive industry improvements, by creating a more dynamic way to exchange information. 


Review sites can benefit consumers, making it easier to research products and services, and identify those that 
best suit their needs in terms of function, price, quality and value for money. These sites allow consumers to share 
information about their experiences, and to seek feedback and opinions from thousands of other users. Online 
reviews can also be a valuable resource for suppliers/sellers, helping them to meet the needs and expectations of 
their customers. Smart suppliers/sellers understand that proactively encouraging user reviews and responding 
quickly and positively to feedback, can help them to keep customers and win new ones. 


As online reviews are increasingly influential to consumers purchasing decisions, it is vital to both consumers and 
suppliers/sellers that sites are managed effectively to build confidence in the quality, integrity, accuracy and 
transparency of reviews. Both consumers and suppliers/sellers have reported some problems with online reviews. 
These problems might be intentional or unintentional, but can lead to a degradation of trust in the online review 
process. Some reported problems include: 


a) false positive reviews written by the suppliers/sellers itself intending to mislead consumers; 

b) false negative reviews written by a suppliers/sellers competitors intending to ward off consumers from the 
organization; 

c) the activity of businesses specialized in ‘online reputation management’ who offer e-commerce companies 
services to improve their online reviews; 

d) consumers using their newfound position of public critic and in effect obtaining better circumstances or 
other benefits from a supplier/seller that they review; 

e) a lack of trust concerning the veracity of consumers reviews, and whether organizations select the better 
reviews, and remove the negative ones; and 

f) suppliers/sellers that use consumers to write positive reviews or penalize them for writing negative 
reviews, in some cases contracting consumers out of the right to write a negative review. 


These issues form the basis for the principles in this standard that are designed to resolve them. 


The standard was first published in 2021 as an adoption of ISO 20488 : 2018 as IS/ISO 20488 : 2018 ‘Online 
consumer reviews — Principles and requirements for their collection, moderation and publication’. This standard 
is based on ISO 20488 : 2018 and modification have been done after the consultation with Indian stakeholders 
primarily to make it implementable in the country. This modified version of standard supersedes IS/ISO 20488 : 
2018. In this standard, the following major changes have been incorporated: 


a) The word ‘supplier’ is replaced with ‘supplier/seller’ in the whole standard; 

b) Definition of ‘Review Site’ is added (see 3.15); 

c) A requirement that this code of practice be made public by the organizations is added (see 4.2.2); 
d) Second para of ‘Collecting personal information for profile or nick name’ (see 5.2.2.1) modified; 
e) A Note — 1 is added to the clause ‘Control of the Identity of Review Authors’ (see 5.5.1); 

f) A Note —3 is added to the clause ‘Reviews Collected with Reward’ (see 5.6.2); 

g) ‘Purchase date’ is added to clause ‘Review submission and consumer experience date’ (see 7.1.4); 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 19000 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


ONLINE CONSUMER REVIEWS — PRINCIPLES AND 
REQUIREMENTS FOR THEIRCOLLECTION, MODERATION 
AND PUBLICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard provides requirements and 
recommendations for the principles and methods for 
review administrators to apply in their collection, 
moderation and publication of online consumer 
reviews. 


1.2 This standard is applicable to any organization 
that publishes consumer reviews online, including 
suppliers/sellers of products and services that collect 
reviews from their own customers, a third party 
contracted by the suppliers/sellers or an independent 
third party. It is recognized that the different 
processes related to the collection, moderation and 
publication can at various times be performed by 
different organizations. This standard is applicable 
to reviews published online, collected by any 
methodology. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards. 


IS No. Title 
IS/ISO/IEC Information technology — Security 
27001 : 2013 techniques — Information security 


management systems — Requirements. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard the following terms 
and definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Collection — Means of obtaining a review 
related to a consumer experience. 


3.2 Conflict of Interest — Situation in which a 
review author has interests connected to the 
suppliers/sellers, review administrator, and product 
or service that could compromise the independent 
nature of their review. 


3.3 Consumer — Member of the general public 
purchasing or using products or services from a 
supplier/seller. 


3.4 Consumer Experience Date — Calendar date 
and time when the consumer made use of the 
product or service. 


3.5 Consumer Review — Recorded information 
made publicly available by aconsumer deemed to be 
a review author about a specified product or service 
provided or sold by a supplier/seller. 


3.6 Flagging — Function enabling consumers or 
suppliers/sellers to draw the attention of the review 
administrator to any content deemed suspicious. 


3.7 Geolocation — Process whereby the geographical 

coordinates (latitude and longitude) of a review 
author can be obtained automatically to identify 
their location. 


3.8 Identification — Process for obtaining information 
necessary to confirm the review author as a real 
person. 


3.9 Moderation — Filtering, analysis, or processes 
conducted automatically or by human means with a 
view to accepting or rejecting a consumer review. 


3.10 Overall Rating — Score for a specific 
product or service, calculated by the review 
administrator, that combines all of the individual 
ratings given by review authors about that product 
or service. 


3.11 Process — Interrelated or interacting activities 
that transform inputs into outputs. 


3.12 Rating — Value, classification, or ranking of 
a product or service by a consumer. 
NOTES 


1 Rating enables a consumer to give their opinion using 
a rating scale (0 to 5, 1 to 5, 1 to 10, 1 to 100, A to D, etc). 
2 This scale may be represented by symbols (smileys, 
stars, coloured dots, symbols, etc); however, these symbols 


should avoid creating confusion with any rating that may 
exist elsewhere. 


3.13 Review Administrator — Organization or 
individual responsible for managing the consumer 
review content, which may be the suppliers/sellers 
of the products and services being reviewed. 


IS 19000 : 2022 


NOTES 


1 This can be a third party contracted by the 
suppliers/sellers, or an independent third party. 


2 The different processes related to collection, moderation 
and publication may at various times be performed by 
different organizations. 


3.14 Review Author — Consumer writing a review 
for publication on the review site. 


3.15 Review Site — Any platform which publishes 
consumer/supplier/seller reviews. 


3.16 Single Sign-On (SSO) — Function enabling a 
user to access a number of websites or applications 
with a single user ID and password. 


3.17 Solicited Review — Consumer’s review of a 
product or service requested by the suppliers/sellers 
or review administrator. 


3.18 Specific Marking — Distinctive sign denoting 
a characteristic of a consumer review. 


3.19 Submission Date — Date on which the review 
is submitted to the review administrator by the 
consumer. 


3.20 Supplier/Seller — Organization or individual 
providing/selling a product or service being 
reviewed by consumers on the online review site. 


NOTE — The terms ‘Seller’ and ‘Supplier’ can be used 
interchangeably. 


3.21 Terms and Conditions — Set of criteria 
published on the review site that specify the rules 
with which review authors and suppliers/sellers will 
comply if they wish to submit information for 
publication on the review site. 


3.22 Test Reviews — Method of authenticating the 
dependability of the review administrator’s 
processes. 


3.23 Total Rating — The score given by a review 
author to sum up the evaluation of a specific product 
or service. 


3.24 Unsolicited Review — Consumer’s evaluation 
of a product or service that is provided without being 
requested by the supplier/seller or the review 
administrator review. 


4 GUIDING PRINCIPLES AND ORGANIZATION 
COMMITMENT 


4.1 Guiding Principles 


The organization, its review administrator and its 
staff shall deliver a service that takes the 
following guiding principles into account at all 
stages of planning, design and delivery: 


a) Integrity — Demonstrates integrity by 
ensuring that the review site reflects 
the opinions of legitimate review 
authors who have acquired a product or 
service and have submitted reviews. 


b) Accuracy — Ensures that processes of 
collecting, moderating and publishing 


consumer reviews produces reviews 
that as far as reasonably possible are 
accurate; that is, adequate, current and 
not misleading. 


c) Privacy — Ensures the protection of 
review authors’ personal information. 


d) Security — Makes certain that all 
systems have anti-fraud mechanisms 
in place to protect personal data from 
internal and external fraud. 


e) Transparency — Ensures the 
organization’s practices on the 
disclosure of information to 
consumers, suppliers, personnel and 
other interested parties regarding 
online consumer reviews are visible in 
all its undertakings, decisions and 
policies. The organization should be 
transparent about all methodologies, 
and ownership, that may impact or 
influence a consumer’s use of the 
review site. 


f) Accessibility — Ensures information 
on the review site is easy to find and 
presented in a clear and simple format 
so that it can be read and understood 
by consumers and suppliers/sellers. 


g) Responsiveness — Responds to 
communications from consumers, 
suppliers/sellers and other interested 
parties concerning its online consumer 
review site and takes appropriate action 
without undue delay. 


4.2 Organizational Commitment 
4.2.1 Culture 


The organization should facilitate a culture that 
demonstrates commitment to the guiding principles 
identified in 4.1. This commitment should be 
supported by senior management. 


4.2.2 Code of Practice 


The organization shall develop a written code of 
practice, communicated and made available to all 
management and staff, which outlines how this 
standard and the guiding principles in 4.1 will be met 
and maintained. This code shall be made available 
to the consumers publicly and at such a place that is 
easily accessible. 


4.2.3 Terms and Conditions 
4.2.3.1 General 


The organization shall develop a written set of terms 
and conditions that state the rules and criteria to be 
complied with for anyone wishing to submit a 
review. 


4.2.3.2 Accessibility 
These terms and conditions shall be: 


a) easily accessible to all review authors and 
suppliers/sellers; and 

b) accepted by the review author before 
submitting a review. 


4.2.3.3 Non-compliance 


It shall be made clear that non-compliance with 
these terms and conditions may lead to rejection or 
removal of reviews. 


4.2.3.4 Criteria 


The terms and conditions shall include the following 
criteria: 


a) The content describes a personal consumer 
experience of the product or service being 
reviewed; 


b) All information is factually correct, to the 
best of the review author’s knowledge; and 


c) The content does not contain defamatory 
language. 


Furthermore, the terms and conditions should 
include the following criteria: 


a) The content is intelligible to readers (for 
example without random characters or the 
use of sequences of words without meaning); 


b) Any conflicts of interest are clearly disclosed 
within the review; 


c) The content does not contain personal 
information that would allow members of the 
public to identify or contact private 
individuals (for example telephone numbers, 
precise physical addresses or email 
addresses); 


d) The content does not contain any financial 
information (for example credit card 
number, social security number or bank 
account number) that could result in identity 
theft; and 


e) The content does not contain any marketing 
materials. 


The review administrator can add to this list. 
However, it cannot define any additional criteria 
that could cause bias in the evaluation of the product 
or service concerned. 


IS 19000 : 2022 


4.3 Continual Improvement 


The organization shall continually update and 
improve the service that it offers. This can be 
accomplished by: 


a) monitoring consumer and supplier/seller 
feedback, and responding to that feedback; 


b) continually improving the effectiveness and 
efficiency of its processes; 

c) reviewing, identifying, considering and 
applying new concepts and practices into 
their processes; 


d) encouraging innovation in the development 
of services and procedures; 


e) providing relevant staff training and 
personnel development opportunities; and 


recognizin examples of outstandin 

8 8 P 8 
performance and practices related to the 
process. 


4.4 Communication Channels 
4.4.1 General 


The organization shall develop effective channels of 
communication with the suppliers/sellers of 
products and services reviewed on their site, to share 
relevant and valuable feedback from review authors. 


4.4.2 Dedicated Contact Channel between 
Suppliers/Sellers and Review Administrators 


The review administrator shall provide a specific 
clearly communicated contact channel, to allow 
contact from suppliers/sellers of products and 
services being reviewed. 


NOTE — A contact channel can be a phone number or 
email address for the specific purpose of supplier enquiries. 


4.4.3 Providing Feedback to Suppliers/Sellers 


The review administrator should contact suppliers of 
products and services alerting them to any serious 
safety issues or potential risks highlighted in 
consumer reviews. 


4.4.4 Register the Supplier/Seller 


The review administrator should offer 
suppliers/sellers reviewed on its site the opportunity 
to register a business online profile so that they can 
receive alerts when new consumer reviews are 
published. 


IS 19000 : 2022 


4.4.5 Third Party Managing Reviews 


Where a third party is managing reviews on behalf 
of a supplier/seller, the review administrator should 
liaise with suppliers/sellers to discuss the best way to 
share relevant and valuable feedback from review 
authors which may assist in improving products and 
services. 


4.5 Resource Capability 


The organization should ensure that it has sufficient 
resources available for process planning, designing, 
reviewing, identifying, considering and applying 
new concepts and practices for continual 
improvement. 


ePublication of 
terms and 
conditions 

eUnbiased collection 
via invite or open 


platform 


PRE 
SUBMISSION 


content 


ratin 


SUBMISSION 


eReview author required to 
create profile or submit 
contact information 


eReview author submits 


eCollection of content 
submission date anda 


NOTE — Resources can include, but are not limited to IT 
systems, and the knowledge, training and experience 
required by the staff that will manage and operate the 
process. 


5 THE COLLECTION PROCESS 
5.1 General 


Consumer reviews shall be collected using an 
objective and demonstrable process (see Fig. 1) that 
minimizes bias and prejudice. 


The organization’s collection process enables any 
consumer meeting the terms and conditions 
(described in 4.2.3) to submit a review. 


eReview 
administrator 
protects review 
author's personal 
information 

eAll reviews 
collected with 
reward are 
marked 


POST 
SUBMISSION 


FIG. 1 COLLECTION PROCESS 


5.2 Responsibilities of Participants 
5.2.1 The Review Author 


All review authors shall be asked, either at the point 
of registration, or before submitting each review, to: 


a) confirm that they have read and accepted the 
review site’s terms and conditions; and 


b) provide an email address or contact 
telephone number to enable the review 
administrator to contact them. 


Any review author not complying with (a) and (b) 


above shall be refused permission to submit a 
review. 


5.2.2 The Review Administrator 


5.2.2.1 Collecting personal information for profile 
or nickname 


The review author shall be given the opportunity 
to create an online profile, or nickname to be 
publicly displayed. 


The review administrator may still collect the 
personal information of the review author. The 
review author can choose to remain anonymous on 


the site, in case of acceptance of terms and 
conditions, however, the choice may be provided by 
the review administrator to the review authoras per 
their business model. 


5.2.2.2 Safeguarding personal information 
The review administrator shall ensure that: 


a) all personal information collected from 
consumers is stored and handled in a secure 
and confidential manner to prevent 
unauthorized access or use; 


b) security settings are put in place to protect 
the consumer’s personal information; and 


c) personal information is used only for the 
purposes of moderating reviews and is 
not transferred to marketing companies, 
brokers or any other third parties unless the 
review author has expressly consented to 
such use or transfer. 


NOTE — Personal information includes information 
such as an individual’s name, address or email 
address; that is, all information that can be linked to 
an individual. 


5.2.2.3 Training of staff 


The review administrator shall ensure that 
anyone handling personal information completes 
training in relation to the guiding principles (see 
4.1). 


NOTE — Please refer to IS/ISO/IEC 27001 for further 
guidance. 


5.3 Consumer Review Features 


The review administrator shall ensure that consumer 
reviews have the following features: 


a) The date on which the review was submitted; 
and 
b) A total rating. 


The review administrator should also provide 
review authors with an opportunity to add: 


a) a description of the consumer experience in 
free text or questionnaire format; 

b) the date or time period of the consumer 
experience; 

c) the purchase date of the products and 
services; and 

d) additional content relating to the consumer 
experience. 


NOTES 


1 The review administrator can routinely offer users 
the opportunity to sort reviews based on whether 
the elements relating to the consumer experience have 
been obtained. 

2 Additional content can take the form of 
photographs, videos or audio comments. These are 
subject to the same rules of moderation as review text. 


IS 19000 : 2022 


5.4 Solicited Consumer Reviews 
5.4.1 General 


Review administrators inviting consumers to submit 
online reviews should send invitations to all those 
who are known to have purchased the product or 
service. 


If the invitations are not sent to all those known 
to have purchased the product or service, it shall 
be collected using an objective and demonstrable 
process that minimizes bias and prejudice. 


5.4.2 Invitation 


Any solicitation for a review of a product or 
service sent by the review administrator, or the 
supplier/seller, should be sent at a time appropriate 
for the consumer to write a review. 

NOTE — For example, the terms and conditions can state 


a specific time frame within which the invitation could be 
sent following the consumer experience. 


The review invitation shall clearly indicate, or give 
access to, the following information: 


a) Who is soliciting the review: 


1)The review administrator or a third 
party acting on behalf of the review 
administrator or the supplier/seller; and 

2) If the review administrator is the actual 
supplier/seller, this should also be clear 
in the review invitation; 


b) Details of the product or service for which a 
review is being sought. 


Furthermore, the review invitation should also 
indicate, or give access to, the following 
additional information: 


a) How the review will be used (in particular 
whether it is intended to be published, and 
where); 


b) What content and review author 
identification information will be 
published; and 


c) How to consult the terms and conditions of 
the review administrator's site. 
5.4.3 Invitation Date 


The review administrator shall ensure that the 
review is not collected before the consumer 
experience of the product or service. 


5.4.4 Multiple Consumers 


If more than one person (for example, a family) has 
had a consumer experience linked to a single 
purchase, the review administrator reserves the right 


IS 19000 : 2022 


to solicit either the purchaser of the product or 
service, or any of the consumers linked to the 
purchase. 


5.4.5 Use of the Consumer Database 


Verification that the review author is a real person 
and confirmation of the consumer experience taking 
place may be obtained from a database belonging to 
the review administrator, the supplier/seller or its 
distributor. 

NOTE — If the consumer experience cannot be confirmed, 


the information can be obtained by means of a form, email 
or other mechanism. 


5.4.6 End of Invitations 


The review administrator should no longer send 
invitations if, at any point, the review administrator 
learns that the evaluated product or service has been 
discontinued or is no longer offered by the 
supplier/seller. 


5.5 Unsolicited Consumer Reviews 


Any consumer shall be allowed to leave a review on 
the site provided they: 


a) provide personal information either by 
registering on the site or creating a profile; 
and 


b) accept the terms and conditions. 
5.5.1 Control of the Identity of Review Authors 


The review administrator shall have a process in 
place to verify that the review author is a real person 
and confirm that the contact details provided are 
genuine and correspond to a real person that may be 
ensured by the following means: 


a) This may be carried out for a random sample 
of review authors, or for those it suspects do 
not meet the terms and conditions or are 
flagged for further investigation; 

b) It should be made clear to all review authors 
when submitting a review that this 
verification might take place, and the 
conditions under which it will be performed; 
and 

c) The identity of the review author can be 
confirmed by one or more of the following 
methods: 


1) Verifying the email address by sending 
one or more emails and awaiting a 
response; 


2) Verifying the review author’s domain 
name and email address extension in 
comparison with the online review 
subject and/or the name of the evaluated 
product or service; 


3) Sending an email that asks the review 
author to confirm their registration by 


clicking on a link; 


4) Verification by a programme that 
protects websites; 


5) Verification by telephone call or SMS; 


6) Verification of identification by Single 
Sign-On (SSO); 


7) Verification of identification by 
geolocation or IP address; 


8) Verification by the review administrator 
that the review author’s email address is 
valid prior to publishing a first review; 
and 


9) Verification by using a single user per 
email address; and 


10) Verification using the captcha system. 


NOTE — Any additional method for verification 
that is reasonable for establishing the identity as 
per the prevalent practice may also be used. 


5.5.2 Verification of Consumer Experience 


The review administrator shall have a process in 
place to increase the certainty that the consumer 
experience was genuine by: 


a) Monitoring the content of reviews to 
ensure that they meet the criteria detailed 
in the terms and conditions; and 


b) responding to any feedback or complaints 
about the content of reviews. 


The review administrator, if on analysis of the 
information obtained concerning the review author, 
discovers elements giving them reason to believe that 
an item of information is untrue or incorrect, should 
assess the review internally. 


5.6 Minimizing Biased and Fraudulent Reviews 
5.6.1 Purchase of Reviews 


The review administrator shall not knowingly 
publish reviews that have been purchased and/or 
written by individuals employed for that purpose by 
the supplier/seller, or by a third party. 


5.6.2 Reviews Collected with Reward 


The review administrator may offer the review 
author a reward for their review of a product or 
service, whether this review is unsolicited or 
solicited. Where the review has been verified then 
the following shall apply: 


a) The reward shall not depend on the content 
of the review submitted (for example a 
reward should be given whether the review 
was positive or negative); 


b) The review administrator shall specify the 
nature of the opportunity to receive a 


reward in the terms and conditions; 


c) Rewards can be given before or after a review 
is submitted; and 

d)The review administrator shall clearly 
display a ‘mark’ alongside the review to 
make readers aware that a reward was offered 
for the review. 


NOTES 


1 An example of a reward programme could be the 
‘new product tester programme’ for example some 
consumers are given or lent new products and provide 
a review after a period of use. 


2 A reward can take the form of cash or products, or a 
prize in a competition such as a lottery style draw. 


3 In case of reviews collected with reward, the 
beneficiaries have to be selected through a non- 
discriminatory procedure and in an un-biased manner. 


5.6.3 Reliability of Collection Process 


The review administrator shall ensure that the 
following are put in place to ensure collection 
reliability: 

a) Development of filtering and control tools 

and algorithms; 
b) A verification and control process; and 
c) A process for measuring the reliability of 
review collection. 

5.7 Review Questionnaire/Collection Form 
5.7.1 General 


The review administrator can, at its discretion, 
structure an online questionnaire/collection form, 
or any other mechanism by which it obtains reviews, 


The language of the 
review is examined 


eSubmission shall be in 
accordance with the 
terms and conditions 

eCannot introduce bias 


AUTOMATED 


MODERATION 


IS 19000 : 2022 


using the features outlined in 5.3. 
5.7.2 Questionnaire/Collection Form Structure 
The review administrator can: 


a) draw up a list of questions on any subject it 
wishes and is not obliged to restrict itself to 
a minimum or maximum number of 
questions or subjects; 


b) structure the questions with multiple choice 
answers or in plain text; and 


c) provide an opportunity for suppliers/sellers 
to comment on the questionnaire/collection 
form. 


5.7.3 Total Rating of the Product or Service 


The total rating for a product or service should 
be given by the review author and not be 
recalculated or modified in any way by the review 
administrator. 


6 THE MODERATION PROCESS 
6.1 General 


The review administrator shall moderate all 
submitted consumer reviews against a 
predetermined, published set of criteria to decide 
whether they are suitable for publication. 


The process (see Fig. 2) allows review 
administrators to reject or remove reviews if the 
review fails to meet the terms and conditions. 


Moderation can take place before and/or after 
publication of a consumer review. Moderation 
may be automatic, manual, or a combination of both. 


MANUAL 
MODERATION 


The language of the review is 


examined 


eSubmission shall be in accordance 
with the terms and conditions 


¢Cannot introduce bias 
¢Moderating staff is proficient in review 
submission language 


FIG. 2 MODERATION PROCESS 


IS 19000 : 2022 


6.2 Condition 


The conditions relating to moderation should 
include, but are not limited to the following: 


a) Compliance — Ensuring compliance of the 
collected content with the site's terms and 
conditions regarding the publishing, 
rejecting, or removing of content. 

b) Review author’s identity and content — 
Once the review author is identified as a 


real person, moderating all content 
submitted. 
c) Volume of reviews — Having in place 


moderation methods corresponding with 
the volume of reviews. 

d) Tracking reviews — Ensuring all those 
involved and their actions connected with 
moderation are identified and traceable. 

e) Time limits — Applying the same 
moderation time limit to all reviews. 

f) Training and support — Ensuring staff 
performing moderation are trained and 
competent in their role. 

g) Approach — All reviews receive equal 
treatment regardless of content. 


h) Language — The language of the review is 
examined. 


6.3 Staff Moderating Consumer Reviews 
6.3.1 Staff's Role 


Staff assess the content of a consumer review to 
decide whether it will be published, rejected, or 
removed. 


NOTE — These staff are responsible for following the 
organization’s code of practice and applying the rules within 
the terms and conditions governing the review author, when 
moderating consumer reviews. 


6.3.2 Staff Competencies and Resources 


Staff shall have the following competencies and 
resources: 


a) Proficiency in the language in which the 
review was written; 


b) Access to all the content of the consumer 
review collected; and 


c) A means to contact the review author if 
necessary for verification. 


NOTE — Notification of this potential contact with 
the review author can be published in the terms and 
conditions pursuant to data protection, privacy 
legislation, and the obligation of those responsible for 
processing personal information to inform the review 
author about the purpose of the processing of such 
data. 


Furthermore, staff should have access to: 


a) all information relating to the history of the 


review submission (for example number of 
submissions of the same review); 

b) the history of information relating to the 
review author (for example number of 
reviews published, subject of previous 
reviews); 

c) a record keeping system allowing the 
moderation of a consumer review to be 
passed to another staff member; and 


d) all historical reviews ever submitted on a 
product or service, whether they are 
accepted or rejected. 


6.4 Moderation Characteristics 


Moderation shall be independent of the review 
content and should only be performed in accordance 
with the organization’s terms and conditions. 


The review administrator should indicate the 
following in the terms and conditions: 


a) The processing method chosen and applied; 


b)The rules in place within the moderation 
process; and 


c) The rules that apply to all consumer reviews 
collected. 


6.5 Analyzing Review Content 


The review administrator shall have in place 
processes to analyze and confirm the content 
collected to ensure its compliance with the terms and 
conditions. 


These processes can combine automated tools 
and/or manual verification processes. 


6.5.1 Performing the Analysis 
The analysis performed should be based on: 
a) Whether the review author is verified as a 
real person; 


b) Review author behaviour (frequency of 
writing reviews, history of contributions, 
location, etc); and 


c) Examination of the language used in the 
review. 


6.5.2 Outcomes of the Analysis 


On the basis of the analysis carried out in 6.5.1, the 
review shall be either: 


a) Identified as not containing problematic 
content; or 


b) Identified as fraudulent or containing 
potentially problematic content (for 
example language) incontravention of the 
terms and conditions. 


NOTE — Reviews reporting the consumer’s 
dissatisfaction with a product or service can be 
considered but are not deemed as potentially 
problematic content. 


6.5.3 Automated Moderation 


The review administrator should use dedicated IT 
programs for analysis within the computer systems 
used to moderate content: 


a) For the purpose of verifying its appropriate, 
relevant and impartial character by 
automated means; 


b) With the creation of tools for data analysis 
to process any problems as quickly as 
possible; and 


c) Within the computer systems used to 
monitor content. 


NOTES 


1 The moderation process can be partially automated 


(by a computer program) in particular for: 


a) filtering (for example a specific moderation 
process or adding an alert flagged to a 
moderator); and 


b) rejecting consumer reviews containing illicit 
content or content not meeting the terms and 
conditions. 


2 Content types that can be subject to automated 
moderation are in particular, but not limited to: 


a) content containing profanity in the text box; 


b) content containing elements relating to the 
review author’s identity; and 


c) Unintelligible content (for example sequence 
of symbols or characters without meaning, 
sequence of non-existent words). 


3 A consumer review can be published without an 
automated moderation before publication only if a 
manual moderation has been performed. 


6.5.4 Manual Moderation 


Manual moderation shall be performed by staff 
competent to moderate the content of the consumer 
review in order to be able to review and decide on 
its publication or rejection. 

NOTE — A consumer review can be published without 


a manual moderation only if an automated moderation 
has been performed. 


6.5.5 Consumer Review Moderation Time Limit 


The organization should aim to complete the 
moderation process within the time limit stated in 
the terms and conditions available to the public. 


NOTES 


1 The moderation time limit cannot be different 
depending on its content (positive or negative). It can, 
however, vary depending on its attributes (for example 
text, form, video, audio, or images). 


IS 19000 : 2022 


2 The review administrator can inform the review author 
that their review has been published. 


6.6 Rejection of a Consumer Review 


The review administrator shall reject a consumer 
review, prior to publication, if: 


a) It is discovered to be fraudulent; and 


b) It does not meet the terms and conditions for 
publication determined by the review 
administrator. 


6.7 Removal of Reviews 
6.7.1 By the Review Author 


If requested by the review author the review 
administrator shall remove the review. 


The review administrator, under the terms and 
conditions, may place a marker where the review 
was posted with an explanation, for example ‘this 
review has been removed by the review author’ and 
include the date and user identifier. 


6.7.2 By the Review Administrator 


The review administrator shall reject and remove a 
previously approved and published review, if there 
is information provided that the review author and 
content did not meet its terms and conditions. 


The review administrator, under the terms and 
conditions, may leave a marker where the review 
was posted with an explanation, for example ‘this 
entry did not meet specific review criteria’ and 
include the date and user identifier. 


6.7.3 Informing the Review Author 


Where the review submitted is identified as being 
intended to artificially construct or cause bias in 
the evaluation of products or services (for example, 
mass sending of reviews by an online reputation 
company), the review administrator should inform 
the review author of its rejection but is not obliged 
to specify the reasons in order to preserve the 
effectiveness of its anti-fraud mechanisms. 


6.8 Editing the Review Content 


The review administrator shall not be permitted to 
edit consumer reviews at any time. It may allow 
review authors to edit their own reviews. If so, it shall 
be done only under the following conditions: 


a) Before publication — The review 
administrator should give the review author 
the opportunity to edit and resubmit their 
rejected review if the review administrator 
believes that the review author has 
unintentionally breached the terms and 
conditions. 


IS 19000 : 2022 


b) After publication — The review 
administrator should give the review author 
the opportunity to resubmit their review 
even after publication. In this case, the 
review author: 


1) Asks for the content to be removed and 
can then choose to submit a new review 
in its place; 


2) Updates the review with a second, 
amended review that is posted under 
the original review; and 


3) Edits the already live content (the 
only content visible after the edit is 
the new edited content). 


The review administrator shall leave a marker where 
the review is posted with an explanation, for 
example ‘the review has been edited by the author’ 
and include the date and the user identified. 


6.9 Assessing the Moderation Process 


6.9.1 Continual Improvement of the Moderation 
Process 


The review administrator shall have measureable 
processes in place to assess the ongoing 
effectiveness of the moderation process. This may 
include the use of sampling, test reviews or surveys 
of review authors. 


6.9.2 Sampling 


A check should be performed on a statistically 
representative sample of reviews at least once a year 
in accordance with the organization’s code of 
practice and any developed guidelines. 


10 


6.9.3 Test Reviews 


To test the quality of the moderation process, and 
ensure continual improvement, the review 
administrator should put in place a system of test 
reviews wherein a pretend review (one that conflicts 
with at least one of the collection criteria stated in the 
organization’s terms and conditions) is sent to the 
moderation process. 


The review administrator should put in place a 
process to ensure that test reviews are removed from 
the site when the collection and moderation process 
identifies them as non-compliant. 


NOTE — If it is found that test reviews are not flagged at 
the moderation stage the review administrator can identify, 
advise and provide retraining to those who failed to flag the 
test reviews. 


6.9.4 Survey of Review Authors 


The organization should have a process in place for 
random sampling of a volume of reviews. 


NOTES 


1 The review administrator might need to contact a random 
sample of review authors to check their contact details and 
that their consumer experience occurred. 


2 The review author might be asked to verify their 
experience by interview with a moderator or by completing 


a survey. 
6.9.5 Removal of Non-Compliant Reviews 


The review administrator shall remove reviews 
identified as non-compliant. 


NOTE — Reviews for which the review authors (contacted 
during the survey for verification purposes) have not 
responded to the survey might be subject to monitoring that 
could result in their removal from the site. 


IS 19000 : 2022 


7 THE PUBLICATION PROCESS 


eAll content is approved and 
displayed (or rejected) in 
full, no editing 

eThe submission date is 
published along with rating 

eReview author controls 
what personal information 


AFTER 
PUBLICATION 


eReview administrator 
enables reviews to be 


flagged 
eSuppliers allowed to 
respond to reviews 
eReview authors allowed to 
remove their review 


is published 
eThe review is published 
without bias, in a timely 


manner 


AT 
PUBLICATION 


FIG. 3 PUBLICATION PROCESS 


NOTE — Overall rating can be included in the 
default display to show the average of all 
reviews with a specification of how 
administrators can display the average rating. 


7.1 Considerations for the Review Administrator 


The review administrator, in publishing any reviews 
(see Fig. 3), should consider the following: 


a) Accuracy of the review — In order to c) The review submission and consumer 
maintain accuracy of the review, the experience date — The review submission date 
following shall be ensured: as collected by the review administrator shall 
1) To ensure transparency and accuracy, appear next to each review. The consumer 

the review shall be displayed and experience date and purchase date, if collected 
published in full with no editing of for public display by the review administrator, 
content by the review administrator. should also appear in the review. 
2) If an extract from a review is used, it 
shall include a link to the full review. If a proof of the consumer experience date has 
3) If the review is translated to another been provided by the review author, the review 
language, it shall be marked. There should be marked accordingly. If so, the review 
shall be a link to the review in the administrator should allow the user to filter for 
original language. proof of the consumer experience date of the 
4) Where a review author submits a Teviews. 
review non-electronically, which is i . ; 
d) The profile information — The review 


then entered by a review administrator, 
content shall be marked as transcribed. 


b) The default display — The review 
administrator should ensure that the default 
display of reviews consists of a submission 
date, so there is a chronological display 
from the most recent to the oldest based on 
the submission date. If a review 
administrator does not default to a 
chronological display, they shall clearly 
indicate what filtering methods are being 
used for display and make chronological 
display an option for site users. 


11 


administrator should separate the profile 
information (which could be visible by the 
public) from other information provided by the 
review author on registration with the review 
administrator’s site. Any personal information 
should only be accessible to the review 
administrator and the review author concerned; 
and 


1) The review author should have control 
over dissemination of their personal 
information; and 


2) The default settings should protect the 
review author’s privacy. 


IS 19000 : 2022 


7.2 Overall Ratings 


The review administrator should combine the total 
ratings given by individual review authors to create 
one overall rating for each specific product or 
service allowing consumers to make easy 
comparisons between different products or services. 


The review administrator shall ensure the following: 


a) Calculate the overall rating on the basis of 
principles of mathematical objectivity; 


b) Clearly inform consumers what methods 
have been used to calculate the overall 
rating; 


c) The overall rating is continually updated as 
new reviews are published; 


d) The ‘user’ flagging mechanism does not 
impact the overall rating calculation until 
the review in question is removed; 


e) The overall rating for an evaluated product 
or service is accompanied by the total 
number of reviews; 


f) Reviews collected with rewards are not 
taken into account while calculating the 
overall rating of reviews that are without 
rewards; and 


g) Publish a separate overall rating for reviews 
collected by giving rewards. 


7.3 Time Limits for Ratings 


The overall rating for an evaluated product or 
service should only take into account ratings in 
reviews submitted within a specific time period 
defined by the review administrator. 


The review administrator should ensure the 
following for transparency of the calculation 
principles for aggregation of ratings: 


a) The review administrator should define the 
maximum time limit for taking into account 
ratings for the overall rating calculation if it 
is shorter than the expiry limit; and 


b) If the expiry limit differs from the time limits 
for taking into account ratings in the overall 
rating calculation, these should be clearly 
stated and be accessible in the terms and 
conditions. 


7.4 Ensuring Transparency of the Review 
Publication Process 


The review administrator shall make available on 
the review site in legible and accessible form, the 
review publication process (see Fig. 3) and any 
aggregation and weighting methods used. 


7.5 Conditions and Procedures 


In accordance with 7.2, the review administrator 


12 


shall display, within the terms and conditions, the 
general conditions and procedures for: 


a) Review publication (maximum moderation 
time limit before publication, review expiry 
limits, review rejection criteria, etc); 


b) Aggregation of ratings; and 
c) Weighting of ratings (for example higher 
weighting for more recent reviews). 
7.6 Publication Time 


Reviews, irrespective of whether they are positive or 
negative, should be published as quickly as 
reasonably possible to eliminate bias in the overall 
view of a product or service through late publication. 


The following should taken 
consideration: 


also be into 


a) Reviews should be published within 72 h in 
case of meeting the laid terms and 
conditions but no longer than one month 
after submitting; and 


b) Publication should not be suspended due to 
any communication with the supplier/seller 
of the product or service evaluated. 


7.7 Flagging a Review Containing Illicit or 
Inappropriate Content 


7.7.1 Access to Flagging 


The review administrator shall enable review 
authors, users, as well as the supplier/seller of the 
product or service evaluated, to flag the reviews 
with the following reasons: 


a) Containing illicit content, or inappropriate 
content (not relating to the objective 
characteristics of the service or product or 
service evaluated); 


b) Clearly demonstrating recognized intent to 
harm the reputation of the product or 
service evaluated with the purpose of 
obtaining a financial or other reward; and 


c) Contravening the site's terms and 
conditions. 


7.7.2 Manual Moderation of a Flagged Review 


The reviews shall be subject to further manual 
moderation in order to verify their compliance with 
the terms and conditions. During this further 
moderation period, flagging: 


a) May lead to the provisional removal of the 
publication of the review concerned; and 


b) Should provide a reasoned response to the 
person or organization flagging the review. 


The review administrator shall, in the case of a 
review flagged and recognized as illicit or 
inappropriate after moderation, remove the review. 


7.8 Right of Response by the Suppliers/Sellers 
Reviewed 


7.8.1 General 


The review administrator should allow 
suppliers/sellers the right to respond to consumer 
reviews published on the site for the purpose of: 


a) giving their version of events (with the 
opportunity to submit supporting 
documents); 


b) thanking the review author for 
contribution; and 


their 


c) indicating any changes made to the product 
or service since the review was written. 


The review administrator ensures a process is in 
place to check that the response author is an 
authorized representative of the supplier/seller. 


7.8.2 Moderating the Supplier’s Response 


The supplier’s/seller’s response should be 
moderated by the review administrator under the 
same processes and criteria as for consumer reviews, 
in accordance with the terms and conditions. 


7.8.3 Publishing the Supplier’s/Seller’s Response 


The supplier’s/seller’s response should be published 
under the review concerned without undue delay. 
The right of response should be granted free of 
charge to the supplier/seller for as long as the review 
is online. The responses should be flagged and 
removed in the same way as a review. 


7.9 Criteria for Removal of Reviews after 
Publication 


7.9.1 General 


The principles and rules for removal of reviews (see 
also 6.7), shall be clearly stated in the terms and 
conditions. 


7.9.2 Request by a Review Author 


The review administrator shall allow areview author 
the opportunity to remove their review from the site 
at their request. 


The review administrator should retain personal 
information for a period not exceeding the time 
necessary for the purposes for which it was collected 
in accordance with the terms and conditions. 


The review administrator should take into account 
the statutory obligations regarding removal linked to 
the maximum retention time for files containing 
personal data. 


13 


IS 19000 : 2022 


7.9.3 Time Limits Related to Removal 
7.9.3.1 General 


The review administrator shall specify the expiry 
limit at which time the review will be removed from 
publication. 


NOTE — This time limit can vary depending on categories 
of products and services. 


7.9.3.2 Expiry limits 


The expiry limits defined by the review 
administrator shall be clearly explained and 
accessible via the terms and conditions. 


7.9.3.3 Minimum period 


There is a minimum period of one year within which 
a review cannot be removed from publication on the 
initiative of the review administrator unless the 
removal is as per conditions contained in 6.7.2. 


The review author may withdraw their review 
during this period when products or services are 
being taken off the market during the year. 


7.9.4 Retention of Records 


The review administrator shall keep a record of all 
reviews and all documents attached to the reviews 
that have been removed from the site, as well as the 
reason for their removal, for a period of at least 180 
days from the removal date. 


7.10 Loss of the Right to Submit Reviews 


If illicit comments, contrary to the terms and 
conditions, are detected, the review administrator 
shall remove the review. Previous reviews from the 
review author should be examined to determine 
whether removal is warranted. The review author’s 
user account profile can also be removed from the 
site. 


7.11 Fraudulent Reviews 


If a review about a product or service is proven to be 
fraudulent, the review administrator shall take 
timely and appropriate action to: 


a) remove the review from the site; 


b) review internal anti-fraud mechanisms and 
make any necessary improvements; 


c) review internal moderation processes and 
make any necessary improvements; and 


d) prevent the review author from having future 
reviews published if the review administrator 
determines doing so is appropriate under the 
circumstances. 


IS 19000 : 2022 


NOTE — The review administrator can mark where 
the review was (keeping the user name and date) with 
a reason why the review was removed, for example 
suspicious review. 


7.12 Publication of Reviews from Another 
Review Site 


In the event that a review administrator publishes 
reviews from another review site that complies with 


14 


the requirements of its terms and conditions, it can 
clearly distinguish the reviews coming from the 
other review site. 


For all reviews, the review administrator follows all 
the requirements regarding the display of a review, 
including those for reviews coming from another 
review website. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


IS 19000 : 2022 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Business Services Sectional Committee, SSD 09 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Plantation Management, Bengaluru 
Business Correspondent Federation of India, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 
New Delhi 


Global Network for Inclusive and Sustainable 


Development, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Management Lucknow, Lucknow 


India Post Payment Bank, New Delhi 


Local Circles, Noida 


Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs, New Delhi 


Ministry of Commerce, New Delhi 


Paytm, Noida 


Reliance Retail Limited, New Delhi 


Service Export Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Uber India Systems Private Limited, Gurgaon 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (103, Shibani Villa, Canal Road, BJP 
Nagar, Bhubaneswar - 751014) 


In personal capacity (2514, Sector D-2, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi - 110070) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
PROF RAKESH MOHAN JOSHI (Chairperson) 
SHRI SUNIL KULKARNI 


SHRI ABHISHEK BHATTACHARYA 
MS LEENA JAISANI (Alternate) 


SHRI PRASHANT ATKAAN 


DR KIRTI BARDHAN 


SHRI EASWARAN VENKATESWARAN 
SHRI SIVAKUMAR NATARAJAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SACHIN TAPARIA 


DR JAI KUMAR BATRA 


SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA 


SHRI DHARMENDER JHAMBI 
SHRI AKSHAY JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI PAWAN KAUL 
SHRI AKSHAY KHARBANDA (Alternate) 


SHRI MAYANK SHARMA 


Ms ATHIRA R. MENON 


SHRI ANAND PANDEYA 


SHRI RAMAN KUMAR AGARWALLA 


SHRI S. K. JAIN 


SHRI S. K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST-F/SENIOR DIRECTOR 


AND HEAD (SERVICE SECTOR DEPARTMENT) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI PARUL GUPTA 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR, BIS 


15 


(Continued from second cover) 


h) The following additions have been done in clause ‘Overall Rating’ (see 7.2): 


1) The review administrator shall ensure that reviews collected with rewards does not impact the overall 
rating of reviews that were collected without rewards; and 

2) The review administrator shall publish a separate overall rating for reviews collected by giving 

rewards. 


j) Modifications are done under ‘Publication Time’ (see 7.6); and 
k) The retention time has been modified (see 7.9.4). 


This standard offers requirements to organizations that manage consumer review sites, detailing good practice 
throughout the process, from collection to moderation and to publication. It gives recommendations in order to 
increase consumer trust in online consumer reviews, increase the protection of suppliers/sellers from exploitation 
and mischief, and improve the purchase decisions of consumers and the quality of products and services provided 
by organizations. 


Organizations that choose to follow this standard can be considered to be demonstrating that they value their 
customers and are committed to providing reviews that consumers can trust. 


In this standard, ‘shall’ indicate a requirement, ‘should’ indicate a recommendation, ‘may’ indicate a permission 
and ‘can’ indicate a possibility or a capability. 
Information marked as ‘NOTE’ is for guidance in understanding or clarifying the associated requirement. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD 09 (20698). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


