( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS: 7440 ( Part III/Set 1 ) - 1976

Indian Standard
ESSENTIAL RATINGS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ANALOGUE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART Section I III OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER Output Having Two Inputs and One

Semiconductor
Chairman DR B. H. WADIA

Devices and Integrated Committee, LTDC

Circuits 10

Sectional

Representing Behram Wadia & Associates, Pune

Members Semiconductor Limited, Pune DR T. R. BHAT National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH National Physical Laboratory ( CSTR ), New Delhi DR G. C. JAIN DR Y. R. ANANTH PEASAD ( Alternate ) The Radio, Electronics & Television Manufacturers' SHRI S. KHITR Assocration ( RETMA ), Bombay SHRI S. Y. PHATAK ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI M. S. KRISZNAN KUMARI V. RATNAVATI ( Alternate ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute DR B. R, MARATHE ( CSIR ), Pilani DR W. S. KROELE ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( DepartSHRI G. B. MEEMAMSI ment of Communications ). New Delhi Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd,`Rhopal SHRI M. S. S. MURTHY SRRI Y. P. MADAN ( Alternate) Directorate of Technical Development Production SHRI R. C. PANDEY ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ) . . SHRI R. S. YADAV (Alternate ) Research, Designs & Standards Organization ( RailSHRI L. R. PARTHASARAT~I way Board ), Lucknow SHRI N. A. P. S. RAO ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SIIRI N. G. P~ADNIS Electronics Corporation of Indta Limited ( DepartSJ~I~ P. S. RAJU ment of Atomic Energy ), Hyderabad Ministry of Defence (DGI ) SHRT P. K. RAO Sum M. A. RANGANATH ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

@
INDIAN

copyrighl 1977

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set 1 ) - 1976 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members Representing SHRI B.S. GOVINDA RAO Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI S. V. RUSSEL ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Limited, Bangalore SHRI IS.R. SAVOOR Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI G. SONI SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) Director ( Electronics ) Secretary SHRI P. N. AMLEEAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI

Panel
Convener DR B. R. MARATHE Members

for Integrated

Circuits,

LTDC

10 : P6
Research Institute

Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ), Pilani Semiconductors Limited, Pune

DR T. R. BHAT SHRI B. S. RAJU ( Alternate ) SHRIR.R.IYER SHRIG. B.MEEMAMSI SHRIC.D.MTJRTHY SHRIV. A.PETHE SHRI B.S. GOVINDA
RAO SHRI S. V. RUSSEL ( Alternate )

Philips India Limited, Bombay Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( Department of Communications ), New Delhi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd ( Department of Atomic Energy ), Hyderabad Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Indian Telephone Industries Limited, Bangalore Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) Bharat Electronics Limited, Bangalore

SHRI P.K. RAO SHRIR.VENE'ATARAD~AN

2

IS t 7440 ( Part

IIf/Sec

1 ) - 1976

Indian Standard
ESSENTIAL RATINGS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ANALOGUE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART Section I III OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER Output Having Two Inputs and One

0.

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part III/Section 1) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 December 1976. after the draft finalized by the Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard (Part III/Section 1) deals with the essential ratings and characteristics and other information to be specified for operational amplifiers having two inputs and one output. This standard should be used in conjunction with IS : 7440 (Part I)-1974* and IS: 3700 ( Part I)1972-t covering format and general requirements. 0.3 The object of this standard is to specify clearly the properties of the device for the intended application and to facilitate comparison and It is anticipated that adoption of this choice between similar products. standard will ensure uniformity in the presentation of device data as well as certain minimum infor,mation on these essential ratings, characteristics and other parameters of the device covered. 0.3.1 While the lists of ratings and characteristics have their minimum, a manufacturer may always give additional at his discretion. been kept at information

0.X This Indian

0.4 This standard is based on the IEC Pub 147-IE ( 1973 ) Fifth supplement to Pub 147-l ( 1972 > `Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices and general principles of measuring methods, Part I and characteristics', issued by the International Essential ratings Electrotechnical Commission.
*Essential ratings and characteristics ofanalogue integrated circuits: format. TEsscntial ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: ( jirrt revision ). Part Part I General

1 mineral

3

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set 1 ) - 1976 0.5 This standard
is one of a series of Indian Standards on semiconductor devices and integrated circuits. A list of standards so far prepared in this series is given on page 12. 0.6 In reporting the results of measurements made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS: 2-1960".

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard

( Part III/Section 1 ) covers essential ratings and characteristics and other information to be specified in the case of operational amplifiers having two inputs and one output.

2. TERMINOLOGY, SYMBOLS 2.1 The provisions
3. ASSIGNED number

GRAPHICAL

SYMBOLS

AND
I)-1972f

LETTER
shall apply. The

prescribed

in 2 of IS: 3700 (Part

TYPE NUMBER
of the device.

3.1 A type number 4. DESCRIPTION 4.1 Information
shall be furnished:

shall be assigned for identification shall be prominently displayed on the device.

OF THE

INTEGRATED
as required circuit,

CIRCUIT
in IS : 3700 ( Part namely, analogue of I ) - 1972t integratfunction and

on the following

4 b)

The category ed circuit;

of the integrated

Function of the circuit-a performed by the analogue

general description integrated circuit; such as bipolar,

Technique c> thin film;

used in the manufacture, details,

MOS, and

d)
e)

Constructional Material,

such as monolithic,

and hybrid;

such as silicon.

5. OUTLINES

AND

CONNECTIONS The following informa-

5.1 Details of Outline and Encapsulation tion shall be given:

a) Reference to the outline covered in IS : 5000$ or drawing showing essential dimensions and tolerances, terminals and other information;

an outline location of

(Jht

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). iEssential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part I General
revision ).

$Dimensions of semiconductor devices. 4

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set of encapsulation; c) Marking - The drawing reproduced. 6. BLOCK DIAGRAM AND b) Method and of the case with the marking TERMINAL CONNECTIONS

1) - 1976

should

be

6.1 The block diagram and the identification of the connections should be shown. When the encapsulation has metallic parts, any connection The connections to them from external terminals should be indicated. with any associated external electrical elements should also be stated. 6.2 As an additional information, the complete electrical diagram may be reproduced, including significant parasitic elements, but not necessarily with indications of the values of the circuit components. 7. RATINGS (LIMITING VALUES) - The following ratings under conditions mentioned for voltages against each: and

7.1 Electrical Ratings currents shall be specified
Power a> Suppb

Voltage(s):

1) Maximum 2) Maximum

value(s)

and polarities; ripple on the supply voltage(s); signals from the

permissible

3) Maximum values of transients or spurious supplies for a specified time duration;

4) Maximum value of the permitted voltage between a common supply terminal and case or reference terminal, where appropriate; and 5) The sequence of the application of supply voltages, where appropriate.

b)

Power Supply Current(s):

1) Maximum 2) Maximum conditions

values,

where

appropriate;

and duration ( external fault

values for a specified ), where appropriate.
Voltage(s):

4

Input Terminal

1) Maximum terminal, 2) Maximum
Output Terminal

values, including value
Voltage(s)

with respect bias voltages; between input -Maximum including Maximum 5

to a and terminals.

common

reference

4 4

common
Input

reference

terminal,

values, with respect bias voltages. values, including

to a bias

Terminal

Current(s) -

currents.

IS : 7440 ( Part III/!&c 1) - 1976 f ) Output Terminal currents.
Current(s) -

Maximum

values,

including

bias

g) Impedance(s) - Maximum values for impedances of the supplies to which the circuit is connected, where appropriate. 7.2 Temperature be specified: Ratings The following temperature ratings shall of

a) Operating Temperatures - Minimum ambient or reference point operating b) Storage Temperatures
-

and maximum values temperature, and

Minimum

and maximum values.

7.3 Power Dissipation Ratings - Where appropriate, maximum value of power dissipation ratings over the operating temperature range for given mounting conditions, shall be stated. 7.4 Short-Circuit Conditions - Where appropriate, maximum duration of short-circuit between terminals or between terminals and ground shall be specified. 7.5 Mechanical Ratings - The mechanical ratings in accordance with 9.1 of IS : 3700 ( Part I ) - 1972*. 8. RECOMMENDED OPERATING CONDITIONS shall be specified

8.1 The recommended operating conditions within the specified operating temperature range, of the following shall be stated: a) Power Supplies - The polarities, the values and tolerances for voltages or currents and for impedances. Wherever possible, the voltages should be chosen from the list of preferred values given in IS : 7440 ( Part I ) - 19747. b) Nominal value(s) of the supply current(s). of the supplies, where

c) Maximum value( S) of the impedance(s) appropriate. d) Input Terminals:
1) Value(s)

of the voltage(s) and/or current(s) signal or of the signal generator; and the bias on the input

of the input where
I General

2) Value( s ) of appropriate.

terminals,
Part Part

*Essential ratings and characteristics ( finf revision ). tEssentia1 ratings and characteristics format.

of semiconductor ofanalogue integrated

devices: circuits:

I General

6

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set 1 ) - 1976 e) Output Terminals: 1) Nominal value( s ) of the voltage( s ) and/or current( the output signal and of the load impedance; and 2) Value(s) of the appropriate. f)
External Elements

s ) of where

bias

on

the

output

terminals,

element(

- Value( s ) and tolerance( s ) for the external s ) which shall be associated with the circuit.

8.1.1 The variation of the parameters specified in 8.1 versus temperature should also be stated over the specified temperature range, where appropriate. 9. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS

9.0 General 9.0.1 Electrical Characteristics - The electrical characteristics shall be stated at the reference point or ambient temperature of 25"C, the specific electrical conditions under which the device operates being also stated. 9.1 Power Consumption shall be stated. 9.2 Input stated: Characteristics -Typical The value following Minimum of the power characteristics and maximum consumption shall values be for

a) Inbut .4dmittanceslImmPedancessiecified values `of:. , 1f load impedance, 2) measuring frequency, and 3) input signal amplitude.

values b) Magnitude of In@t O$et Voltage and Current - Maximum for specified values of source resistance, if they affect the values of these characteristics. Input Bias Current - A maximum value for zero or specified voltage c) in common mode. value under specified d) ( Equivalent ) Input Drift - Maximum conditions. e) Common Mode Rejection specified values of:
Ratio -

Maximum

and

typical

values

at

supply voltage( s ), output voltage with zero input signal :,' and source impedances, frequency of the input signal, :;load amplitude of input signal in common
5) 6) adjustment

in common

mode,

of the gain control 7

mode, and ( if it exists ).

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set 9.3 Output

1 ) - 1976 -

Characteristics

The

following

characteristics and/or maximum

shall

be

stated: a) Output AdmittancelIm~edance - Minimum for specified values of the following:
2)

values

1) Supply Source

voltages, impedance, and amplitude. signal

3) Frequency, 4) Output

b) Output Voltage Swing - Typical and minimum values for specified supply voltage and load resistance and, where appropriate, for a specified value of total distortion.
c) Maximum Rate of Change Operation ) - Typical and, of Output Voltage (for Large Signal

where

appropriate,

minimum

value( s )

under

specified

conditions.

NOTE - The rise and/or fall time of the input pulse should be at least one order less compared to the slope time of the operational amplifier.

9.4 Forward
a)

Transfer

Characteristics

-

The

following value

characterfor specified

istics shall be stated:
Oten Loop

values

Gain - Maximum of the following:

and

minimum

1) Supply voltage (s ) , 2) Frequency, 3) Adjustment of the gain control 4) Load and source impedance(s), of the output 5) Amplitude measured.
b) Operation with

( if it exists ), and at which the gain is

signal

Sinusoidal

values for one or more stated:

Signals - Maximum and/or of the following characteristics

minimum shall be by

1) Frequency for which the open loop gain 3 dB from its low frequency value, and 2) Frequency
:;zteioise ( Where

has decreased

for the unity
Appropriate

gain.
) -

A

maximum

value

should

be

NOTE -The noise should be specified in terms of noise factor or in terms of equivalent ( rms ) input voltage and/or current, for specified values of supply voltage(s), source resistance, frequency and bandwidth,

8

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set 9.6 Interaction Between the Amplifier following shall be stated for appropriate steady state and transient conditions:

1 ) - 1976

and the Supply Lines - The specified conditions both for appearing the on the supply lines referred terminals to the ( where

a) b) cl

Maximum signal from the amplifier ( where appropriate ), The transfer characteristic input of the amplifier, and The impedance appropriate ). Times times shall be specified ta from

supplies

of the amplifier

at the supply

9.7 Response 9.7.1 The

response time: time: response

in terms of the following:

a) Delay b)

Slope time: time:

Is ( tr or tf )
trip ttot
only three of these four

c) Ripple
d) Total

NOTE-For the purpose of essential characteristics parameters have to be stated ( see Fig. 1 ).

9.7.2 The characteristic values of these parameters should be stated as typical and where appropriate as maximum value( s ) under the following specified conditions: a) Unity gain cdnfiguration; values with which and of unity gain of the loading b) Input and feedback resistance configuration is realized;

c) Phase compensating conditions ( configuration compensating networks, if any ); and d) Load conditions network ). (configuration and values

values the

NOTE- The rise time of the input pulse should ed to any of the response times of the operational

be at least one order amplifier.

less compar-

9.8 Overshoot
conditions

Factors

as the response

- Maximum times should

value for be stated.

the

same

specified

9.9 Effects of Variation of Supply Voltage(s) and Temperature on the Electrical Characteristics - Where appropriate the effects of variation of supply voltage and temperature on the essential characteristics specified in 9.1 to 9.8 shall be stated over the recommended operating conditions of temperature and supply voltages as specified in 8.

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set 1 ) - 1976

INPUT

A

0'

t OVERSHOOT

RELATIVE OUTPUT 100 % 90 %

10 %

0%
--I

yc t

-

E P Specified FIG.

percentage

of the final ( quiescent

) value.

1

EXAMPLE OF RESPONSE TIMES OF LINEAR AMPLIFIERS

10

IS: 7440 ( Part 10. MECHANICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND

III/Set

1 ) - 1976 DATA

OTHER

10.1 Mechanical characteristics and other data required mechanical design, assembly precautions, etc, should specified in 9.2 and 9.3 of IS : 3700 ( Part I )-1972*. 11. ENVIRONMENTAL 11.1 Where
stated

for the detailed be supplied as

DATA
environmental data shall be

appropriate, the relevant in accordance with IS : 6553-19717. DATA Under

12. RELIABILITY 13. CHARACTERISTIC

consideration.

CURVES curves of the

13.1 Graphical representation of the relevant characteristic integrated circuits as given in 9.9, shall be provided. 14. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

14.1 A curve of the typical variation of input and output impedances or admittances versus frequency, the other specified conditions remaining unchanged shall also be given. 14.2 Any external elements to be associated These should be referred to its terminals. appear in two distinct tables as follows: a) The first table should specific to a function, b) The second table serve as'correcting 14.2.1 a) b) c) Each table should with the integrated external elements circuit should are

include the associated elements which or which determine an operation; and the associated three elements columns:

should include elements. include

which

the following terminals

In the first column, identified;

the circuit

concerned

should be

the In the second column, concerned should be indicated

nature of the external elements ( for example: RC network ). together

the resulting effect of the circuit In the third column, with the external element should be indicated.

*Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part I General (first revision ). tEnvironmenta1 requirements for semiconductor devices and integrated circuits.

11

INDIAN ON INTEGRATED

STANDARDS

CIRCUITS

IS: 1885 ( Part VII/Set 1 )-1970 Electrotechnical devices, Section 1 General vocabulary: Part VII Semiconductor devices, Part VIII

1885 ( Part VII/Set 5 ) Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part VII Section 5 Integrated circuits and microelectronics 2032 ( Part VIII )-1965 Semiconductor Graphical devices symbols used in

Semiconductor

electrotechnology: of semiconductor

3700 ( Part I )-1972 General 3715 ( Part I )-1971 4411-1967 5000
NOTE

Essential ratings and characteristics (j&t revision ) Letter symbols for semiconductor of semiconductor devices of semiconductor devices

devices: Part I aspects

devices:

Part I General

Code for designation
-

Dimensions

Standards on dimensions of semiconductor devices are published leaf form ( individually priced ) and are supplied in an attractive binder separately ). So far, 31 standards have been published. 5001 ( Part I )-1969 Guide for preparation of drawings of semiconductor integrated circuits: Part I Semiconductor devices 5001 ( Part II )-I973 Guide for preparation of drawings of semiconductor integrated circuits: Part II Integrated circuits 6553-1971 7412-1964 Environmental requirements for semiconductor devices of analogue integrated Life testing of semiconductor

in loose ( priced

devices and devices and

devices and integrated circuits circuits:

7440 ( Part I )-1974 Essential ratings and characteristics Part I General format 7446 ( Part II )-1974 Essential ratings and circuits: Part II Telecommunication

characteristics of analogue integrated amplifiers audio, video and multichannel

7440 ( Part III/Set 1 )-1976 Essential ratings and characteristics of analogue integrated circuits: Part III Operational amplifier, Section 1 Having two inputs and one output 7440 ( Part III/Set 2 )-1977 Essential ratings and characteristics of analogue integrated circuts: Part III Operational amplifier, Section 2 Having two inputs and two outputs 7441 ( Part I )-1974 Essential ratings Part I General format and characteristics of digital integrated circuits:

