IS 15527:2004

w1'a7 m-@

@m-rdvimmTum� m'ii ?/R3Tw-1-m TN'T&i mfl w-Ra13i Hw'Fi3
Indian Standard

MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN OPEN CHANNELS -- MEASUREMENT IN MEANDERING RIVERS AND IN STREAMS WITH UNSTABLE BOUNDARIES

ICS 01.040.17; 17.120.20

0 BIS 2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

2004

Price Group 3

Hydrometry Sectional Committee, WRD 01

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydrometry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. Various methods of measurement of discharge in open channels are available, of which the velocity-area method is most extensively used. The principles of this method are published in IS 1192: 1981 `Velocity area methods for measurement of flow of water in open channels'. This Indian Standard deals specifically with measurements of flow in meandering rivers and in streams with unstable boundaries and elaborates some of the provisions in IS 1192. [n the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived form ISO/TR 9210: 1992 `Measurement of liquid flow in open channels --Measurement in meandering rivers and in streams with unstable boundaries'. Composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 15527:2004

Indian Standard

MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN OPEN CHANNELS -- MEASUREMENT IN MEANDERING RIVERS AND IN STREAMS WITH UNSTABLE BOUNDARIES
1 SCOPE

This standard provides guidelines for discharge measurements in meandering rivers, in streams with unstable boundaries and from bridges, following the provisions of IS 1192. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreement based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: 1SNo.
1191:2003 Title

separated by shoals, with little or no erosion of the main banks. The channel as a whole does not meander, although local meandering in minor channels generally occurs. 3.5 Transition; Crossover -- Stretch of channel between adjacent meander loops where the main flow crosses over from one side of the channel to the other. It is characterized by a reduction in depth of flow. 3.6 Transverse Flow -- Flow perpendicular to the main direction of flow which is parallel to the axis of the channel. Sometimes referred to as secondary flow, to differentiate it from the main or primary flow. Transverse flow occurs in all channels, both straight and curved in plan, although it is more evident in curved channels, causing super-elevation of the water surface on the outside of a bend. 3.7 Node; Nodal Point -- Point in the plan of a sinuous channel at which the amplitude of the sinuous path is minimum. It is located in the transition, or crossover, in the channel. In a dynamically stable channel which meanders, the node migrates downstream with the meander loops, but may be prevented from migrating by natural or artificial obstruction, thus creating a static stretch of river downstream. 3.8 Specific Discharge -- This term has two meanings depending on local usage. a) Discharge per unit area of catchment otlen used to compare the magnitude of flow in different rivers (maximum, mean or minimum). Discharge corresponding to a specific stage or gauge height. Often used to illustrate changes in the conveyance capacity of a channel caused by changes in sediment load and bed level during a particular period (flood, annual flow, flow between years, etc). Sometimes used to detect aggrading or degrading channels over a period of years.

1192:1981

Hydrometric determinations -- Vocabulary and symbols Velocity-area methods for measurement of flow of water in open channels @rst revision)

3 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 1S 1I91 and the following shall apply. 3.1 incised River -- River which has cut its channel through part of the valley floor or which has formed its channel by erosion. The sediment in transit in an incised river is generally dissimilar to the boundary material through which the channel is carved out. 3.2 Alluvial River -- River which flows through alluvium formed from its own deposits. The sediment, which it carries, except for the wash load, is similar to that in its bed.
3.3 Meandering River -- Channel which follows a sinuous path owing to natural physical causes not imposed by external constraints. The conditions are characterized by curved flow and alternating shoals and bank erosion. 3.4 Braided River -- River characterized by an extremely wide and shallow channel in which flow passes through a number of small interlaced channels,

b)

4 SITE SELECTION IN STABLE AND STRAIGHT REACHES OF MEANDERING RIVERS As far as possible the channel at the measuring site shall be straight and of uniform cross-section and slope,

IS 15527:2004 in order to avoid an abnormal velocity distribution. Further the accuracy of the determination of discharge by the velocity-area method is increased, if the velocities at all points are parallel to one another and at right angles to the meandering cross-section. At a measuring site, even if properly located to satisfy the requirement during flood season, the flow direction can change appreciably during lean season. As far as possible, the basic stream gauging section should not be changed. However, when the flow directions during flood and lean seasons are very different, it is permissible to suitably adjust the orientation of gauging section during lean season, taking into account the requirements of IS 1192. 5 SITE SELECTION IN RIVERS WITH RELATIVELY STABLE MEANDERS In alluvial rivers, the course over long reaches is sometimes comprised of one meander followed by another. Finding a sufficiently long straight reach then becomes difficult. Under these conditions the gauging site shall be located either in the reach of two bends or at the transition between successive bends. In a bend, transverse flow develops, and the resultant direction and velocity of flow are composed of the net effect of normal and transverse flow. The distribution of velocities and depths across the section also becomes extremely heterogeneous. On the other hand, in the transition between successive meanders, the river course is relatively straight over a short reach. The cross-section is more uniform and better defined within the bend. A transition, therefore, provides better site conditions for a gauging station. When a straight reach over a sufficiently long distance is not avai[able, the best alternative is, therefore, to se iect a site in a transition. The important factors that affect the accuracy of the discharge measurement in meandering rivers are the scouring and silting and the change in flow direction at the discharge measuring section. In regard to the former, the measuring time should be shortened as far as possible by operating more than one crew simultaneously. In regard to the latter, the velocity measured at each point shall be corrected for angle using a direction-measuring current meter. 6 SITE SELECTION IN RIVERS WITH UNSTABLE
MEANDERS

curvature is large, continued erosion and filling result in formation of a hairpin bend, ultimately forming a cut-off across the bottleneck. In this process, the meander changes its shape. Thus, depending on the bend curvature, bank recession and changes in meander position andlor shape occur, rendering the river course unstable. Requirements of site stability cannot be satisfied in such rivers. Local strata of stiff clay or rock are sometimes encountered along the meandering course of alluvial rivers. This natural constraint obstructs free passage of the meandering river. The meanders accumulate upstream of such constraints. On the downstream side after some distance, the river course again forms meanders. However, within and immediately downstream of the constraint, the river profile does not change appreciably. These locations are termed nodal points and, in view of the stability of the river at these points, they are better suited for locating gauging sites on rivers which have an otherwise unstable course. Even if natural constraints do not exist, sometimes artificial constraints in the form of a bridge with a constricted waterway may exist. The effect of such an artificial constraint is to produce nodal points. The river reach immediately downstream of such structures, where the river course remains locally stable, can therefore be utilized for locating gauging sites. 7 DISCHARGE MEASUREMENT RIVERS IN BRAIDED

In alluvial rivers, meanders are often unstable. If the bend curvature is small, the meander tends to progress downstream by continued erosion along the concave bank and filling along the convex bank. In this process, the river course changes its position. If the bend 2

One difflcuky experienced in discharge measurement in braided rivers with sandy beds carrying sustained heavy floods is the instability of the bed forms. Different bed forms, such as ripples, mega-ripples, dunes and sand waves, can occur simultaneously in different portions of the cross-section. Their size can be relatively large (for example, a wave height up to 0.3 m, 1.5 m, 7.6 m and 15.2 m, with corresponding wave lengths up to 1.5 m, 152 m, 488 m and 914 m respectively). These bed forms can also exhibit a significant rate of downstream movement (as much as 3 m/day, 122 m/day, 167 m/day, 204 m/day respectively have been observed). The bed form controls bed rugosity, and hence different parts of a cross-section can have different rugosities and depths merely due to different bed forms. Movement of bed forms in single day causes continual variation in local rugosity coefficients and also in depths. All these factors can bring about appreciable variation in water level, even with the same discharge. Under these conditions, in addition to the mean stage-discharge curve, curves at extremes of depth must be established, For instance, upper levels and freeboards of engineering structures have to be designed with respect

IS 15527:2004

to upper stage curves, whereas foundation levels have to be designed with respect to the depth of flow according to the lower stage envelope curves. Another cause of instability in braided rivers is the downstream movement of islands separating channels. These islands are eroded at their upstream end and built up at their downstream end, resulting in migration of the islands. The rate of such movement is, however, slow and the accuracy of daily observation of discharge at the gauging site, therefore, may not be affected. Segmentation, however, needs to be suitably changed when daily and periodic observations are made during the flood season. When several major channels are required to be gauged along the measuring line, it may become necessary to employ two or more survey boats and crews to work simultaneously in order to complete one discharge measurement at a single time. Whenever possible, it is preferable to locate the gauging site where the river is narrow and has fewer active channels due to natural or artificial constraints. Braided rivers in sub-mountainous regions often experience flash floods wherein the stage changes rapidly. Discharge measurements, therefore, shall be made as quickly as possible to keep the change in stage to a minimum. This can be achieved by using a singlepoint method for measurement of velocity instead of the two or multiple-point method; by re-reduction, the resulting error shall be less than the error caused by a rapid change in stage during the period of a single discharge measurement. As an illustration, atypical rapid discharge measurement can be made using the following procedure: a) Use the 0.6 depth method instead of the 0.2 to 0.8 depth or multi-point method; b) Use the 0.2 depth or a subsurface method, if the 0.6 method creates a vertical angle requiring time-consuming correction or if the vertical angle increases because of drift, thus increasing the sounding time; c) Reduce time of velocity observation to about 20 to 30 s; d) Reduce the number of observation verticals to about 15 to 18.

take fresh cross-sections and update rating curves after every major flood event.
8 DISCHARGE BRIDGE MEASUREMENT FROM A

In wide flood plains, sometimes the spill is so substantial that the overbank area is subjected to extensive inundation in the case of meandering and braided rivers. On the overbank area, numerous obstructions to flow can exist, such as buildings, crops, trees, bushes and weeds. Negotiating such obstructions during discharge measurement using a boat is difficult. This difficulty is not encountered if discharge measurements are made from a bridge. The discharge of the river channel and spills may be spread over an extensive area, but it converges and passes through the relatively narrow and well-defined bridge structure. Discharge measurements from a bridge then are more practical. In making depth and velocity observations from a bridge, the choice of the upstream or downstream side of the bridge for the observation cross-section should be guided by comparative merit. For instance, when the upstream side is chosen, the hydraulic conditions are normally found to be superior and approaching floats can be seen and more easily avoided. On the other hand, if the measurement is made from the downstream side, the vertical angles are more easily observed, the flow is straighter due to the guiding effect of the bridge and damage to the current-meter due to possible collision with piers is avoided. The physical conditions at the bridge, such as location of walkways, traffic hazards and accumulation of debris against the piers, also need to be considered. When making observation from a bridge, it must be noted that the discharge distribution along the measurement line is affected by the obstruction caused by the bridge piers. The effect is local and is restricted to a limited width on either side of the piers. Within this width, measurement of velocity and depth is difficult and risky, with increased uncertainty. The greater the number of piers, the greater the uncertainty in the measurement of the total discharge. In such cases, estimation of discharge flowing through the crosssectional width adjoining the piers is preferred to direct measurement. The estimation is made by first determining the discharge intensity `qm' over the vertical at the end of the affected zone on either side of each of the piers. Next, it is assumed that, in the absence of the pier, this discharge intensity would have been operative over the entire width `b,,,'between the vertical at the end of the affected zone and the center line of the pier. The discharge flowing through the affected zone adjoining each pier is then estimated as qmbln (see Fig. 1). 3

This procedure reduces the time for discharge measurement from 15 to 20 min. Braided rivers in sub-mountainous regions are often subje~ to sedimentation, with a tendency to shifting channels. This instability affects not only the scheme of segmentation but also the rating curve. Specific gauge-discharge curves are useful in such cases to keep track of the sedimentation rate. It may be advisable to

IS 15527:2004

7m

= OISCHARGE

[MEAN)
bm= FLOW

INTENSITY ovER THE

VERTICAL AT PO INT'A' WIDTH OF AFFECTED ZONE ON EACH SIOE OF P(ER.

w=
s=
o / -

WIDTH

OF

PIER.

CLEAR WIDTH OF PASSAGE FOR FLOW BETWEEN TWO PIERS.

l/,
d
I

w

/
/

/ /

I
I

/

/ /

I

POINT `A' I u 0"12!4s 0"76%s \ WIDTH FOR VELOCITY MEASUREMENT

I ;1 ( BRIDGE ABUTMENT

o"121cs

q

BRIDGE ~ ym I Y ~ \ . bm +

/\

A8UTMENT

~DiSCHARGE ASSUMED WIDTH TO
bm

INTENSITY
bm

~M
=0.12 sS+~

I
OVEfi

BE CONSTANT

FIG.

1 WIDTHOFAFFECTED ZONEFOR FLOWMEASUREMENT DUETOBRIDGE PIERS

IS 15527:2004

ANNEX A (Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Hydrometry Sectional Committee, WRD 01
Representative(s) Ss+mM. K. SHARMA (Chairman)
SHIUS. C. JAIN Srms K. S. SUBRAMANSAM (Alternate)

Organization

CentralWaterCommission, NewDelhi
AIMILPrivateLtd, New Delhi Bhakra Beas Management Board, Punjab Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune Central Water Commission, New Delhi Consulting Engineering Services (India) Private Ltd, New Delhi Electronic Equipments, Pune Fluid Control Research Institute, Palghat (Kerala) Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore Indian Institute of Technology (Department of Civil Engineering), Roorkee Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad Irrigation Department, Government of Kamatak% Bangalore Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Ministry of Railways (RDSO), Lucknow National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad

(WR) DUWCTOR SENIOR DESIGN ENGUWER (WR) (Alternate)
SHSU A. R. CHAVAN Smu B. S. Kuuc.uuw (Alternate) SHRIS. K. SENGUPTA DIRECTOR (RD) (Alternate) Smu T. S. BATHSIA (Ahernate) Wru S. S. NARANG

Smu V. R. MUNAGEKAR
Smo S. R. MUNAGSKAR (Alternde) DR NAGARAI SITARAM Smtr JACOBCHANDAPUU(Alterna~e) DR K. SRSDHARAN DR G. L. ASAWA DUWTOR(ERS)

(ERS) DIRSCTOR
CSSSEF ENGSNESR (IPRI) RrzsizutcHOsmcsnt(IPRI) (Ahernde) DIRECTOR (IRI) Cm ENGSNSER (GANGA) (Alternate) Jonw DULKTOR (STANDARDS) (Ahernate) DEPUSYDIRECTOR (STANDARDS)

Srmr SHANKRACHARYA (Alternate I) ,%smFWsv BABDOTA (Alternate II) Smu Arm BHATNAGAR
DIRECTOR (Alternate) DR P. K. MOHAFATRA IG3EARCH GFFICER DIRECTOR (Alternate) DR S. V. CFUTALE

National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi In personaI capacity (425/14 T. V. Nagar, Pune 411037, Mrharashtra) BIS Dlrcctorate General

Director and Head (WRD) [Representing Director-General (Ex-@7cio)]

.Member-Secreta~ Smu R. S. JUNFJA Dhector (WRD), BIS

5

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. WRD 01 (354).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I,T. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 `{ Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 23233841 { 23378499,23378561 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW, NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRWANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. Printed at Rabhat Offset fiess. New Delhi:2

