**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10862 (1984) : Classification and Basic Requirements of 
Pilot Craft [TED 18: Inland, Harbour Crafts and Fishing 
Vessels] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629 124 76 , S . 10 862 - 1984 




, , , ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

CLASSIFICATION AND BASIC 
REQUIREMENTS OF PILOT CRAFT 



1. Scope 

1.1 Classification and requirements for self-propelled water craft employed in the pilot servicing of 
merchant ships in closed waters and estuaries. 

1-2 The applicability of the requirements of this standard to pilot craft navigating under a navy flag 
shall be determined by the competent authorities. 

1.3 The water craft employed mainly in pilotage of merchant ships by leading may be relieved of 
adhering to these requirements completely or partially at the discretion of the competent authorities. 

2. Definitions 

2.1 Pilot Launches —Mechanically driven water craft the sea-worthiness and equipment of which 
enable them to transfer pilots directly from board to board within a 20 nautical mile zone, 

2.2 Pilot Boats — Mechanically driven water craft which may be part of the equipment of a pilot ship. 
They serve to transfer a pilot for distance up to 5 nautical miles from the pilot ship or from the shore. 

3. Classification 

3.1 On the basis of the displacement when fully loaded with water, fuel and oil and with a full 
complement of crew and pilots, all water craft intended for the delivery of pilots are divided into two 
types as follows: 

Type Name of Craft Displacement D in tones 

1 Pilot boats D < 10 

2 Pilot launches 10 < D < 1C0 

3.2 Depending upon the region of operation, the pilot crafts ere divided into two groups as follows: 

a) Non-tidal region, and 

b) Tidal region. 

4. General Requirements 

4.1 AM pilot crafts shall have -a speed sufficient for carrying out efficiently all operations connected with 
the pilotage of merchant ships in their service area. 

4.2 The full rolling cycle for launches shall be not less than 6 sec. Those craft whose intrinsic 
characteristics do not ensure this parameter shall be fitted with devices ( damping devices, stabilizers, 
bilge, keels, etc ) to reduce the amount of roll. 

4.3 The stabilitiy of pilot cralt of all types shall comply with the requirements of the competent 
authorities. 

4.4 Pilot craft of all types shall be capable of transferring and disembarking a pilot safely in conditions 
of wave height up to 10 m. 

5. Design, Equipment and Supply 

5.1 In addition to the radio communication facilities specified by the competent authorities to ensure 
the safety of navigation, all pilot craft shall be fitted with fixed or portable very high frequency radio 
sets ensuring communication with the ships being served and pilot stations. 



Adopted 31 March 1984 



© August 1984, ISI 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10862- 1984 

5.2 The design of mechanized pilot hoists which may be installed in launches shall ensure their 
efficient and safe usage in conditions of vibration, rolling and pitching and hydro-meteorological factors 
acceptable for the operation of the launch in this area. 

The hoist shall be located as near the mid-section as possible, where the pitch amplitude is a 
minimum, and in such a manner that the platform ( cabin ) with the pilot is continuously in the field of 
vision of the navigator on watch. 

5.3 To provide a view of the side of the ship served, from the house of the pitch launch or the boat 
when transferring a pilot, the house deck-head shall be fitted with scuttles of an appropriate design. 

5.4 To transmit commands and signals, launches shall be fitted with loudspeakers providing sufficient 
audibility forward, aft and along the sides. 

5.5 The composition of life-saving appliances shall; be determined on the assumption that all the pilots 
simultaneously aboard the lunch are members of tNe crew. 

5.6 Pilot launches shall have a high manoeuvrability. For this purpose, it is recommended that they be 
equipped with two-shaft propulsion plants with variable pitch propellers, diesel-electric plants capable 
of dead slow speed, steering nozzles or activated rudder propellers. 

5.7 To permit mooring to high freeboard ships, launches and boats shall be fitted with fairleads of such 
a design as to permit deflection of the mooring rope in a direction close to vertical. The places of 
installation of fairleads shall be selected so that the tension of the mooring rope does not create a 
heeling moment dangerous for stability. 

5.8 To ensure the pilot's safety during transfer and disembarkation the foredeck of launches shall be as 
free from equipment as possible and shall have a non-skid coating. 

The hand-rail fitted on the deck of the boat at the area of disembarkation of a pilot shall be as 
close to the centre-plane as possible. When fitted along the sides, the hand-rail shall be kept 
sufficiently away from the sides to ensure the safety of the pilot when the boat is alist and be within 
the extended reach of the pilot whilst he still holds the boarding ladder with his other hand. 

The foredeck area of the launch and the boat shall be sufficient for disembarkation of the pilot 
from an accommodation ladder or from the hoist platform. 

5.9 For safe movement of pilot along the side of the launch a passage not less than 600 mm in case, 
there is a deck house, shall be provided on deck ( on both sides ) with a hand-rail on the deck house' 
wall. 

5.10 The equipment of spaces for the crew and pilots shall comply with the requirements of/the 
competent authorities for the equipment of ships continuously operating in the relevant climatic zone. 

5.11 All craft shall be fitted with flexible (inflatable) or other fenders of an approved type and 
side fenders which efficiently cushion the blows against the hull of the merchant ship. 

5.12 The place from which the transfer of the pilot is carried out shall be illuminated in sucf^ a manner 
that the light does not dazzle the pilot, the helmsman of the ship receiving the pilot or the members of 
the crew operating the hoisting/lowering device. 

Note — This item is optional for boats. 

5.13 General lights and special lights for navigation shall be as prescribed by the competent authority. 
In addition to these the pilot craft shall carry unified signal lights ( shapes by day ) indicating 'Make 
lee side, watch us'. In all cases, irrespective of the number of pilots aboard, the craft shall darry by 
day the flag 'H' of the International Signals Code meaning : 'I have a pilot on board'. 

5.14 All pilot craft which are periodically or continuously employed in pilotage by leading shall carry the 
lights indicated in 5.13 and additional (special ) lights according to the unified scheme so that their 
light is seen within the same sector as that of the stern light. a 

i 

6* Designation — The hull and deck house of all pilot craft shall have special painting distinguishing 
them from other types of ship, and the unified inscriptions pattern/specified in IS : 10858-1984 
'Identification painting and inscription code for pilot craft. 



Printed »t Arcee Press, New Delhi. India 



