( Reaffirmed 1998 )

Indian Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND OBSERVATION OF INSTRUMENTS FOR PORE PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS IN EARTH DAMS AND ROCKFILL DAMS - ELECTRICAL PORE PRESSURE CELLS VIBRATORY WIRE TYPE

UDC

627'824'2/`3

: 531'787'2 : 624'131'387

0 BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARO

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

November 1990

Price Group 4

Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation

Sectional Committee, RVD 16

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 29 March 1990, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the River valley Division Council. The soil mass is composed of solid soil particles and voids filled with water and air. The constructed embankment will always contain a certain volume of air and water within the voids. The air is compressible while water is highly incompressible. Hence when embankment settles due to compaction by rolling, or due to self weight, the void space contract. This causes pressure in the pore fluid comprising air and water. Thus the intergranular pressure is reduced due to opposing pore pressure and therefore the shear strength depends upon intergranular pressure. Pore pressure is also caused due to the seepage of water through an embankment. The initial energy head of percolating water at entrance into the dam isgreater than the-energy heat at any point in the interior. The difference represents the loss of energy due to friction forces of percolation. The potential of the water decreases as it seeps through the dam. Pore pressure due to percolation is determined by subtracting the corresponding elevation from the flow potential at that point being considered. Thus pressure at any point in a dam at any time is the function of compaction, consolidation and seepage. Procedures for testing the pore pressure cells both in the laboratory and in the field before installation are under formulation. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 12949 : 1990

Indian Standard CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION,

MAINTENANCE AND OBSERVATION OF 3NSTRUMENTS FOR PORE PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS IN EARTH DAMS AND ROCKFILL DAMS - ELECTRICAL PORE PRESSURE CELLS VIBRATORY WIRE TYPE
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the details of installation, observation and maintenance of electrical pore pressure cells ( vibrating wire type > installed in earth and rockfill dams for measuring the pore pressures in the embankment land the foundation. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian adjunct to this standard: IS No. 10034 : 1982 Standard is a necessary Title Code of practice for selection, installation and splicing, providing protection to the open ends of cables used for connecting resistance type measuring devices in concrete and masonry dams. change of the tension in the wire. In practice, a gauge-wire is stretched between two points on a structural member or transducer element used to sense the physical quantities that are to be determined 3.1.1.1 When the gauge-wire is caused to oscillate, it will vibrate at its resonate or natural frequency of vibration which is dependent on the tension in the wire. If strains are induced in the element on which the gauge is mounted, the distance between the support posts -will change. Accordingly, the tension in the gauge-wire and its natural frequency of vibration wihalso be changed. Thus the change in frequency of the gauge wire is a measure of the strain in the sensing element of the transducer. 3.1.1.2 The main components of such an instrument are, porous filter element diaphragm, vibrating wire, electro-magnet and connecting cable. The pretensioned vibrating wire is such connected to the body of the cell and the ~diaphragm, that the tension of the wire changes due to the deflection of the diaphragm .only. Due to pore water pressure, the diaphragm is deflected and the natural frequency of the measuring wire is altered. The mechanical oscillation of the wire is converted to electrical frequency signal by an electro-magnet and this electrical frequency is transmitted through the cable to the receiver unit and correlated to the pore pressure. The frequency of the wire is independent of variations in voltages, currents and resistance. There are several types of electrical piezometers and the main difference lies in the transducer package, the porous element and the arrangement of the body of the piezometer. 3.1.1.3 The pore pressure cell should be structurally isolated from the surrounding concrete/earth so that no apparent pore pressure are indicated due to straining of the body of the instrument. I

3 INSTALLATION EQUIPMENT 3.1 Electrical Pore Pressure Cells The electrical pore pressure cell has a stainless steel diaphragm behind a porous filter element. The diaphragm is deflected by the pore water pressure against one face; the deflection being proportional to the applied pressure. The deflection of the diaphragm is measured by means of various electrical transducers, most common among them being unbounded resistance strain gauge and vibrating wire strain gauge. Electrical piezometers have very small time lags and are very sensitive. Hence these are especially suited in the circumstances when the fluctuations in pore pressures are very quick or in case of dynamic observations. 3.1.1 Vibration Wire Type Pore Pressure Cells The basic principle of the vibrating-wire strain gauge is that the change in natural frequency of vibration of a stretched wire depends qn the

Is 12919 : 1990 cable shall be of sufficient length to reach the permanent readout station. In case of necessity The electrical type pore pressure cells shall be of joining the cables, proper splicing kit shall be supplied with conductors of required length used. The cables should be looped where they ( see 3.2.1 ) attached to the instrument as agreed cross an interface and at joints, to reduce the by the supplier and the purchaser. The cable type strain in cables and joints due to differential depends on the different makes of the instruments movement. When there are sufficient pore the and for the details and specifications, pressure cells to be installed which can .justify use catalogue of the manufacturer may be referred to. of an instrument house, the cables have to be In most installations the cable is recommended to lead through an entry duct connected to a suitable be further protected. terminal unit. If many pore pressure cells are When used in adverse environments, cables grouped together closely and the terminal unit armoured with steel wires, having two layers of is relatively far, then suitable junction boxes shall be used for connecting individual cables from the insulation with petroleum jelly filling to prevent transducers to a multicore cables, which in turn water seepage may be used. It is also recomconnected to the terminal unit. mended that the use of a junction box to connect several individual cables terminating in the 3.3 Installation of Pore Pressure Cells in the junction box and a steel armoured, jelly filled Drill Holes multi-core cable of 10,20,40 conductors capability 3.3.1 Pore pressure cells are installed in bore may be used to connect these to a termination holes drilled, below the foundations or through switch box installed in the terminal house. already completed embankments. The minimum 3.2.1 Cable Connections diameter of bore holes shall be 100 mm for cell diameter up to 35 mm and 150 mm for cell The connection between the pore pressure cell and diameter above 35 mm and up to 45 mm separate the cable of required length to connect to the bore holes shall be drilled for each cell. Casing of readout unit is generally done in the factory these wholes is usually required to maintain the itself and in exceptional cases when the cable is holes during installation, depending on local too short or has been damaged, the cable connecconditions and the type of equipment available. tions are done at site. In such a case care should The casing should be removed after the pore be taken to get pressure-tight connections using pressure cell is placed in position. sealing compound. The splicing shall be done in accordance with IS 10334 : 1982. 3.3.1.1 Procedure for installation of pore pressure cells in drill holes. 3.2.2 Insulation Tests a) Remove the high air entry filter from the After completion of the cable connections, test the cell and boil it in clear water for five pore pressure cell for insulation by means of an minutes to saturate the filter with water. ohmmeter, the value shall not be less than 500 megaohms at 12 V. There must -be no electrical b) Reassemble the pore pressure cell under connection between each of the conductors cool water by assembling the same in a and the metal braiding or the body of the bucket of clean water. The bucket should pore pressure cell. After this the pore pressure be large enough to allow pore pressure cell cell shall be checked for proper functioning. to be reassembled and the. placement of These tests should be performed immediately the cell inside the cloth bag in submerged after the sealing resin has been applied. condition.
3.2 Cable

3.2.3 Identjfication of Cable Ends After connecting the cable to the pore pressure cell the free end of the cable should be marked or identified with permanent marks by use of a minimum of 3 tags at a maximum spacing of 10 m over the entire exposed length of cable with non-corrosive metal tags engraved or embossed with appropriate transducer numbers. Permanent identification is necessary to prevent errors in identifying the pore pressure cells. 3.2.4 Cable Termination Arrangement The number of cable joints should be minimised, using continuous lengths wherever possible. The
3

c) Place a cloth bag in the bucket of water mentioned above-and place some clean sand in the bag, place the pore pressure cell in the bag and pack the sand above it as shown to get the assembly as indicated in Fig. 1.

d) Tie the top of the bag by a suitable string

and place the same into the bronze metal screen keeping the assembly submerged in water. proper functioning of the cell.

4 Take zero reading at this time to check f 1 Clean the drill hole and fill up the bottom
300 mm of hole with clean saturated sand.

IS 12949 :1990 If the hole has been provided with the casing, fill up the sand up to required depth and remove the casing from the bottom 300 mm prior to backfill operation. g) Lower the cell assembly into the hole up to the top of the sand. Test the pore pressure cell whether it is working satisfactorily, if yes, continue with the steps below. h) Pour additional clean saturated sand to fill the hole up to 300 mm above the top of the cloth bag. i) Follow the backfilling as shown in Fig. 2. 3.3.2 Installation
Embankment of Pore Pressure Cell in

trenches which carry the connecting cable from all the cells. The main trenches are offset 300 to 600 mm from the location of cells. Main trenches are usually 450 to 600 mm wide and the depth should provide for a minimum Of 100 mm of selected material over the connecting cables and a 300 mm thick protective cushion of selected fine material in the bottom of the trenches, below the connecting cables. A minimum of 450 mm of embankment material should then be placed to complete the backfill to existing embankment level. 3.3.2.1 Procedure for installation of pore pressure cells in embankment: a) Remove the high air entry filter from the cell and boil it in water for five minutes to saturate the filter with water.
PIEZOMETER CABLE

Pore pressure cells are placed in embankment in shallow trenches laid at right angles to the main

TIE STRING

. . . .
. . ,

: . ;r.. . .. .. . .I . -. _.

I*:*f.::.j

BRONZE KETAL SCREEN

:

-I .

____ *.. . Y:CLkAN.. 8:SATuRA~_: ' -.SMlD. _, B-0.. l . ,. .. . .' . . . -_ Y ..a. *:*" __.*

w

:[

- TIE WIRE

IFIG. 1

zq

All dimensions

in millimetres.

PORE PRESSURE CELL ASSEMBLY FORINSTALLATION IN ~)RX.LL~.OLES
3

IS12949:1990 PXEZCMETER CA%LES 12 mm APMIT

HOLE FOR FOUNDATION TYPE TIP

OFFSET TRENCH

OFFSET TRENCH

-_--

BENTONITE PLUG OF

SITE

GONDITION DEMAND) CELL ASSEMBLY

RE PRESSURE

H
EAN SATURATED SAND :

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 2

TYPICALINSTALLATION OF POREPRESSURE CELL IN DRILL HOLES

b) Reassemble the pore
bucket of conditions.

cool water

pressure cell in a under submerged

e> Place ICI0 mm thick layer of selected fine . material of the same type as that of the surrounding embankment and compact. f > Place the pore pressure cell at its designed location as shown in Fig. 3. g) Place selected fine embankment material up to a thickness of 300 mm over the pore pressure cell taking care so as to avoid 4

cl Take zero reading at this time to check
proper functioning of the cell.

d) Carry

the cell to its desired location submerged condition.

in

IS 12949 : 1990

large sized ~particles which can damage the pore pressure cell or the cable. h) Test the pore pressure cell for satisfactory operation. j) Backfill the `rest of the trench with typical fill material and compact the same by manual tamping. 3.3.3 Laying of Cables The cable shall be laid in main trenches, where bed is cleared of sharp edge objects and replaced with selected material, in slight wave lines. The trench shall then be filled with selected fine material up to a depth of 300 mm and hand compacted. The main cable trenches should be provided with a cross cut-off trench filled with 1 : 3 soil bentonite mixture to prevent formation of a possible seepage path in the body of the earth/rockfill dam. Heavy machinery shall not be allowed to pass within 2 000 mm of the instrument and before 2 000 mm covering height over the instrument. At locations where the cable passes in transition zones of the embankment, differential settlement of fill materials may shear the cable, adequate provision shall be made by providing extra loose length of cable in that portion. While routing of cables through rockfill, the main trenches carrying cables shall be filled with

coarse to fine sand completely passing 5 mm seive. The relative spacing between individual layers of cables as shown in Fig. 4 may be maintained. The graded material surrounding the main trench shall be provided with properly graded layers to prevent migration of sand filling in the main trench. The cables shall be protected against prolonged exposure to sun and mechanical damage. It is, therefore, necessary that the cable is properly covered at all times. 3.3.4 Cable Ends The free ends of the installed cable shall be terminated immediately in water-tight connections. Entry of moisture through open ends of cable can ultimately result in making the pore pressure cell inoperative. 3.3.5 Precautions
Voltages Against Atmospheric Over-

Suitable over-voltage protection shall be provided to safeguard the transducer and the terminal unit from atmospheric over-voltages. 4 OBSERVATIONS 4.1 Initial Reading 4.1.1 After the installation
I

of each

piezometer

VARIFS

~11 dimensions Bentonite plug ( `4 mixture of 5% Bentonite be placed `15' Metre Intervals, or Midway Smaller ) FIG.

in millimetres.

( by Volume ) and 950/, Emb.ankment Material Shou!d Between the Plezometer TIPS Whenever Distance IS

3

TYPICAL INSTALLATION OF PORE PRESSURE CELL IN EMBANKMENT ( Contd )
5

IS

12949

: 1990

,MANUALlYCOMPACTED
RACK FILL

LEVEL FINE MATERIAL

SE:LECTEO

FINE MATERIL\L

A-A

EMBANKMENT SOIL

SOIL

c

_ C-PORE

c'NE
in mihpetres.

:RlA&

All dimensions

FIG. 3

TYPICALINSTALLATION OF

PRESSURE CELL INEMBANKMENT of the

stabilizing near the piezomcter tip will take some

pore time depending on soil permeability, pressure gradient, etc. A judgement in each case is necessary to decide when piezometer readings can take place. Normally the pore pressure will be stable within 48 hours of installation. A reading at this stage shall be taken and shall be recorded as the initial reading. 4.1.2 The pore pressure cell is temperature compensated, that is, temperature fluctuations of the surrounding soil will not affect the measuring result, provi.de_d the entire cell is in a state of temperature balance ( the measuring -wire should 6

be at the same temperature as the body cell). 4.2 Recording of Observation

Different systems of recording observations of vibrating wire type instruments are available. For recording observations instruments of the manufacturers of the respective makes should be referred to. 4.3 Frequency of Observation Pore pressure readings shall be taken at every 15 days interval during construction and at monthly intervals during shut down. After

IS12949:1990
ROCK

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG.

4 LAYING CABLES THROUGH ROCKFILL
be duly processed prepared: and the following graphs

construction, during initial reservoir filling, the readings shall be taken for every 3 m rise or fall of the reservoir or at monthly intervals. After two years, the readings should be taken at every 3-monthly intervals except during rainy season when readings should be taken at monthly intervals. 5 PRESENTATION 5.1 The data from OF DATA piezometric observations shall

Pore pressure, reservoir level and embankment height versus time; Pore pressure versus total stress; and The distribution of the above parameter along with geometry of the place with the contours and cross sections.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

BiS ia a, statutory institution &t&l&h& under the -&au& of I?rdikqSpesldarils Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development oft& @c&&i@& of standardizatioti, marking and quality certification of goods and at&ding to connected mstbsrs in ttlre country.
wdl!P I II `1, _ : .' .*, .; _. : z : .

BIS haq the copyright -df' &#`it&publit%tio6 `I$ii &rC of these publications may he reproduced in axty'form without the prior -i&ion in.writing of BIS; This do& not preclude the free use, in the

co&se of implementing the ~standard, of nesary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyrigtit be addressed to tbe Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revlsioa of Indian Stamdmls Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. RVD 16 ( 2953 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 $`elephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002
Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

Telephone 33101 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 .2 18 43 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

CALCUTTA

700054 160036

Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
Printed at Printwell Printers, Delhi, India

