INRI AAF IS 6151 (Part 1) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


rT 1 eat 
( Teel TREAT ) 


Storage Management Code 
Part 1 Terminology 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.060; 01.040.65 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERE TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 3 


Foodgrains, Allied products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Foodgrains, Allied products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Food and Agriculture Divisional Council. 


Scientific storage of agricultural commodities demands proper care of different commodities, construction of 
appropriate type of storage structures suitable for different commodities, hygienic transport, receipt distribution 
and delivery of these commodities, maintenance of warehouse inspection records, etc. To overcome problems 
of recurring nature like general and specific care of agricultural commodities, calculation of storage space for 
various commodities, occupancy or storage structures and calculation of cost of storage and construction, need 
was felt for developing Indian Standard for storage management of agricultural produce and inputs. In order to 
have a uniform terminology and to give an authoritative definition of terms frequently used in the storage and 
marketing structures for agricultural commodities, this standard was first published in 1971. The other two parts 
in this series are: 


Part 2 General care in handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs; 
Part 3 Specific care in handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs. 


In this revision, definition of various terms has been updated and some new definitions have been added. 
Further, the scope of the standard has been restricted to agricultural produce only and terminologies related to 
‘agricultural inputs’ have been removed. 


The Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised Y. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6151 (Part 1) : 2020 


Indian Standard 
STORAGE MANAGEMENT CODE 


PART 1 TERMINOLOGY 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This code (Part 1) prescribes the definition for various 
terms most frequently used in storage management. 


2 DEFINITIONS 


2.1 Aeration — Operation consisting of introducing 
fresh air into the agricultural produce using a flow 
rate which is adequate to achieve or maintain levels 
of temperature and humidity required for satisfactory 
storage. 


2.2 Agricultural Produce — Produce such as 
cereals, pulses, milled products, oilseeds, sugar, etc. 


2.3 Airtight Storage — Storage in a structure which is 
impermeable to air. 


2.4 Alley Way — Free space left around the stacks of 
bags for operational purposes. 


2.5 Ancillary Structures — Structures such as 
office room, isolation sheds, store room for keeping 
equipment, pesticides, fumigants, etc.; rooms for watch 
and ward purposes, built for effective control over the 
storage premises. 


2.6 Angle of Repose (Angle of Internal Friction) — 
An angle formed with the horizontal plane at which 
the loose grain when piled will retain its position. The 
angle varies with commodities and variable factors 
such as moisture content, particle size, degree of 
packing etc. 


2.7 Bag storage Structure — Structure in which 
agricultural produce are stored in bags made of cotton, 
polythene, jute, etc. 


2.8 Bulk storage Structures — Structure in which 
agricultural produce are stored in loose form. 


2.9 Bin — Compartment of a silo, large container or an 
enclosed space intended for storing grain in bulk. 


2.10 Bulk Weight — Weight of agricultural produce 
in kilograms per cubic metre. 


2.11 Degassing — Process of freeing a receptacle or 
structure of pesticidal vapours. 


2.12 Delivery — Issue of agricultural produce from a 
receptacle or structure. 


2.13 Disinfestation — Process by which the pests of 
stored agricultural produce are eliminated or reduced 
to minimum safe level. 


2.14 Drying — Process by which moisture content 
of agricultural produce is reduced to a safe level for 
storage. 


2.15 Dunnage — Any item or material which can 
act as a barrier or help in preventing damage due to 
seepage of moisture and facilitate aeration to the 
agricultural produce. 


2.16 Flat Storage Structures — Bulk storage 
structure which has its height smaller than other 
dimensions like width or diameter. 


2.17 Fumigation — Process of employment of 
fumigants for disinfestation. 


2.18 Fumigation Covers — Covers made of plastic 
or rubberized cloth used for covering stacks of 
agricultural produce for fumigation. 


2.19 Gas Mask — Covering of face with appropriate 
filter for protection against vapors of fumigants. 


2.20 Godown (Warehouse) — A structure used for 
scientific storage of agricultural produce in bags or in 
bulk. 


2.21 Infestation — Live insect and mite species 
which, during some stage(s) of their life cycle, are 
capable of causing damage to the grain. It may be 
classified into the following types: 


2.21.1 Clear — If the lot is completely free from living 
infestation. 


2.21.2 Few — If the lot is having upto 2 living minor or 
major insects per 500 g of sample. 


2.21.3 Heavy — If the lot is having more than 2 living 
minor or major insects per 500 g of sample. 


2.22 Hidden Infestation — Those insects which are 
present within individual grains because either they 


IS 6151 (Part 1) : 2020 


are at juvenile stages and have developed from eggs 
laid inside the grains or they have entered the interior 
of individual grains through cracks or other damage, 
usually to feed. 


NOTE — Hidden infestation is not normally apparent upon 
first examination of the sample. 


2.23 Loading point — The place from where stocks 
of agricultural produce are lifted for being loaded in a 
conveyance. 


2.24 Long Term Storage — Storage for such long 
periods required by large scale trade stockists and 
government agencies desiring to keep buffer stocks 
or to maintain food banks. Duration of such storage is 
more than one year. 


2.25 Loss in Storage — Quantitative and qualitative 
loss of agricultural produce in storage due to damage 
by pests, moisture or heat. 


2.26 Major Insect Pests — Principal storage pests 
which cause significant damage to a grain. 


2.27 Minor Insect Pests — Minor storage pests which 
do not cause significant damage to the grains. 


2.28 Occupancy — Utilization of the capacity of a 
storage structure expressed in terms of percentage of 
the total effective storage capacity and reckoned as the 
average for 12 calendar months. 


2.29 Overall — Uniform worn by the workers for 
disinfestation work. 


2.30 Net-plinth Area — Net plinth area of a structure 
actually available for storage of agricultural produce. 
The area is utilized for calculation of rated capacity of 
the structure (see 2.33). 


2.31 Receipt — Receipt of agricultural produce 
through trucks, carts, wagons or steamer for storage. 


2.32 Rural Storage — Storage at farmer’s level. 


232.1 Indoors Storage — Storage of agricultural 
commodities inside a house. 


2.32.2 Outdoors Storage — Storage of agricultural 
commodities outside a house. 


2.33 Rated Capacity — Net storage capacity of a 
structure in tonnes deducing alleyways and top space 
from the total covered plinth area. The capacity varies 
with height of stack and may be computed by the 
formula. 


2.34 Safe Moisture Level — The moisture level which 
will not encourage development of micro-organisms 
and mites. 


2.35 Short Term Storage — Storage of agricultural 
produce as generally practised by cultivators, for a 
period less than one year. 


2.36 Silo — Bulk storage structure consisting of one or 
more bins which facilitates quick handling of grains. 


2.36.1 Storage Block — A portion of the silo used for 
the storage of agricultural produce. 


2.36.2 Head House — A portion of the silo which 
houses elevator and other accessories such as weighting 
and cleaning machines for agricultural produce. 


2.36.3 Distribution Gallery — The structure on top 
of bins of a silo for housing system for distribution of 
agricultural produce into bins. 


2.36.4 Marine Tower — A structure located on the quay 
side for either loading or unloading of agricultural 
produce into and from ships. This may be stationary 
or portable. 


2.36.5 Collection Gallery — A portion of the silo at or 
below ground level for housing collection equipment. 


2.36.6 Garner — An intermediate hopper for storage of 
agricultural produce to ensure desired flow for further 
handling of agricultural produce. 


2.36.7 Truck or Wagon Dump — A structure consisting 
of a series of receiving hoppers where the agricultural 
produce are dumped by trucks or wagons. 


2.37 Stack — A regularly stacked pile of filled up bags 
or other containers. 


2.38 Stack Height — Height of a stack in terms of 
number of bags from floor. It varies with agricultural 
produce and conditions. 


2.39 Spraying — Process of application of pesticidal 
sprays for disinfestation or prevention of infestation. 


2.40 Stored Grain Pests — Pests like insects, mites, 
rodents, birds micro-organisms, etc, infesting stored 
agricultural produce. 


2.41 Sweepings — Sweepings containing dirt, dust, 
refractions, etc, and also sound grain collected as a 
result of either sweeping and round about a storage 
structure or rail heads or ship boards. 


2.42 Temperature Sensing Devices — Devices like 
thermocouples or electrical resistance thermometers 
used for measuring temperature of agricultural produce 
inside a structure. 


2.43 Temperature Gradient — Temperature difference 
between different portions of stored agricultural 


produce (especially middle and periphery) or different 
surfaces of as structure (especially metallic) resulting 
in moisture condensation in cooler regions. 


2.44 Transit Storage — Storage for a short term in 
which a commodity is practically on the move. 


2.45 Unloading Point — The place where agricultural 
produce are unloaded from a conveyance. 


IS 6151 (Part 1) : 2020 


2.46 Ventilation — Process of letting off foul air from 
a storage structure and letting in fresh air. 


2.47 Waterproofing — Process of making a structure 
waterproof by means of waterproof compounds or 
by any other means to guard against deterioration of 
grain due to seepage of ground or rain water inside a 
structure. 


IS 6151 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX A 


( Foreword ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Composition of Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


Organization 
Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of 
Agriculture, New Delhi 


Centre of Excellence for Soybean Processing, CIAE, 
Bhopal 


All India Food Processors’ Association, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute 
(CFTRI), Mysore 


Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering & 
Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana 


ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack (formerly 
CRRD 


ICAR-Central Tuber Crop Research Institute (CTCRI), 
Thiruvananthpuram 


Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC), New Delhi 

CONCERT, Chennai 

Confederation of Indian Food Trade & Industry (CIFTI)- 
FICCI, New Delhi 

Confederation of Indian Industries (CH), New Delhi 

Consumer Education & Research Centre, Ahmedabad 

Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 

Consumer Research, Education, Action, Training and 
Empowerment (CREATE) 

Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL), Mysore 

ICAR - Indian Institute of Maize Research (IIMR), 
Ludhiana (formerly DMR) 

Directorate General of Supplies and Transport, Delhi 

Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad 

Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine & Storage, 
Faridabad 

Food Corporation of India (FCI), New Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


J. S. (MARKETING) AND AGRICULTURAL MARKETING 
ADVISOR (Chairman) 


Dr PUNIT CHANDRA 
Dr S. K. Giri (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAM BAGGARRY 
Ms Jyoti Soni (Alternate) 


Dr M. S. MEERA 
Dr V. B. SASHIKALA 


HEAD (DIVISION OF TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY) 
Dr D. N. Yapay (Alternate) 


DR AWADHESH KUMAR 
Dr (Mrs) PADMINI Swar (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Dr M. S. SANJEEv (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. MALHOTRA 
SHRI SIDHARTH RATH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SANTHANAM, IAS (RETD.) 
SHRI G. SANTHANARAJAN (Alternate) 


Ms PARNA DASGUPTA 
Ms PRIYANKA SHARMA (Alternate) 


Mr ManisH WHORRA 
Mr AROMAL JKOSHI (Alternate) 


Mrs Do tty A JANI 

Dr Aninpita Menta (Alternate) 
DR SITARAM DIXIT 

Dr M. S. Kamaru (Alternate) 
MR K. SURESH KANNA 

SH R. PONNAMALAM (Alternate) 


Dr G. K. SHARMA 
Dr A. D. SemwaL (Alternate) 


Dr R. Sar KUMAR 
Dr DHARAM PAUL CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Cor S. C. JosHr 
MAJ SONALI DUDHANE (Alternate) 


Dy AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISOR 
SMO (Stp.) (Alternate) 


PLANT PROTECTION ADVISER 
Suri R. V. SINGH (Alternate) 


Mr A. S. ARUNACHALAM 
MR Sacar (Alternate) 


Ms APRAJITA VERMA 


Organization 


G.B. Pant University, Food Science Division, Pant Nagar 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 


Indian Grain Storage Management and Research Institute, 
Hapur 


Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT), 
Thanjavur 


Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP), Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
New Delhi 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship $ 
Management (NIFTEM), Sonipat 


National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad 


National Sugar Institute (NSI), Kanpur 


Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association of 
India (PFNDAD) 


Vasantdada Sugar Institute (VSI), Pune 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA), New Delhi 


IS 6151 (Part 1) : 2020 


Representative(s) 
Dr SatisH K. SHARMA 
Dr Sweta Rat (Alternate) 
Dr S. C. KHURANA 
Suri I. C. CHADDHA 


DIRECTOR 
Dr C. ANANDHARAMAKRISHNAN 


Mr DEEPAK KHEDKAR 
Mr MADHAB CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr SUBHASH GUPTA 
Dr S. C. BansaL (Alternate) 


Dr AsHUTOSH UPADHYAY 
Dr RuresH CHAVAN (Alternate) 


Dr K. BHASKARA CHARY 
Dr V. SUDERSHAN Rao (Alternate) 


Dr V. P. SRIVASTAVA 


DR SHATADRU SENGUPTA 
Dr Jasvır SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr RAJEEV V. DANI 
Dr SANIJEEV V. PariL (Alternate) 


Dr RADHEY KRISHNA TRIPATHI 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 16 (14867). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


