**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10844 (1984) : Glossary of terms relating to slide 
fasteners [PGD 14: Consumer Products and Allied Equipments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 672*837 :001'4 



IS : 10844 -1984 




Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO 
SLIDE FASTENERS 



1 , Scope — Covers definition of terms relating to slide fasteners. 

2. General Terms 

2.1 Slide Fastener — It consists of interlockable elements each attached to one of the opposing 
edges of two tapes and a movable part called 'slider' that spans the interlockable elements. The 
slider when moved in one direction causes the elements on one tape to interlock with the elements on 
the other tape and when moved in the opposite direction causes the elements to disengage 
(see Fig. 1 and 2). 

2.1 .1 Separate element slide fasteners — It consists of two rows of interlockable separately formed 
elements called 'scoops', each of which is attached to one of the opposing edges of two tapes. In 
this category would fall the most commonly used metallic chain slide fasteners and the recently 
introduced injection moulded or extruded plastic/metal teeth slide fasteners {see Fig. 1 ). 




STRINGER 




RCTAINER PM 



7^ 

— ' ^RETAINEP 



OPEN -END FASTENER 



CLOSED- END FASTENrR 



FIG. 1 NOMENCLATURE OF SLIDE FASTENER — SEPARATE ELEMENT TYPE 



Adopted 10 February 1984 



O August 1984, ISI 



Gr 3 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK ^HAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI ItOOOS 



18:10844^1984 

2,1.2 Continuous monofilament spiral slide fasteners — In case of continuous monofilament 
zippers, commonly known as coil jslida fasteners, these slide fasteners usually are made out of nylon 
or polyester monofilaments and two continuous interlockable configurated monofilament elements are 
attached to one of the opposing edges of two tapes (symmetrical ) or one side of the tapes at their 
opposing edges (asymmetrical ). The so-called nylon/polyester monofilament spiral slide fasteners 
belong to this category are all continuous monofilament slide fasteners ( see Fig. 2 ). 



OPEN 
TOP STOP 




CHAIN 



CLOSED 
BOTTOM STOP 

BEAD OR CORD 



TAPE 
EXTENSION 



CLOSED-END FASTENER 



SEPARATING PIN 




REUINER 



OPEN-END FASTENER 

FIG. 2 NOMENCLATURE OF SLIDE FASTENER — CONTINUOUS MONOFILAMENT SPIRAL TYPE 

2.1.3 Closed-end slide fasteners — These are non-separable slide fasteners having two single tapes 
fitted with scoops and slider-puller assembly and are permanently attached at either or both ends 
( see Fig. 2 ), 

2.1.4 Open-end slide fasteners — These are separable sfide fasteners, normally called 'open-end' 
fitted with special components at the bottom of the fasteners chain, so as to permit complete dis- 
engagement and the re-engagement of the two stringers ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). 

3. Components 

3.1 Stringer — The tape, bead and element assembly that constitutes one side of a chain is called a 
stringer I see Fig, 1 ), 

3.2 Tape — A strip of material along one edge of which the bead and scoops are attached or to which 
the continuous monofilament elements are attached. The so-called tape depending on 'end-use' 
could be made of cotton textile woven fabric; cotton/man-madB fibre blend fabric or even rubber and 
other solid plastic strips {see Fig. 1 and 2 ). 

3.2.1 Tape extension — The tape extending beyond the top and bottom stops at either or both ends 
of the stringers ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). 

3.2.2 Tape widtf) — It is measured from one edge of the tape to the other edge ( see Fig. 3 ). 



IS : 10844* 1984 

3,2.3 Exposed tape width — \t is that part across the tape extending beyond the shoulders of the 
scoops/spiral to the outer tape edge ( see Fig. 3 ). 




EXPOSED 
TAPE WIDTH h H 



H— TAPE WIDTH 

i 



CHAIN WIDTH - H 



^CHAIN 



THICKNESS 



FIG. 3 DIMENSIONS OF CHAIN AND TAPE 



3.3 Bead 

3.3.1 For separata e/emant s/ide fasteners ~ An inner edge of each tape to which scoops are 
affixed {see Fig. 1 ), 

3.3.2 For continuous monofilamant slide fastanars — Tape located at the outer edge of the 
continuous interlocicing elements and against which the slider flanges bear. The bead is optional on 
continuous monofilament slide fasteners {see Fig. 2). 

3.4 Scoops — Separately formed elements designed for interlocking and affixed along with the edge 
of the tape {see Fig. 1 ). 

3.4.1 Scoop legs — The two portions of a scoop that affix the scoop to the bead. 

3.4.2 Scoop pocket — The cavity of the scoop designed to receive the head. 

3.4.3 Scoop head or beads — The portion of a scoop that engages the pocket. 

3.5 Spiral— Continuously formed monofifament designed for interlocking and affixed along with edge 
of a tape {see Fig. 2). 

3.6 Chain — It is the linkage formed by interlocking the scoops/spirals of two stringers. 

3.6.1 Chain thickness — The measurement from the front to the back of the chain ( see Fig. 3 ). 

3.6.2 Chain width — The measurement between the shoulders of the interlocked elements or 
between the outermost edges of the head, if the bead extends beyond the element {see Fig. 3 ). 

3.7 Puller— It is that part connected to the slider by which the slider is operated either to open or to 
close the chain {see Fig. 1 ). 

3.7.1 Puller pin {locking pin) — The portion or portions on the puller that extend through a 
window or windows to effect a locking action in ( pin locking ) lock sliders ( see Fig. 6 ). 

3.1.2 Puller trunnions — The two points at the end of the puller that fit into the bridge of the 
slider. 

3.8 Cord — A strand of multiple yarn for use in forming a bead. Normally two such cords, one og 
the top and one at the bottom of one edge of each separate tape, are sewed on. 



Note — In so-called Ipeaded tape, one cord is interwoven when the tape is being woven out of yarns. Presently 
needle looms more or less crochet those out to make a bead. 



IS : 10844-1984 

3.9 Stops — These are elements at top and bottonn of the chain ^nd the tape which prevent the slider 
from coming off the chain ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). 

3.9.1 Bottom stop — A part affixed to both stringers immediately below or over the chain, holding 
the two strmgers together at the bottom and preventing the slider from coming off the chain 
{see Fig. 4). 




OVEft 



BELOW 




FIG. 4 BOTTOM STOP 

3.9.2 Top stop— Part affixed in between or immediately above the scoops or spiral, on either or 
both stringers, to prevent the slider from coming off the chain (^eeFig. 1 and 2). 

3.9.3 Bridge type top stop — A part aiflxed immediately above the chain, holding the tops of the 
two stringers together and preventing the slider from coming off the chain ( see Fig. 5 ). 

3.10 Slider — The part that opens the slide fastener when moved in one direction and closes it when 
moved in the opposite direction. 

3.10.1 Sf/der flanges — The edges of a slider formed to contain the chain ( see Fig. 6 ). 

3.10.2 Slider mouth — The opening in a slider that receive the chain ( see Fig. 6 ). 

3A0,3 Slider automatic lock — k slider that provides automatic positive locking action on the 
chain when the puller Js released. 

3A0A Slider nor}-locking — A slider that does not lock the chain when the puller is released 
{see Fig. 6). 




FIG. 5 BRIDGE TYPE TOP STOP 



■BAIL OR LUG 



MOUTH 




FLANGES 



6A Non-Locking Slider 



FrG. 6 SLIDER 
4 



LOCKING 
PIN 



WINDOW 




6B Pin Type Locking Slider 



IS : 10844- 1984 

ZAO.B Slldar pin-locking {common lock) — A slider that provides positive locking action on the 
chain when ths puller provided with a suitable pin is pressed down {see Fig. 6 ). 

3,10=6 Slider flange lock — A slider with notches in the flanges of the slider that block the 
shoulders of the scoops when the stringers are pulled apart. 

3.10.7 Slider window — It is the opening in the slider body to admit the locking pin {see Fig. 6 ). 

3.10.8 Slider bail or lug — It is portion of the slider body to which the puller is attached 
{see Fig. 6). 

3.11 Retainer Pin {Fixed) — A tube like element, similar to the separating pin, affixed over the bead 
at the bottom end of the stringer opposite to the separating pin. This element is designed to hold the 
retainer of the open end fastener in position ( see Fig. 1 ). 

3.11.1 Separating pin — A tube like element attached over the bead at the bottom end of the 
stringer {see Fig. 1 and 2). 

3.11 .2 Retainer {fixed) — An element permanently attached on to the retainer pin of an open-end 
fastener (^eeFig. 1 and 2 ) at the bottom of one stringer. It has an opening shaped to fit the 
''separating pin', in order to close, the 'separating pin' is passed through the slider body, and then 
inserted into this opening. Thus the retainer ( fixed ) holds or retains the two stringers in alignment 
for interlocking. 

Note — Present development in 'Open-End* fasteners also use 'movable retainer' which is a movable or sliding 
element performing a similar function to that of the retainer (fixed ). The purpose being to permit separation of the 
two stringers from the bottom. This element is not removable from the bottom. 

3.12 Slide Fastener Length — The nominal length of a slide fastener is the distance as measured of a 
closed chain and placed without tension on a flat horizontal working surface, and the chain aligned 
over a straight reference line on the working surface between the bottom extreme surface of the 
bottom stop to the top extreme surface of the top stop(s) or the top of the slider, whichever is the 
extreme. 

3.12,1 Effective length of opening — Distance between the top-end of the slide at the fully closed 
position and top-end of the bottom stop. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



