( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS :-5952 - 1970

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF PARATHION RESIDUES
Pest Control Sectional Committee, AFCDC
Chairman DR K. D. PAHARIA Repwrnting Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ) Tata Fison Industries Ltd, Bombay Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) Ministry of Health, Family Planning, Works, Housing & Urban Development Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Central Bureau of Investigations, New Delhi I.C.I. ( India ) Private Ltd, Calcutta

6

SERI M. L. ADPANI DR K. KALYAN ( Alternate ) DR P. N. A~ARWAL DR K. BAQCHI DR H. L. BAMI DR N. K. BASU DR T. GUHA ( Al&mate ) MAJ-GEN M. S.~BOPARAI

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services, Ministry of Defence Department of Agriculture, Government of Uttar DIRECTOR olr AQRICULTURE Pradesh _ DR P. L. CEATURVERI (Alternate ) DIRECTOR OF STOI~A~E & INS- Directorate of Storage & Inspection ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & PECTION Co-operation ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( STORAQE, TECRNICAL ) ( Alternate) Indian Pharmacopoeia Committee ( Ministry of DRUGS CONTROLLEB Health, Family Planning, Works, Housing & Urban Development) Bombay Chemicals Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI G. D. GOKHALE SHRI V. V. KETKAR (Alternate) Nati;;xhayrganic Chemical Industries Limited, DB R. GONOAIXES SHRI H. J. QAD~~HANJI ( Altematc ) Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi Da K. C. GULATI Hindustan Insecticides Limited, New Delhi SHRI T. GEORGEJOHN DR S. N. NAP ( Alternate) Cyanamid India Limited, Bombay DRLALLANRAI SERI M. K. ZUTSHI ( Alternate) -Central Food Technological Research Institute SERI S. K. MAJUMDAR ( CSIR ), Mysore SHRI M. MUTEU ( Alternate ) ( Continuedon page 2 )

INDIAN
M \NAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI 1

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

is : 5952 - 1970
( Confinuedfrom page 1 ) Members
Reprem ting

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI L. P. MATHUR SHRI K. P. SIN~H ( Alternate ) Pesticides Association of India, New Delhi DR P. R. MEEITA Bharat Pulverising Mills Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. S. MEHTA SHRI S. CIXATTERJI ( Alternate ) Bayer (India) Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. N. NAKHATE DR D. V. KAS~IELIEAR ( Alternate1 Directorate General of Technical Development SHRI R. NARASIMHAN ( Ministry of Industrial Development and Internal Trade ) American Spring & Pressing Works Private Ltd, SERI S. L. PATEL Bombay SHRI L. M. PATEL ( Alternate) Department of Agriculture, Government of Mysore PLANT PROTECTIONOFFICER Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi DR S. PRADHAN DR RATFAN LAL ( Alternuts ) Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi SHRI P. RAM~AS Pest Control Corporation, Calcutta DR A. SARUP Pest Control ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay DR VINOD R. SHAH Shaw Wallace & Company Limited, Calcutta SURI L. R. SHARMA SHRI N. R. JAYASUNUAR ( Alfernate ) Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar DR K. S. SINaH DR R. P. CI~AUDHURI (Alternate) National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Delhi DR B. L. WATTAL Director General, ISI ( Ex-ofiio Member ) Da HARI BHAOWAN, Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) &RI E. N. SUNDAR Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Pesticide
Convener

Residue

Analysis

Subcommittee,

AFCDC

6 :7

DR H. L. BAM~

Central Forensic Science Laboratory, of Investigations, New Delhi

Central Bureau

Members Central Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi DR K. BAQCHI SHRI D. S. CHADHA ( Alternafe) King Institute, Madras SHRI K. BALASUBRAHMANIAN Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR S. L. CHOPRA National Organic Chemical Industries Limited, SHRI H. J. DADACHANJI Bombav SHRI P. CHAWLA ( Alttmnte) lndian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi DR R. S. DEWAN fiombay Chemicals Private Ltd, Bombay SHRX V. V. KETKAR Directorate of Storage & Inspection ( Ministry of DR K. -KRIS~NAMU~T~Y Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ) ( Continued on pug4 8 )

2

IS : 5952 - 1970

Indiun Standard
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF PARATHION RESIDUES
0.
0.1This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 December 1970, after the draft finalized by the Pest Control Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council and the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 Due to the increased use of pesticides in the country, the question of their harmful residues and their effect on public healthhas been engaging the attention of the people concerned with public health. With a view to helping in collection of authentic data on pesticidal residues and in order to enable the health authorities to implement the existing Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules relating to the limits of pesticidal residues, the Indian Standards Institution has undertaken the task of preparing a series of Indian Standard methods of test for estimation of pesticidal residues. 0;3 While preparing these standards, due attention has been paid to the methods of test being followed in various laboratories of the country. For the sake of wider adoption, only those methods have been prescribed in these Indian Standards which, as far as possible, avoid the use of costly equipment and reagents. 0.4 Prior to the qualitatively the that are used in before analysis. two standards standards would estimation of pesticidal residues, it is necessary to Also, it is important that the pesticidal residues. these methods of test are pure and solvents are Taking into consideration these two important covering these fields are under preparation. be necessary adjuncts to this standard, identify solvents purified factors, These

0.5 Parathion formulations have become popular in the agricultural and public health field for the control of various pests and the method of test for estimating its residues as described in the standard is one in the series of the Indian Standard methods of test for estimating residues of various pesticides in different foodstuffs. 0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS: 2-1960*.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

IS : 5952 -1970 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the method of test for estimating parathion [ 0 0-diethyl 0-( 4nitrophenyl) phosphorothioate] foods and their milled products. 1.1.1 The method will be applicable to a minimum parathion residues. 2. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD limit of 25 pg of

2.1 The residues of parathion are extracted with benzene or isopropanolbenzene and the cleaned up solution is clarified. The nitro group of the parathion is then reduced with zinc dust and hydrochloric acid solution to amino group. The resulting water soluble compound is diazotized and coupled with N-( l-naphthyl) ethylene diamine to produce a magenta colour, the intensity of the colour is measured with a spectrophotometer at 555 to 560 ml-l. 3. SAMPLING 3.1 The representative samples for the purpose of estimating parathion residues in various agricultural and food products shall be in accordance to the sampling procedures as prescribed in the relevant Indian Standards, wherever available. 4. EXPERIMENTAL 4.1 Reagents 4.1.1 Benzene -analytical grade and redistilled. PROCEDURE

4.1.2 Adsorbent Mixture - 10 parts of anhydrous powdered sodium sulphate, 5 parts of Atta clay, 5 parts Filter Cel, 2 parts of activated carbon. 4.1.3 Parathion Standard Solution-Prepare a standard solution for parathion in such a manner that 1 ml of the final solution contains 20 pg of parathion. 4.1.4 4.1.5 Standard ElTydrochloric Acid Solution Sodium Mtrite Solution -aqueous, 0.5 N. 0.25 percent ( W/V). (w/v).

4.1.6 Ammonium Sulphamate Solution-aqueous, 2.5 percent Dissolve 1.25 g in water and dilute to 50 ml. Prepare weekly.

4.1.7 .h'-( I-.hfa#hthyl) Ethylenediamine Di-Hydrochloride Solution- aqueous, 1 percent (w/v). Prepare-fresh solution daily and store the above in a dark coloured bottle. 4

IS : 5952 - 1970
4.1.8 <inc Dust 4.1.9 analytical reagent-grade. reagent grade. of Parathion

Isopropyl Alcohol -analytical

4.2 Preparation Residues

of Sample, Clean-up and Extraction

4.2.1 Firm Relatively Tough-Skinned Fruits, such as Apjdes, Pears, etcWeigh 2 to 3 kg of fruit into a clean dry jar of 15 litres, so mounted that it can be turned with end-over-end tumbting action by hand-crank or motor. Add 500 ml of benzene (see Notes 1 and 2 ) and stopper with tight-fitting cork, wooden bung, or plastic screw-cap faced with gasket of sheet-cork or other suitable solvent-resisting material. Turn the jar for 5 minutes at Open the jar and drain off benzene as 75 to 100 rpm (see Note 3). completely as possible into 1-litre erlenmeyer flask (see Note 4).
NOTE 1 -In all cases; treat the benzene extract by shaking for five minutes with 10 g to 100 ml extract. the adsorbent mixture, in proportion of approximately Finally, filter through rapid, folded paper. NOTE 2 -As all times. benzene vapours are toxic, take precautions against inhaling them at

NATE 3 -Since apples treated for longer periods become swollen and soft, limit the time of stripping; on other firmer products time factor is not so important. NOTE 4 - It is assumed that concentration of parathion in benzene poured from apples is same as that in solvent retained by apples after wetting. off

4.2.1.1 Aliquots of this solution may be used directly for parathion residue determination if they do not contain more than 100 mg of foreign organic matter. 4.2.1.2 In order to remove partially any colouring matter and plant waxes, add, to each 100 ml of the benzene solution, 10 g of a mixture compounded by weight by mixing 10 parts of anyhydrous sodium sulphate, 5 parts Atta clay, 5 parts Filter-Gel and 2 parts Nuchar. Stopper flask, shake vigorously for five minutes, and filter on folded paper (see Note). Do not allow appreciable evaporation of the filtrate before determining parathion in aliquot.
NOTE- This operation dehydrates the benzene, promotes rapid filtration and colouring matter and about approximately half of the natural waxes that may be present in the products.

4.2.2 Soft Fruits, such as Plums, Tomatoes, Berries, etc- Use 1 to 2 kg sample with 300 to 500 ml of the redistilled benzene, and strip by shaking gently by hand for five minutes in a jar of suitable size. 4.2.3 Fresh, Leafy Vegetables, such as Cabbage, Lettuce, Greens, etc- Blend 100 g of the sample into 100 ml of isopropyl alcohol for two minutes in high speed blender. Add 200 ml of benzene and blend again for two minutes,

IS : 5952 - 1970
pour the mixture into a centrifuge bottle and centrifuge for 5 minutes. Transfer supernatants to a I-litre separator. Wash blender with 50-ml portions of benzene and transfer to -centrifuge bottles. Break up solids with stirring rod, stopper and shake for 2 minutes. Centrifuge as before and add solvent layer to separator. Wash and extract with equal volume of distilled water to remove isopropyl alcohol. Dry benzene layer with 30 g of anhydrous sodium sulphate and dilute to suitable volume with benzene and finally make the volume to 200 ml with benzene. 4.2.4 Other Products - Grind dried products, in a suitable mill and extract with benzene in a large Soxhlet-type extractor for a period of one to two hours. Satisfactory extraction may be achieved in many cases by letting ground material steep overnight in stoppered jars with measured volume of redistilled benzene. Follow the same procedure as detailed in 4.2.3. 4.3 Preparation of Standard Curve for O-200 wg Range - Add 2.0, 4.0, 6.0, 8.0, 10-O ml parathion standard solution B to a series of 250-ml conical flasks. Make up the volume to 25 ml with benzene in all cases and provide a blank of 25 ml benzene. Add 20 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid and 200 mg of finely powdered zinc dust and connect to a condenser by all glass-adapter fitted with thermometer. Place on a hot-plate at medium heat and rapidly distil ofl the benzene. Where the vapour temperature is about 70X, ebullition stops, benzene is eliminated and vapour temperature falls. Do not It;t aqueous solution to boil at this point, disconnect the flask, add 10 ml of alcohol and reconnect to refiux condenser. Reflux for 5 minutes and cool the flask in ice water. Treat the other flasks likewise in succession. 4.3.1 Add about 100 mg of Filter Cel to each flask and filter into 50-ml volumetric Aask through Whatman No. 44 or equivalent. Use long thin stirring rods during transfer of solutions and washing to filter. Take care not to exceed the volume of 45 ml in the flasks. Volume of washwater that may be used is limited to about 15 ml. 4.3.2 Add 1 ml of sodium nitrite solution to each flask, mix and let stand for 10 minutes, add 1 ml of ammonium sulphamate solution to each flask, mix, and let stand for 10 minutes. Then add 2.0 ml of reagent Jv+-( 1-naphthyl ) ethylene diamine dihydrochloride solution, dilute to 50 ml volume and let stand for 10 minutes. Take the absorbance of the solution at 555 rnp in spectrophotometer (see Note). Colours should be stable for at least one hour.
NOTE-

available

With l-cm cell absorbance 5-cm cell may be preferred.

for 100 mcg of parathion

is about

0.33.

If

4.3.3 Read the absorbance in succession using blank standard as reference and plot optical density against concentration in micrograms of parathion to obtain standard curve. 6

IS : 5952 - 1970

-Place aliquot of clarified solution containing the extract of parathion residues obtained as under 3.2 from the material under investigation in a 250-ml conical flask, the volume of aliquot taken dependIf the aliquot is less than 25 ml ing upon the expected residue content. dilute to 25 ml with redistilled benzene, add 20 ml of 0.5 N hydrochloric acid and 200 mg of zinc dust and proceed as for the standard solution of parathion for the preparation of standard curve.
4.4 Determination

4.5 Reporting of Parathion Residues -Develop colour, read absorbance against standard blank and determine content of parathion in the aliquot taken from the standard curve and content of parathion residues in the material in terms of parts per million calculated from the same.

IS : 5952 - 1970
( Continued from page 2 ) Members SERIV.
LAKE~IMI~~A~AYANA

RepIesenting

Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ) Public Analyst, Government of Haryana DR B. D. NARAN~ Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta SHR~ S. N. MITRA CIBA of India Limited, Bombay DR A. A. VAHORA SRRI V. G. DESHPANDE ( Alternate ) Cent~~so~~od Technological Research Institute, SHR~ K. VISWESWARIAB SHRI J. R. RANUASWAMY ( Alternate ) ' National DR B. L. WATTAL SERI V. N. BHATNAQAR ( Alternate ) Institute of Communicable Diseases, Delhi

8

