lS/lSO/lEC

Guide 65:1996

Indian Standard GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR BODIES OPERATING PRODUCT CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS -- GUIDELINES

ICS

03.120.20

@ BIS 2007

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

~epf[)lnber

`200;7

Price Group 4

National

Mirror

Committee

of CASCO.

IRD 1

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with lSO/l EC Guide 65: 1996 `General requirements for bodies operating product certification systems' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (l EC) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the National Mirror Committee of CASCO and approval of the Director General, Bureau of Indian Standards under Rule 8 (3C) of B/S Ru/es. The text of lSO/lEC Guide has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Comma practice (,) has been used Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should

b)

as a decimal

marker, marker.

while

in Indian

Standards,

the current

is to use a point

(.) as the decimal

lS/lSO/lEC Guide 65:1996

Contents
1
2 3 4 Scope . ........................................................................................... References ...................................................................................... Definitions Certification 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 ....................................................................................... body ............................................................................

Page

1 1 1
2 2 2 3 3 3 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 8 8 8 8

General provisions .................................................................. Organization ........................................................................... Operations .............................................................................. Subcontracting ....................................................................... Quality system ....................................................................... CmdRi6ns and procedures for granting, maintaining, extending, suspending andwithdrawlng certification ............ internal audits and management Documentation reviews,,,., ...................... ....................................................................... .........................................................................

Records .................................................................................

4.10 Confidentiality 5 Certification 5.1 5.2 6 7 8

body personnel ............................................................ criteria ................................................................ requirements ......................................

General ................................................................................... Qualification

Changes in thecertlfication Appeals, complaints Application 8.1 8.2

and disputes ................................................... .............................................................. ................................................ .. . . ..... . .. ...

for certification

information

on the procedure

Theapplication

...........................................

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Preparation for evaluation ............................................................... Evaluation .............................................................. ......................... Evaluation report ............................................................................. Decision on certification .................................................................

Surveillance ..................................................................................... Useoflicences, certificates andmarks of conformity ....................

Complaints to suppliers ..................................................................

I

lS/lSO/lEC Guide 65:1996

Introduction
Certlflcatlon of a product (a term used to include a process or service) is a means of providing assurance that it complies with specified s?andards and other normative documents. Some product certification systems may Include Initial testing of a product and assessment of Its suppliers' quality systems, followed by surveillance that takes into account the factory quality system and the testing of samples from the factory and the open market. Other systems rely on initial testing and surveillance testing, while still others comprise type testing only. This Guide specifies requirements, the observance of which IS Intended to ensure that certification bodies operate third-party certification systems in a consistent and reliable manner, thereby facilitating their acceptance on a national and international basis and so furthering international trade. The req~lr~ment~ c~rltained in ttjs Guide are written, above all, to be considered as general criteria for organizations operating product certification systems; they may have to be amplified when specific Industrial or other sectors make use of them, or when particular requirements such as health and safety have to be taken into account. Assertion of conformity to the appropriate standards or other normative documents will be in the form of certificates or marks of conformity. Systems for certifying particular products or product groups to specified standards or other normative documents will, in many cases, require their own explanatory documentation. Whale this Guide is concerned with third-parties providing product certification, many of its provisions may also be useful in first- and second-darty pr~duct conformity assessment procedures. The diversity in certification systems may at first seem unnecessary and even confuse newcomers in the field, clients and operators alike. The lSO/lEC publication Certif;catjon and related activities is available for background reading and will help to answer questions regarding the practices of the worldwide conformity assessment community.

II

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide 65:1996

Indian Standard GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR BODIES OPERATING PRODUCT CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS -- GUIDELINES

1

Scope

lSO/l EC Guide 2:1996, Standardization activities -- General vocabulary.

and

related

1.1 This Guide specifies general requirements that a third-party operating a product certification system shall meet if It is to be recognized as competent and reliable.
In this Guide the term "certification body"' is used to cQver any bQdy operating a product certification system. The word "product" is used in its widest sense and includes processes and services; the word "standard" IS used to include other normative documents such as specifications or technical regulations. 1.2 The certification system used by the certification body may include one or more of the following, which could be coupled with production surveillance or assessment and surveillance of the supplier's quality system or both, as described in lSO/l EC Guide 53: a) b) type testing or examination; testing or inspection of samples taken from the market or from suppher's stock o; from a combination of both; testing or inspection of every product or of a particular product, whether new or already in use; batch testing or inspection; design appraisal.

lSO/lEC Guide 7:1994, Guidelines for drafting of standards suitable for use for conformity assessment. lSO/l EC Guide 23:1982, Metho"ds of indicating formlt y with standards for third-party certification tems, consys-

1S0/1EC Guide 25:1990, General requirements for the competence of calibration and testing laboratories. lSO/l EC Guide 27:1983, Guidelines for correctwe action to be taken by a certification body in the event of misuse of its mark of conformity 1S0/1EC Guide 28:1982, General rules for a model third-party certification system for products. 1S0/1EC Guide 39:1988, General requirements acceptance of inspection bodies. for the

lSO/l EC Guide 53:1988, An approach to the ut//ization of a suppher's quality system in third-party product certification. 1S0/1EC Guide 62:1996, Genera/ requirements for bodies operating assessment and certif/cat/on/reg/stration of qua//ty systems.

c)

d) e)

NOTE 1 lSO/l EC Guide 28 may be consulted for a model of one form of a third-party product certification system.

3

Definitions

2

References
management and quahty

For the purposes of this Guide, the relevant definitions given in lSO/l EC Guide 2 and ISO 8402 apply, together with the following definition,

ISO 8402:1994, Quahty assurance -- Vocabulary.

ISO 10011-1:1990, Guidelines systems -- Part 1: Auditing.

for

auditing

quality

3.1 supplier: The party that is responsible for ensuring that products meet and, if applicable, continue to meet, the requirements on which the certification is based.

1

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide 65:1996

4

Certification body

3) 4) 5) 6)

decisions on certification, supervision policies, supervision of the implementation of its

4.1 General provisions
4.1.1 The policies and procedures under which the certification body operates and their administration shall be non-discriminatory and shall be administered In a non-discriminatory manner. Procedures shall not be used to impede or inhibit access by applicants, other than as movided for in this Guide. 4.1.2 The certification body shall make its services accessible to all applicants whose activities fall within Its declared field of operation. There shall not be undue financial or other conditions. Access shall not be conditional upon the size of the suppher or membership of any association or group, nor shall certification be conditional upon the number of certificates already issued, d)

of the finances of the body,

delegation of authority to committees or individuals as required to undertake defined activities on its behalf, technical basis for granting certlfrcatlon; which demonstrate it IS a legal

7)

have documents entity;

e)

4.1.3 The criteria against whiq,h the products of a supplier are evaluated shall be those outlined in specified standards. Requirements for standards suitable for this purpose are contained in lSO/lEC Guide 7. If explanation IS required as to the application of these documents for a specific certification system, it shall be formulated by relevant and impartial committees or persons possessing the necessary technical competence, and published by the certification body. 4.1.4 The certification body shall confine its requirements, evaluation and decision on certification to those matters specifically related to the scope of the certification being considered.

have a documented structure which safeguards impartiality including provisions to ensure the impartiality of the operations of the certification body; this structure shall enable the participation of all parties significantly concerned in the development of policies and principles regarding the content and functioning of the certification system; ensure that each decision on certification IS taken by a person(s) different from those who carried out the evaluation; have rights and responsibilities certification activities; relevant to its

f)

g)

h)

have adequate arrangements to cover liabilities arising from its operations and/or activities; have the financial stability and resources required for the operation of a certification system; employ a sufficient number of personnel having the necessary education, training, technical knowledge and experience for performing certification functions relating to the type, range and volume of work performed, under a respons~ble senior executive; have a quality system giving ability to operate a certification ucts; confidence in its system for prod-

i)

It

4.2

Organization

The structure of the certification body shall be such as to foster confidence in its certifications. In particular, the certification body shall a) b) be Impartial; be responsible for decisions relating to its granting, maintaining, extending, suspending and withdrawing of certification; Identify the management (committee, group or person) which shall have overall responsibility for all of the following:

k)

1)

have policies and procedures that distinguish between product certification and any other activities in which the certification body is engaged; together with its senior executive and staff, be free from any commercial, financial and other pressures which might influence the results of the certification process; have formal rules and structures for the appointment and operation of any commntees which are revolved in the certification process; such committees shall be free from any commercial,

c)

m)

1)

performance of testing, inspection, ation and certification as definied Guide,

evaluin this

n)

2)

formulation of policy matters relating to the operation of the certification body,

lS/lSO/lEC Guide 65:1996

financial and other pressures that might influence decisions; a structure where members are chosen to provide a balance of interests where no single interest predominates will be deemed to satisfy this provision; o) ensure that activities of related bodies do not affect the confidentiality, objectivity and impartiality of its certifications, and it shall not

b)

ensure that the subcontracted body or person is competent and complies with the applicable provisions of this Guide and other standards and guides relevant to testing, inspection or other technical activities (see clause 2), and is not ihvolved either directly or through the person's employer with the design or production of the product in such a way that Impartiality would be compromised; obtain the applicant's consent.

1)
2)

supply or design products tifies,

of the type it cer-

c)

gwe advice or provide consultancy services to the applicant as to methods of dealing with matters which are barriers to the certification requested, provide any other products or services which could compromise the confidentiality, objectivity or impartiality of its certification process and decisions:

NOTES 2 Where work related to certification has been undertaken prior to the application for certification, the body may take account of it, provided it can take responsibility as detailed in 4.4 a) and satisfy itself regarding the matters deta(led (n 4.4 b}. 3 The requirements given in 4.4 a) and b) are also relevant, by extension, when a certification body uses, for granting its own certification, work performed by another certification body with which it has signed an agreement.

3)

p)

have policies and procedures for the resolution of complaints, appeals and disputes received from supphers or other parties about the handling of certification or any other related matters.

4.5 4.3

Quality system

Operations

The certification body shall take all steps necessary to evaluate conformance with the relevant product standards according to the requirements of specific product certlf!cation system (see clause 3). The certification body shall specify the relevant standards or parts thereof and any other requirements such as sampling, testing and Inspection requirements which form the basis for the applicable certification system. In conducting its certification operations, the certification body shall observe, as appropriate, the requirements for the suitability and competence of body(ies) or person(s) carrying out testing, inspection and certiflcatlon/registration as specified in lSO/lEC Guides 25, 39 and 62.

4.5.1 The management of the certification body having executive responsibility for quality shall define and document its policy for quality and its objectives for, and commitment to, quality. The management shall ensure that this policy is understood, Implemented and maintained at all levels of the organization. 4.5.2 The certification body shall operate an effective quality system in accordance with the relevant elements of this Guide and appropriate for the type, range and volume of work performed, This quallty system shall be documented and the documentation shall be available for use by the certification body staff. The certification body shall ensure effective implementation of the documented quality system, procedures and instructions. The certification body shall designate a person having direct access to its highest executive level who, irrespective of other responsibilities, shall have defined authority for a) ensuring that a quality system is established, implemented and maintained In accordance with this Guide, and reporting on the performance of the quallty system to the body's management for review and as a basis for improvement of the quality system.

4.4

Subcontracting

When a certification body decides to subcontract work related to certification (e.g. testing or inspection) to an external body or person, a properly documented agreement covering the arrangements including confidentiality and conflict of Interest shall be drawn up. The certification body shall a) take full responsibility for such subcontracted work and maintain its responsibility for granting, malntainmg, extending, suspending or withdrawing certification;

b)

4.5.3 The quality system shall be documented In a quality manual and associated quality procedures, and

3

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide 65:1996

the manual shall contain Iowfng a) b)

or refer to at least the fol-

4.6 Conditions and procedures for granting, maintaining, extending, suspending and withdrawing certification
4.6.1 The certification body shall spec!fy the conditions for granting, maintaining and extending certification and the conditions under which certification may be suspended or withdrawn, partially or In total. 4.6.2 a) The certification body shall have procedures and, if applicable, to sus-

a quality policy statement: a brief description of the legal status of the certification body, including the names of its owners and, If different, names of the persons who control It; the names, qualifications, experience and terms of reference of the senior executive and other certification personnel, both internal and external; an organization chart showing lines of authority, responsibility and allocation of functions stemming from the senior executive; a description of the cation body, including (committee, group or its constitution, terms procedure; organization of the certifidetails of the management person) identified in 4.2 c), of reference and rules of

c)

grant, maintain, withdraw pend certification;

d)

b) c)

extend or reduce the scope of certification; re-evaluate, in the event of changes significantly affecting the product's design or specification, or changes in the standards to which compliance of the product is certified, or changes in the ownership, structure or management of the supplier, if relevant, or in the case of any other information indicating that the product may no longer camply w[th the requirements of the certification system,

e)

f)

the policy and procedures agement reviews; administrative control; procedures

for conducting

man-

g)

including

document 4.7

Internal audits and management reviews
body shall conduct periodic all procedures in a planned to verify that the quality sysis effective.

h)

the operational and functional duties and services pertaining to quality, so that the extent and limits of each person's responsibility are known to all concerned; the procedure for the recruitment, selection and training of certification body personnel and monitoring of their performance; a list of its approved subcontractors and the procedures for assessing, recording and monitoring their competence; Its procedures for handling nonconformities and for assuring the effectiveness of any corrective and preventive actions taken; the procedures for evaluating products and implementing the certification process, including 1) 2) the conditions for issue, retention withdrawal of certification documents, controls over the use and application documents employed in the certification products; and of of

4.7.1 The certification internal audits covering and systematic manner, tem is Implemented and The certification a)

1)

body shall ensure that are

personnel responsible for the area aud!ted informed of the outcome of the audit; corrective action is taken in a timely priate manner; and the results of the audit are documented.

1)

b)

and appro-

k)

c)

1)

4,7.2 The body's management with executive responsibility shall review its quality system at defined intervals which are sufficiently short to ensure its continuing suitability and effectiveness in satisfying the requirements of this Guide and the stated quality policy and objectives. Records of such reviews shall be maintained.

4.8 m) the policy and procedure for dealing with appeals, complamts and disputes; its procedures for conducting internal based on the provisions of ISO 10011-1. audits,

Documentation

n)

4.8.1 The certification body shall provide (through publications, electronic media or other means), update at regular intervals, and make available on request, the following: .

4

MSO/lEC

Guide 65:1996

a)

Information certification

about the authority body operates;

under which the

b)

a documented statement of its product certification system, including its rules and procedures for granting, maintaining, extending, suspending and withdrawing certification; Information about the evaluation procedures and certlflcatlon process related to each product certification system; a description of the means by which the organization obtains financial support and general information on the fees charged to applicants and to suppliers of certified products; a description of the rights and duties of applicants and suppliers of certified products, including requirements, restrictions or limitations on the use of the certification body's logo and on the ways of referring to the certification granted; Information about procedures plamts, appeals and disputes; a directory phers. of certified for handling com-

formation. The records shall be kept for a period of time so that continued confidence may be demonstrated for at least one full certification cycle, or as required by law. 4.9.2 The procedures ent with its certification concerning 4.10.1. certification body shall have a policy and for retaining records for a period consistcontractual, legal or other obligations. The body shall have a policy and procedures access to these records consistent with

c)

d)

NOTE 4 The question of the length of time for retention of records requires specific attention in the light of legal circumstances and recognition arrangements,

e)

4.10

Conf identicality

f)

4.10.1 The certification body shall have adequate arrangements consistent with applicable laws to safeguard confidentiality of the information obtained in the course of its certification activities at all levels of its organization, including committees and external bodies or individuals acting on its behalf. 4.10.2 Except as requried in this Guide or by law, information gained in the course of certification actwities about a particular product or supplier shall not be disclosed to a third-party without the written consent of the supplier. Where the law requires information to be disclosed to a third-party, the supplier shall be informed of the information provided as permitted by the law.

g)

procfucts and their suP-

4.8.2 The certification body shall establish and maintain procedures to control all documents and data that relate to its certification functions. These documents shall be reviewed and approved for adequacy by appropriately authorized and competent personnel prior to issuing any documents following initial development or any subsequent amendment or change being made. A listing of all appropriate documents with the respective issue and/or amendment status identified shall be maintained. The distribution of all such documents shall be controlled to ensure that the appropriate documentation is made available to personnel of the certification body or suppliers when they are required to perform any function relating to the certification body's activlt!es.

5

Certification body personnel

5.1 General
5.1.1 The personnel of the certification body shall be competent for the functions they perform, including making required technical judgments, framing policies and implementing them, 5.1.2 Clearly documented instructions shall be available to the personnel describing their duties and responsibilities. These instructions shall be maintained up to date.

4.9

Records

4.9.1 The certification body shall maintain a record system to suit its particular circumstances and to comply with existing regulations. The records shall demonstrate that the certification procedures have been effectively fulfilled, particularly with respect to application forms, evaluation reports, surveillance activities and other documents relating to granting, maintaining, extending, suspending or withdrawing certification, The records shall be identified, managed and disposed of in such a way as to ensure the integrity of the process and the confidentiality of the in-

5.2

Qualification criteria

5.2.1 In order to ensure that evaluation and certification are carried out effectwely and uniformly, the minimum relevant criteria for the competence of personnel shall be defined by the certification body,

5

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide 65:1996

5.2.2 The certification body shall require its personnel Involved in the certification process to sign a contract or other document by which they commit themselves a) to comply with the rules defined by the certification body, including those relating to confidentiality and independence from commercial and other interest; and to declare any prior and/or present association on their own part, or on the part of their employer, with a supplier or designer of products to the evaluation or certification of which they are to be assigned,

ties shall be subject certification body. 7.2 a) Each certification

to

the

procedures

of

the

body shall

keep a record of all appeals, complaints and disputes and remedial actions relative to certiflcatlon; take appropriate document subsequent action;

b)

b) c)

the action taken and Its effectiveness.

The certification body shall ensure that, and document how, any contracted personnel for their own part, and on the part of their employer if any, satisfy all the requirements for personnel outlined in this Guide. 5,2.3 Information on the relevant qualifications, trainingand experience of each member of the personnel Involved in the certification process shall be maintained by the certification body. Records of training and experience shall be kept up to date, in particular the following: a) b) c) d) e) f) name and address; organization educational affiliation and position held; qualification and professional status;

8

Application for certification

8.1 Information on the procedure
8.1.1 The certification body shall provide to applicants an up-to-date detailed description of the evaluation and certification procedures, appropriate to' each certification scheme, and the documents containing the requirements for certification, the applicants rights and duties of suppliers which have certified products (including fees to be paid by applicants and suppliers of certified products). 8.1.2 plier a) The certification body shall require that a sup-

experience and training in each field of the certification body's competence; date of most recent updating of records; performance appraisal

always complies with the relevant the certification programme;

provisions

of

b)

6 Changes in the certification requirements
The certification body shall give due notice of any changes it intends to make in its requirements for certification. It shall take account of views expressed by interested parties before deciding on the precise form and effective date of the changes. Following decision on, and ~ublication of, the changed re~uirements, it shall verify that each supplier-makes any necessary adjustments within such time as, in the opinion of the certification body, is reasonable. c)

makes all necessary arrangements for the conduct of the evaluation, including provision for examining documentation and access to all areas, records (including internal audit reports) and personnel for the purposes of evaluation (e.g. testing, inspection, assessment, surveillance, reassessment) and resolution of complaints; makes claims regarding certification only in respect of the scope for which certification has been granted; does not use its product certification in such a manner as to bring the certification body into disrepute and does not make any statement regarding its product certification which the certification body may consider misleading or unauthorized; upon suspension or cancellation of certification, discontinues its use of all advertising matter that contains any reference thereto and returns any certification documents as required by the certification body;

d)

e)

7

Appeals, complaints and disputes

7.1 Appeals,

complaints and disputes brought before the certification body by suppliers or other par-

6

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide 65:1996

f)

uses certification only to indicate that products are certified as being in conformity with specified standards; endeavors to ensure that no certificate or report nor any part thereof is used in a misleading manner; In making reference to its product certification in communication media such as documents, brochures or advertising, complies with the requirements of the certification body.

c)

g)

the certlfica~ion body has the capability to perform the certification service with respect to the scope of the certification sought and, If applicable, the location of the applicant's operations and any special requirements such as the language used by the applicant.

h)

9.2 The certification body shall prepare a plan for Its evaluation activities to allow for the necessary arrangements to be managed. 9.3 The certification
body shall assign personnel appropriately qualified to perform the tasks for the specific evaluation. Personnel shall not be assigned If they have been involved in, or been employed by a body involved in, the design, supply, installation or maintenance of such products in a manner and within a time period which could conflict with impartiality, 9.4 To ensure that a comprehensive and correct evaluation is carried out, the personnel involved shall be provided with the appropriate working documents,

8.1.3 When the desired scope of certification is related to a specific system or type of system operated by the certification body, any explanation needed shall be provided to the apphcant. 8.1.4 If requested, additional application shall be provided to the applicant. information

8.2 The application
8.2.1 The certification body shall require completion of an official application form, signed by a duly authorized representative of the applicant, in which or attached to which are the following: a) b) the scope of the desired certification; a statement that the applicant agrees to comply with the requirements for certification and to supply any information needed for evaluation of Droducts to be certified. shall provide the

10

Evaluation

The certification body shall evaluate the products of the applicant against the standards covered by the scope defined in its application against all certification criteria specified in the rules of the scheme.

8.2.2 The applicant, as a minimum, following information: a) b)

11
corporate entity, name, address and legal status; a defm~tion of the products to be certified, the certification system, and the standards against which each product is to be certified if known to the applicant.

Evaluation

report
procedures these pro-

The certification body shall adopt reporting that suit its needs but, as a mimmum, cedures shall ensure that a)

9

Preparation for evaluation
b)

personnel appointed to evaluate the conformance of the products shall prowde the certification body with a report of findings as to the conformity with all the certification requirements; a full report on the outcome of the evaluation IS promptly brought to the applicant's notice by the certification body, identifying any nonconformitles that have to be discharged in order to comply with all of the certification requirements and the extent of further evaluation or testing required. If the applicant can show that remedial action has been taken to meet all the requirements wlthln a specified time limit, the certification body shall repeat only the necessary parts of the Inltlal procedure.

9.1 Before proceeding

with the evaluation, the certif{catlon body shall conduct, and maintain records of, a review of the application for certification to ensure that a) the requirements for certification are clearly defined, documented and understood; any difference in understanding between the certification body and the applicant is resolved; and

b)

7

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide 65:1996

12

Decision on certification

12.1 The declslon as to whether or not to certify a product shall be taken by the certification body on the bass of the information gathered during the evaluation process and any other relevant information. 12.2 The certlflcatlon body shall not delegate authority for granting, maintaining, extending, suspending or withdrawing certification to an outside person or body

which affect the conformity of the product. The certkcation body shall determine whether the announced changes requ!re further investigations. If such E the case, the supplier shall not be allowed to release certlfled products resulting from such changes until the certification body has notified the supplier accordingly.

13.3 The certification veillance actwities.

body shall document

its sur-

12.3 The certification body shall provide to each supplier offering certified products, formal certification documents such as a letter or a certificate signed by an ~fflcer who has been assigned such responsibility. These formal certification documents shall permit identification of the following:
a) the name and address of the supplier products are the subject of certification; the scope of the certification as appropriate, granted, whose

13.4 Where the certification body authorizes the continuing use of its mark on products of a type which have been evaluated, the certification body shall periodically evaluate the marked products to confirm that they continue to conform to the standards.

14 Use of Iicences, certificates and marks of conformity
14.1 The certification body shall exercise proper control over ownership, use and display of Iicences, certificates and marks of conformity. 142 Guidance on the use of certificates and marks permitted by the certification body may be obtained from lSO/lEC Guide 23.

b)

includlng,

1)
2)

the products certified, which may be identified by type or range of products, the product standards or other normative documents to which each product or product type is certified, the applicable certification system; and the term of

3) c)

the effective date of certification, the certification if applicable.

14.3 Incorrect references to the certiflcatton system or misleading use of Iicences, certificates or marks, found in advertisements, catalogues, etc., shall be dealt with by suitable action.
NOTE 5 Such actions are addressed in lSO/lEC Guide 27 and can Include corrective action, withdrawal of certlflcate, publication of the transgression and, if necessary, other legal action.

12.4 In response to an application for amendment to the scope of a certificate already granted, the certification body shall decide what, If any, evaluation procedure is appropriate in order to determine whether or not the amendment should be made and shall act accordingly.

15

Complaints

to suppliers

The certification body shall require the supplier of certified products to

Is

surveillance

a)

13.1 The certification body shall have documented procedures to enable surveillance to be carried out In accordance with the criteria applicable to the relevant certification system. b) 13.2 The certification body shall require the suppller to )nform It about any of the changes cited In 4.6.2 c), such as Intended modification to the product, manw facturing process or, If relevant, its quality system,

keep a record of all complaints made known to the supplier relating to a product's compliance with requirements of the relevant standard and to make these records available to the certification body when requested; take appropriate action with respect to such complaints and any deficiencies found in products or services that affect compliance with the requirements for certification; document the actions taken

c)

8

Bureau of Indian Standards
established under the Bureau BIS is a statutory institution harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing No part of these publications may be reproduced in any of /rJdian Standards Acf, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

implementing designations.

of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Review of Indian Standards Amendments also reviewed indicates that for revision. amendments Additions'. are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest or edition by referring to the latest issue of `F31SCatalogue' and `Standards: Monthly

This Indian Standard

has been developed

from Dot: No. IRD 1 (012).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amendment No. Date of Issue -- Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131, 23233375, 23239402 Website Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 23378499, 23378626, www.bis.org. in Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378561 23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216, 22542519, 22541442 22542315

Eastern :

{

Northern : SCO 335-336,

Southern : C.I.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113 {

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

~ 28329295,28327858 ~ 28327891,28327892

Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2

