**************** 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


^^^Eii^^^^^tt^i  iil%k^K>S:^^S^T<^^ 


IS  2747  (1990) :  Taximeters 
26:  Weights  and  Measures] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


Performance  Requirements  [PGD 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangarara  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  2747  :  1990 

REAFFIRMED 

Indian  Standard 

TAXIMETERS  -  PERFORMANCE 
REQUIREMENTS 

(  First  Revision  ) 
( "T^?n  ^^rft^riT  ) 


UDC     68ri246  :  620-16 


®  BIS  1990 
BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,  9   BAHADUR  SHAH   ZAFAR   MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

August  \m  PHceGroi.p4 


Commercial  Weights  and  Measures  Sectional  Committee,  LMD  6 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (  First  Revision  )  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  18  January 
1990,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Commercial  Weights  and  Measures  Sectional  Committee  had 
been  approved  by  the  Light  Mechanical  Engineering  Division  Council. 

This  standard  lays  down  performance  requirements  of  taximeters  to  ensure  that  the  taximeters  register 
correct  fare.  This  standard  is  intended  chiefly  to  cover  the  technical  provisions  relating  to  taximeters, 
and  it  does  not  include  all  the  necessary  provisions  of  a  contract. 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1964.  In  this  revision,  the  performance  requirements  of  both 
mechanical  and  electronic  type  taximeters  have  been  covered  and  is  largely  based  on  the  specification 
for  taximeters  of  mechanical  and  electronic  type  formulated  by  the  Weights  and  Measures  Unit  of  the 
Department  of  Civil  Supplies,  Government  of  India. 

In  addition,  assistance  has  been  derived  from  the  following: 

a)  International   Organization   for   Legal    Meterology  (  OlML  )  Recommendation   No.  21  Taxi- 
meters. 

b)  Ministerial  order  regarding  the  ^Approval  of  model  and  installation  of  taximeters*,  Ministry  of 
Economic  Affairs,  Belgium. 

c)  Regulations  on  Taximeters,  Commissioner  of  Police,  London. 

d)  Clifford,  A.N.  Taximeters  testing  at  NPL.  Metrology  Division,    National   Physical  Laboratory, 
Teddington  (  UK  ). 

e)  Handbook  44  —  Specification,  tolerances  and  regulations  for  commercial  weighing  and  measur- 
ing devices.  US  Department  of  Commerce,  National  Bureau  of  Standards. 

f)  Handbook  45  —  Testing  of  measuring  equipment— A  manual  for  weights  and  measures  oflScials, 
US  Department  of  Commerce,  National  Bureau  of  Standards. 


AMENDMENT  NO.    1     OCTOBER  2003 

TO 

IS  2747  :  1990    TAXIMETERS  —  PERFORMANCE 

REQUIREMENTS 

(  First  Revision  ) 

(  Page  4,  clause  6.1.0,  last  sentence  )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the 
existing: 

'Brief  outlines  of  approval  test  are  given  in  6.1.1  to  6.1.12. 

[  Page  6,  clause  6.1.10.2(c),  line  4  ]  —  Substitute  'data'/^^^  'date'. 

{  Page  6,  clauses  6.1.11  )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 
'6.1.10.3  Test  procedure 

a)  The  distance  test  of  a  taximeter,  whether  (a),  (b)  or  (c)  of  6.1.10.2  shall 
include  at  least  duplicate  runs  of  sufficient  length  to  cover  at  least  the 
third  money  drop  or  1  km,  whichever  is  greater,  and  shall  be  at  a 
speed  less  than  40  km/h  travelled  by  the  vehicle  in  normal  service. 

b)  If  the  taximeter  is  equipped  with  a  mechanism  through  which  charges 
are  made  for  time  intervals,  a  test  shall  be  conducted  to  determine 
whether  there  is  interference  between  the  time  and  distance  mechanism. 
During  this  test,  the  vehicle  is  operated  at  a  speed  of  3  or  4  km/h  faster 
than  the  changeover  speed.' 

(  Page  6,  clause  5.1,12  )  —  Substitute  '6.1.11'  for  ^5.1.12'. 

1  Page  6,  clause  6.3  )  —  Renumber  *6.3'  as  '6.1.12'. 


(BP26) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


IS  2747  :  1990 


Indian  Standard 

TAXIMETERS  -  PERFORMANCE 
REQUIREMENTS 

f  First  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  covers  the  performance  require- 
ments for  distance-cum-time  taximeters  both  of 
mechanical  and  electronic  type,  to  determine 
charges  for  hire  of  carriages  plying  for  public 
hire. 


2  REFERENCES 

IS  No. 
10236 


(Part    2): 

1982 

(  Part    4  )  : 

:  1982 

(  Part  10  )  ; 

:  1985 

(Part  11  ): 

:  1985 

TERMINOLOGY 

Title 

Procedure  for  basic  climatic 
and  durability  test  for 
optical  instruments 

Part  2  Dry  heat  test 
Part  4  Damp  heat  test 
Part  10  Bump  test 
Part  1 1  Vibration  test 


For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  follow- 
ing definitions  shall  apply. 

3.1  Adopting  Device 

A  special  device  which  allows  the  values  of  K 
(  see  3.22  )  and  w  (  see  3.23)  to  be  adjusted  in 
such  a  way  that  the  maximum  permissible  error 
laid  down  in  7.4  shall  not  be  exceeded. 

3.2  Bench  Test 

The  test  of  a  taximeter  independent  of  the  taxi 
cab. 

3.2.1  Distance  Test 

The  test  to  check  the  equivalent  distance  intervals, 
without  the  effect  of  time,  between  money  drops. 

3.2.2  Time  Test 

The  test  to  check  only  the  time  intervals  between 
money  drops. 

3.3  Cleared 

A  taximeter  is  cleared  when  no  indication  of  fare 
is  shown  and  when  all  parts  arc  in  the  positions  in 
which  they  are  designed  to  be,  when  the  vehicle  on 
which  the  taximeter  is  installed  is  not  engaged  by 
a  passenger. 


3.4  Competent  Authority 

Authority  competent  to  formulate  and  enforce 
rules  and  regulations  in  connection  with  the  use 
and  testing  of  taximeters. 

3.5  Distance  or  Time  Interrals 

The  intervals  corresponding  to  money  drops 
(  see  3.13  )  following  the  initial  money  drop 
(  see  3.14  ). 

3.6  Distance  or  Time  Interyal,  Initial 

The  distance  or  the  time  interval  corresponding  to 
the  initial  money  drop. 

3.7  Effective  Cab  Wheel  Circumference 

The  distance  covered  by  the  cab  driven  wheel  with 
correctly  inflated  tyre  in  one  complete  revolution 
when  a  motor  cab  with  a  full  complement  of 
passengers  is  pushed  forward  in  a  straight  line. 

3.8  Extras 

Charges  to  be  paid  by  the  hirer  in  addition  to  the 
fare  for  transportation  of  chargeable  luggage. 

3.9  Face 


is 


That  side   of  a   taximeter     on    which    fare 
indicated. 

3.10  Fare 

That  portion  of  the  charge  for  the  hire  of  a  public 
vehicle,  that  is,  computed  by  a  taximeter  through 
the  operation  of  distance  and  time  mechanism. 

3.11  Flag 

A  lever  arm  or  any  other  device  by  which  the 
operating  condition  of  a  taximeter  is  controlled. 

3.12  Gear  Box 

An  assembly  of  jgears  to  permit  adjustments  for 
different  tyre  sizes,  transmission  ratios  and  the 
like. 

3.13  Money  Drop 

An  increment  in  the  fare  indication. 

3.14  Money  Drop,  Initial 

The  fare  indication  following  the  depression  of  the 
flag  from  FOR  HIRE  to  the  HIRED  position. 


1 


IS  2747  :  i99% 


3.15  Pick-Up 

Fare  is  calculated  by  the  basic  rate  for  the  time 
elapsed  or  altemtti¥dy,  by  the  basic  rate  for 
distance  travelled  accondrng  as  the  speed  of  the 
vehicle  is  below  or  above  the  speed  of  agreement 
of  basic  rates.  The  arrangement  oftranifer  of 
calculation  between  the  two  basic  rates  is  some- 
times called  the  pick-up  and  sometimes  the 
dififerential. 

3.16  Prescribed 

In  the  standard,  where  the  word  'prc«cribed*  is 
used,  it  shall  mean  prescribed  by  comp>etent 
authority, 

3.17  Road  Test 

The  test  over  a  measured  course  of  a  complete 
taximeter  assembly  when  installed  on  the  motor 
cab,  the  mechanism  being  actuated  as  a  re$u!t  of 
tbc  motor  cab  travel. 

3.18  Speed  of  Agreement  of  Basic  Rates 

The  speed  at  which  the  basic  distance  and  the 
basic  time  rates  correspond,  that  is,  a  meter 
operated  at  the  speed  of  agreement  for  basic  rates 
will  show  a  money  drop  of  distance  travelled 
which  is  exactly  the  same  as  for  the  time  elapsed. 

Example    (  Only  for  illustration  )  : 

Basic  rate  for  time  :  10  paise  per  5  minutes 

Basic  rate  for  distance       :  10  paise  per  1/3  km 

The  basic  rates  agree  when  a  distance  of  1/3  km 
is  travelled  in  5  minutes,  that  is,  the  speed  of  the 
vehicle  is  4  km  per  hour. 

3.19  Tariff,  Basic  Distance 

The  tariff  for  distance  corresponding  to  all  the 
intervals  except  the  initial  interval. 

3.20  Tariff,  Basic  Time 

The  tariff  for  time  corresponding  to  all  the 
intervals  except  the  initial  interval. 

3.21  Taxlmctcf 

A  device  that  computes  continuously  and  indicates 
at  any  moment  of  the  journey,  the  charges  pay- 
able by  the  passenger  of  the  pubHc  vehicles  as  a 
function  of  the  distance  travelled,  and  below  a 
certain  speed,  of  the  length  of  tiflie  occupied, 
independent  of  supplementary  charges,  according 
to  prescribed  rates  tariff. 

3.22  Taximeter  Constant,  K 

The  constant,  ^,  of  a  taximeter  i&  a  characteristic 
quantity  showing  the  type  and  number  of  signals 
which  the  instrument  must  receive  in  orcter  to 
indicate  correctly  a  covered  distance  of  1  km. 

Constant  AT,  is  expressed: 

a)  in  ^revolutions    per    iodicated    kilometre* 


(  rcv/km  )  if  the  information  relating  to  the 
distance  covered  by  the  vehicle  is  introduced 
into  the  taximeter  in  the  form  of  a  number 
of  revolutions  of  its  main  shaft  (  drive  shaft 
at  entry  point  to  the  instrument ). 

b)  in  'impulse  per  indicated  kilometre'  ( imp/ 
km  )  if  this  information  is  introduced  in  the 
form  of  electrical  signals. 

3.22.1  According  to  the  construction  of  the 
instrument,  the  constant  AT,  may  be  fixed  or 
adjustable  by  fixed  amounts. 

3.23  VehicJe  Characteristic  Coefficient^  w 

The  characteristic  coefficient,  >y,  of  a  vehicle  is  a 
quantity  indicating  the  type  and  the  number  of 
signals  intended  to  drive  the  taximeter  which 
appear  at  the  component  provided  for  this  pur- 
pose, for  a  distance  travelled  of  1  km. 

Coefficient  w,  is  expressed: 

a)  in  'revolutions  per  kilometre  travelled* 
(  rev/km  ),  or 

b)  in  'impulse  per  kilometre  travelled*  ( imp/ 
km  )  depending  on  whether  the  information 
relating  to  the  distance  traveJIed  by  the 
vehicle  appears  in  the  form  of  a  number 
of  revolutions  of  the  component  driving  the 
taximeter  or  in  the  form  of  electrical 
signals. 

3.23.1  Coefficient  varies  as  a  function  of  several 
factors,  principally  the  wear  and  the  pressure  of 
the  tyres,  the  load  carried  by  the  vehicle,  the  con- 
ditions under  which  the  vehicle  makes  a  journey. 
It  shall  be  measured  under  the  standard  test  con- 
ditions for  the  vehicle. 

4  G£N£RAL 

4.1  The  following  units  of  measurement  shall  be 
used  for  taximeters  (a)  the  metre  or  kilometre  for 
distance  and  (b)  the  second,  minute  or  hour  for 
time, 

4.2  The  fare  for  the  journey  shall  be  expressed  in 
the  legal  monetary  units. 

5  CONSTRUCTIONAL  AND  OPERATIONAL 

REQUIREMENTS 

5.1  The  taximeter  shall  be  robust  and  wdl  con- 
structed. The  functional  of  the  taximeter  shall  be 
made  of  materials  which  guarantee  adequate 
strength  and  stability. 

5  J  The  casing  of  the  taximeter  and  that  of  the 
adapting  device  as  well  as  the  covers  of  transmis- 
sion devices  shall  be  so  made  that  the  essential 
parts  of  mechanism  are  out  of  reach  from  outside 
and  are  protected  against  dust  and  humidity. 


IS  2747  :  1990 


5.2.1  Access  to  devices  for  adjustment  shall  be 
made  impossible  without  damage  to  the  sealing 
arrangements. 

5.3  In    the    case    of   electronic     taximeters,    the 
electronic    devices    which    calculate    the    charges 
payable  shall  operate  without    failure,  and  at  any 
time,   it  shall  be   possible  to   check  their  correct 
operation. 

5.3.1  This  may  be  achieved  by  means  of  a  special 
control  programme  which  is  automatic  or  manually 
activated. 

5.3.2  Any  fault  identified  by  this  control  pro- 
gramme shall  be  clearly  indicated. 

5.4  Measuring,  Calculating  DeWces 

5.4.1  Except  when  the  taximeter  is  being  cleared, 
indications  of  fare  shall  be  clearly  visible  at  all 
times. 

5.4.2  The  taximeter  shall  be  so  designed  that  it 
calculates  and  indicates  the  fare  for  the  journey 
solely  on  the  basis  of: 

a)  distance  travelled  when  the  vehicle  moves 
at  a  speed  higher  than  the  changeover 
speed,  or 

b)  period  of  time  when  the  vehicle  moves  at 
a  speed  less  than  the  changeover  speed. 
The  changeover  speed  is  attained  by  dividing 
the  time  tariff  by  the  distance  tariff,  and 
may  vary  according  to  the  variation  in  these 
tariffs. 

5.4.3  The  distance  drive  shall  be  made  through 
the  medium  of  the  wheels,  and  the  reverse  motion 
shall  not  cause  a  reduction  in  the  fare  or  distance 
shown. 

5.4.4  The  time  drive  shall  be  obtained  by  a 
mechanical  or  electronic  movement  of  the  clock- 
work which  can  be  activated  only  by  operating 
the  mechanism  of  the  taximeter. 

5.4.5  If  the  clockwork  mechanism  is  operated  by 
manual  winding,  it  shall  work  for  at  least  8  hours 
without  rewinding  or  for  at  least  two  hours  if 
rewinding  is  necessary  at  each  manual  operation 
before  it  is  set  in  operation. 

5.4.6  The  electronic  clokwork  shall  be  capable  of 
functioning  at  any  time. 

5.4.7  During  the  distance  drive,  the  first  increment 
of  fare  indication  (  money  drop  )  shall  occur 
after  travelling  the  initial  distance.  The  subsequent 
money  drops  shall  correspond  to  equal  distance 
between  each  of  them. 


5.4.8  During  the  time  drive,  the  first  increment  of 
fare  indication  (  money  drop  )  shall  occur  after 
the  initial  time  interval.  The  subsequent  money 
drops  shall  correspond  to  equal  time  intervals 
between  each  of  them. 

5.4.9  Without  change  of  drive,  the  ratio  between 
the  initial  distance  and  the  subsequent  distance 
shall  be  the  same  as  the  ratio  between  the  initial 
time  and  the  subsequent  time  intervals. 

5.4.10  An  adapting  device,  situated  inside  or 
outside  the  instrument  case,  shall  allow  the  adapta- 
tion of  taximeter  constant  to  the  characteristic 
coefficient  of  the  vehicle  on  which  it  is  mounted 
with  an  accuracy  such  that  the  maximum  permis- 
sible errors  laid  down  in  7.4  shall  not  be  exceeded. 

5.4.11  The  taximeter  shall  be  so  designed  as  to 
facilitate  necessary  adjustment  of  the  calculating 
device  for  making  it  conform  the  changes  in  the 
tariff. 

5.4.12  If  the  number  of  tariffs  provided  on  the 
instrument  is  greater  than  the  number  of  tariffs 
in  force,  the  taximeter  shall,  in  the  superfluous 
positions,  calculate  and  indicate  a  fare  based  on 
one  of  the  authorized  tariffs. 

5.5  Control  Mechanism 

5.5.1  The  mechanism  of  the  taximeter  shall  be 
capable  of  beijig  set  in  motion  after  having  been 
engaged  by  a  single  control  mechanism. 

5.5.2  For  the  electronic  taximeter,  this  mechanism 
may  consist  of  various  push  buttons  and  switches 
for  special  operations. 

5.5.3  The  mechanism  of  the  taximeter  shall  be 
capable  of  being  set  in  motion  in  one  of  the  posi- 
tions indicated  in  5.5.4,  5.5.5  and  5.5.6. 

5.5.4  Free  Position  {for  Hire  ) 

In  this  position: 

a)  There  shall  be  no  indication  of  the  fare  to 
be  paid,  or  this  indication  shall  be  equal  to 
zero  or  to  a  value  of  the  initial  money  drop 
but  in  the  latter  case,  the  indication  shall 
be  covered  by  a  shutter; 

b)  The  distance  drive  and  the  time  drive  shall 
not  operate  the  device  which  indicates  the 
fare  to  be  paid; 

c)  The  totalizer  indicating  the  total  distance 
travelled  shall  remain  turned  off;  and 

d)  The  window  through  which  possible  extras 
arc  seen  shall  be  blank  or  indicate  'zero*. 


IS  2747  :  1990 


5.5.5  Working  Position  (  Hired ) 

In  this  position,  the  time  and  distance  drives  and 
the  extras  indicator,  if  any,  ghall  be  engaged. 

5.5.6  'To  Pay'  Position 

In  this  position  which  shows  the  filial  total  fare 
due  from  (he  passenger  for  the  journey  excluding 
any  extras,  the  time  drive  shall  be  disconnected 
and  the  distance  drive  shall  remain  connected  to 
the  authorized  tariff. 

In  case  of  electronic  taximeters,  it  is  permitted, 
by  operating  a  special  button  in  the  *To  Pay* 
position,  to  add  any  possible  extras  to  the  fare, 
and  to  indicate  on  the  indicator,  the  total  fare 
payable  by  the  passenger.  When  this  button  is 
released,  the  two  amounts  shall  be  indicated  sepa- 
rately. 

5.5.7  The  control  mechanism,  shall  be  so  designed 
that  starting  from  *Free*  position,  the  taximeter 
can  be  set  successively  in  ^Working*  position  and 
*To  Pay'  position. 

5.5.8  The  operation  of  the  control  mechanism  is 
subject  to  the  following  restrictions: 

a)  Starting  from  the  ^Working*  position,  it 
shall  not  be  possible  to  put  the  taximeter 
back  in  the  Tree'  position  without  going 
through  the  *To  Pay'  position. 

b)  Starting  from  the  'To  Pay'  position,  it  shall 
not  be  possible  to  put  the  taximeter  in  the 
'Working'  position  without  going  through 
the  *Frec'  position. 

5.6  Indicatiog  Device 

5.6.1  The  ^Reading  Face'  of  the  taximeter  shall  be 
so  designed  that  the  indications  of  interest  to  the 
passenger  can  be  easily  read  by  him. 

5.6.2  The  fare  to  be  paid,  excluding  possible 
extras,  shall  be  ascertained  from  the  fare  indicator 
by  simple  reading  of  an  indication  in  aligned 
figures  having  a  minimum  height  of  10  mm. 

5.6.2.1  When  electronic  indicating  elements  are 
used,  it  shall  be  possible  to  check  the  operation  of 
the  indication. 

5.6.3  As  soon  as  the  instrument  is  put  into  opera- 
tion from  the  Tree'  position  by  operating  the 
control  mechanism,  the  shutter,  if  any,  covering 
the  indication  of  fare  to  be  paid,  shall  retract  and 
a  fixed  amount  corresponding  to  the  initial  money 
drop  shall  appear. 

5.6.3.1  The  fare  indicator  shall  thereafter  advance 
by  successive  steps  of  a  constant  monetary  value 
as  soon  as  the  amount  of  the  initial  money  drop 
has  been  used  up. 


5.6.4  The  taximeter  shall  be  provided  with  a 
device  indicating  at  any  moment  on  the  reading: 
face,  the  engaged  working  position. 

5.6.5  The  taximeter  shall  have  a  means  for 
illuminating  the  readings  appearing  on  the  reading" 
face  and  it  shall  be  possible  to  replace  the  light 
bulbs  without  opening  the  sealed  parts  of  the 
meter. 

5.6.5.1  In  the  case  of  self-luminous  indications, 
no  additional  illumination  is  required  if  readability 
of  indications  of  interest  to  the  passenger  is 
ensured. 

5.7  Optional  Additional  Deyfces 

5.7.1  The  taximeter  may  in  addition  be  provided 
with  supplementary  devices  such  as: 

a)  an  indicator  of  extras  independent  of  the 
fare  indicator  mentioned  in  5.6.2  and 
automatically  returning  to  zero  in  the 
Tree'  position.  In  the  To  Pay*  position, 
it  is  permitted  to  add  the  extras  to  the  fare 
by  operating  a  pushbuttion. 

b)  totalizers  which  give,  in  aligned  figures 
having  a  minimum  height  of  4  mm  in- 
dications of: 

1)  the  total  distance  travelled  by  the  vehicle, 

2)  the  total  distance  travelled  on  hire, 

3)  the  total  number  of  ^engagement*,  and 

4)  the  total  number  of  money  drops. 

The  totalizers  may  also  be  non-erasable 
electronic  memories  which  can  be  recalled  and 
indicated  in  the  Tree'  position  of  the  taximeter. 
The  date  in  the  memory  shall  be  protected 
for  at  least  72  hours  after  a  power  supply 
failure. 

c)  a  device  detecting  the  presence  of  a  pas- 
senger (  pressure  sensor  ). 

6  TESTS 

6.0  Two  types  of  tests,  namely,  type  approval 
tests  and  periodical  tests  have  been  prescribed  for 
the  taximeters. 

6.1  Type  Approval  Test 

6.1.0  Exhaustive  tests  are  carried  on  new  types 
of  taximeters  or  taximeters  made  by  new  manu- 
facturers to  determine  their  suitability.  Brief  out- 
lines of  approval  tests  are  given  in  6.1.1  to  6.1.11. 

6.1.1  Two  taximeters  which  would  be  known  as 
'Pattern  Meters'  shall  be  sent  to  the  competent 
authority  and  shall  be  accompanied  by  detailed 
description  with  drawings.  A  working  spccimea 
of  the  flexible  cable  by  which  the  meter  shall  be 
driven,  shall  also  be  forwarded  along  with  tbc 
meters  for  test. 


IS  2747  :  1990 


6.1.2  The  pattern  meters  shall  be  subjected  to 
exhaustive  tests.  At  least  one  of  the  meters  shall 
be  opened  and  such  parts  dismantled  as  may  be 
considered  necessary  for  studying  single  move- 
ments, their  meterial  and  design. 

6.1.3  Such  parts  as  are  subject  to  repeated  impact 
shall  be  studied  not  only  for  their  ability  to  stand 
wear  and  tear  but  also  to  ensure  that-  the  parts 
taking  impact  have  no  points  of  stress  concentra- 
tion likely  to  lead  to  ultimate  failure.  Considera- 
tion shall  be  given  to  the  mechanical  consequences 
of  hypothetical  failures  of  any  moving  part  that 
would  be  caused  by  a  seizure  want  of  lubrication 
or  misplacement  from  any  other  cause. 

6.1.4  Fare  Indications 

At  all  stages,  the  money  drops  on  the  dial  shall 
make  instant,  accurate  and  complete  change  from 
one  iigurc  to  the  next.  The  error  due  to  engaging 
and  disengaging  of  the  mechanism  shall  be  within 
the  tolerance  limits  specified  in  7. 

6.1.5  Flag 

When  the  flag  is  unlocked  from  the  Tor  Hire' 
position,  it  should  be  checked  that  the  last  recorded 
fare  has  been  cleared  and  the  meter  is  properly 
re-set  at  the  *Zero'  position.  There  shall  be  no 
possibility  of  the  fare  recording  caught  either 
partly  cleaned  or  on  a  rebound.  It  shall  be  checked 
that  any  reverse  movement  between  the  ratchet 
lock  and  the  next  does  not  make  improper  record- 
ing or  any  kind  of  injury  possible.  It  should  be 
properly  seen  that  no  [)ossibility  exists  for  tamper- 
ing by  improper  use  of  the  flag.  From  the  moment 
the  flag  is  put  down,  the  fare  should  recorded  and 
the  figures  expressing  it  shall  appear  on  the  face. 

6.1.6  Distance  Drive 

There  will  always  be  a  critical  point  in  a  fare 
recording  mechanism  when  the  next  fare  increment 
is  almost  due  to  be  recorded.  If  the  journey  ends 
at  the  critical  point  which  is  seldom  possible,  an 
impact,  such  as,  slamming  of  the  car  door  could 
cause  the  next  increment  to  be  recorded.  A  jerky 
drive  should  be  arranged  in  the  test  to  check  that 
no  fault  develops  in  the  meter  mechanism.  Several 
tests  shall  be  made  to  check  that  the  possibility  of 
premature  recording  of  an  incremet  is  kept  at  a 
minimum. 

6.1.7  Before  and  after  the  road  test  (  see  6,1.10  ), 
the  meter  shall  be  subjected  to  the  bench  test 
specified  in  6.1.8. 

6.1.8  Bench  Test 

The  test  shall  be  performed  on  taximeter  fitted 
with  an  appropriate  and  reliable  gear  box. 


6.1.8.1  Apparatus 

a)  Test  bench  for  taximeters,  a  device  employ- 
ing an  electric  motor  to  turn  the  taximeter 
spindle  shall  be  used.  This  device  shall 
also  be  capable  of  being  rotated  by  hand. 
Brackets  shall  be  provided  for  convenient 
mounting  of  the  taximeters. 

b)  Counter,  shall  be  of  such  a  design  as  to 
register  one-tenth  of  a  spindle  revolution. 

6.1.8.2  Procedure 

The  test  shall  be  carried  out  in  two  stages  called 
*Short  hauF  and  *Long  haul'. 

a)  Short  haul  test  —  With  the  flag  in  the 
^Stopped*  position,  the  meter  is  driven  for 
the  equivalent  of  a  distance  of  two  or  three 
kilometres.  The  number  of  input  revolu- 
tions for  each  money  drop  arc  read  from 
the  counter  and  compared  with  the  cal- 
culated number. 

b)  Long  haul  test  —  The  flag  shall  be  in  the 
^Stopped'  position.  The  taximeter  shall  be 
operated  continually  for  an  interval  corres- 
ponding to  not  less  than  60  kilometres. 
Throughout  the  test,  the  taximeter  shall  be 
kept  under  observation  so  that  any  sticking 
of  the  money  drop,  any  failure  of  the  money 
drop  to  occur  in  the  proper  sequence,  any 
incorrect  alignment  of  figures  or  any  other 
abnormal  condition  may  be  discovered 
which  would  lead  to  rejection  of  the 
taximeter. 

6.1.8.3  Fare  indications 

These  shall  comply  with  the  provisions  of  6.1.4, 
6.1.9  Time  Test 

6.1.9.1  Apparatus 

This  test  requires  that  observations  shall  be  made 
to  the  nearest  second.  A  stop  watch  or  a  desk 
type  of  interval  timer  which  may  be  started  from 
and  re-set  to  zero  as  desired,  shall  be  used. 

6.1.9.2  Procedure 

The  time  test  consists  of  timing  the  imcrvals 
between  money  drops  with  the  flag  in  the  *Hired* 
position  and  shall  be  conveniently  divided  into 
two  tests,  namely,  individual  interval  test,  and  the 
long  interval  test. 

a)  Individual  interval  test  —  The  individual 
interval  test  shall  be  initiated  by  depressing 
the  taximeter  flag  to  the  *Hired*  position 
and  simultaneously  starting  the  stop  watch 
or  the  timer.     At  the  instant  each   money 


IS  2147 :  1990 


drop  occurs,  the  elapsed  time  to  the  nearest 
second  shall  be  recorded.  The  watch  or  the 
timer  shall  not  be  stopped  but  shall  be 
allowed  to  continue  running  throughout  the 
entire  period  of  the  time  test.  The  test  shall 
be  continued  for  a  minimum  of  one  hour. 

b)  Long  interval  test  —  The  taximeter  shall  not 
be  cleared  at  the  conclusion  of  the  separate 
interval  test  nor  shall  the  stop  watch  or  the 
timer  be  stopped.  Operation  shall  be 
continued  for  at  least  one  hour  or  more 
without  intervening  observations.  When 
the  test  is  to  be  concluded,  the  time  at 
which  the  nioncy  drop  occurs  shall  be 
observed  and  recorded  after  which  the 
taximeter  shall  be  cleared. 

6.1.10  Road  Test 

6.1.10.1  Standard  conditions  for  test 

Taximeters  shall  be  tested  for  road  test  by  using 
any  one  of  the  methods  specified  in  6.1.10,2  under 
the  following  'standard  test  conditions*: 

a)  The  load  carried  by  the  vehicle  shall  cor- 
respond to  the  weight  of  the  number  of 
adult  persons  including  the  driver  authorized 
by  the  competent  authority  from  time  to 
time; 

b)  The  tyres  shall  be  inflated  to  the  pressure 
prescribed  by  the  vehicle  manufacturer  and 
shall  be  in  good  condition  (  such  as,  con- 
forming to  the  road  safety  rules  );  and 

c)  The  vehicle  shall  move,  under  its  own 
power,  on  level  ground,  in  a  straight  line, 
at  a  speed  less  than  40  km/h. 

6.1.10.2  Test  method 

a)  Road  test— \  road  test  consists  of  driving 
the  vehicles  over  a  precisely  measured  road 
course. 

b)  Fifth  wheel  test— Th\s  test  consists  of  driving 
the  vehicle  over  any  reasonable  road  course 
and  determining  the  distance  actually 
travelled  through  the  use  of  a  mechanism 
known  as  'fifth  wheel',  that  is,  attached  to 
the  vehicle  and  that  independently  measures 
and  indicates  the  distance. 

c)  Simulated  road  test— This  test  consists  of 
determining  the  distance  travelled  by  com- 
putation from  rolling  circumference  and 
wheel  turn  date. 

6.1.11  Test  Procedure 

6.1.11.1  The  distance  test  of  a  taximeter,  whether 
(a),  (b)  or  (c)  of  6.1.10.2    shall    include    at    least 


duplicate  runs  of  sufficient  length  to  cover  at  least 
the  third  money  drop  or  one  km,  whichever  is 
greater,  and  shall  be  at  a  speed  approximating  the 
average  speed  travelled  by  the  vehicle  in  normal 
service. 

6.1.11.2  If  the  taximeter  is  equipped  with  a 
mechanism  through  which  charges  are  made  for 
time  intervals  a  test  shall  be  conducted  to  deter- 
mine whether  there  is  interference  between  the  time 
and  distance  mechanisms.  During  this  test,  the 
vehicle  is  operated  at  a  speed  of  3  or  4  km/h  faster 
than  the  changeover  speed. 

5.1.12  Endurance  Test 

A  sample  of  taximeter  picked  up  at  random  from  | 
production  shall  be  first  checked  for  conformity 
to  the  requirements  laid  down  in  5  and  if  it 
complies  with  these  requirements,  it  should  be 
run  continuously  for  not  less  than  500  hours.  After 
this  test,  the  meter  and  its  component  parts 
shall  not  show  any  damage  or  defects  and  all  the 
parts  shall  be  satisfactory;  necessary  checks  shall 
be  made  for  this  purpose.  Taximeter  shall  than  be 
tested  for  conformity  to  the  requirements  given 
in  7. 

NOTE  —This  is  type  test  to  be  carried  out  by 
recognized  testing  laboratory  and  shall  be  con- 
ducted whenever  there  are  changes  in  the  design, 
materials  manufacture  and  construction. 

6.1.13  A  type  approval  certificate  shall  be  issued 
for  pattern  meters  which  satisfy  the  type  approval 
test  with  the  limits  of  tolerances. 

6.2  Periodical  Test 

6.2.0  Routine  tests  to  ensure  compliance  with  the 
requirements  of  this  specification  are  made  on 
production  taximeter  which  are  copies  of  approved 
pattern  meters.  The  following  tests  shall  be  carried 
out. 

6.2.1  Bench  Test  (  see  6.1.8  ) 

6.2.2  Time  Test  (  see  6.1.9  ) 

6.2.3  Road  Test  (  see  6.1.10  ) 

6.3  Taximeter  shall  meet  the  following  environ- 
mental requirements: 

a)  Dry  heat  test  for  )6  hours  at  70"C  as  given 
in  IS  10236  (  Part2):  1982; 

b)  Damp  heat  test  at  40°C,  95  percent  relative 
humidity  as  given  in  IS  10236  (  Part  4  )  : 
1982; 

c)  Vibration  test  with  severity  of  10  to  150  Hz 
with  amplitude  of  2  mm  for  a  duration  of 
6  hours  in  accordance  with  IS  10236 
(  Part  11  )  :  1985;  and 


182747:1990 


d)  Bump  test  for  1  000  bumps  at  40  g  along 
all  the  three  axes  as  in  IS  10236  ( Part  10 )  : 
1985, 

7  TOLERANCES 

7.1  Bench  Test 

Tolerances  for  bench  test  shall  be  as  follows: 

a)  On  over  registration  :  1  percent,  and 

b)  On  under  registration  :  1    percent    with  an 

added  tolerance  of 
30  m  whenever  the 
initial  interval  is  in- 
cluded in  the  interval 
test. 

7.2  Road  Test 

During  drive  by  distance,  the  maximum  disper- 
sion of  indications  shall  not  exceed: 

a)  For  the  initial  distance,  2  percent  of  the 
true  value.  However,  for  initial  distance 
less  than  1  000  metres,  the  dispersion  may 
be  up  to  20  metres. 

b)  For  distance  succeeding  the  initial  distance, 
2  percent  of  the  true  value. 

7.3  Time  Test 

During  drive  by  time,  the  maximum  dispersion  of 
indications  shall  not  exceed: 

a)  For  the  initial  time,  3  percent  of  the  true 
value.  However,  for  initial  time  less  than 
10  minutes,  this  error  may  be  up  to 
20  seconds. 

b)  For  time  succeeding  the  initial  time,  3  per- 
cent of  the  true  value. 

7.4  The  tests  shall  be  carried  out  under  standard 
test  conditions  given  in  6.1.10.1  such  that  the 
constant^  of  the  taximeter  differs  by  less  than 
1  percent  from  the  characteristic  number  w  of  the 
vehicle  on  which  it  is  mounted. 

8  SEALING 

8.1  The  undermentioned  parts   of  the  taximeters 


shall  be  so  constructed  that  they  can  be  sealed 
with  lead  or  by  marks  of  protection  and  guaran- 
tee: 

a)  The  case  enclosing  the  internal  mechanism 
of  the  taximeter. 

b)  The  case  of  adjusting  device  ( if  this  device 
is  outside  the  case  of  the  taximeter ),  and 

c)  The  covers  of  electrical  or  mechanical 
devices  forming  the  connection  between  the 
entrance  of  the  taximeter  and  the  corres- 
ponding part  provided  on  the  vehicle  for 
alignment  with  the  instrument  including  the 
detachable  parts  of  the  adjusting  device. 

8.2  A  plate  of  approved  size  and  pattern  shall  be 
attached  to  the  taximeter  gear  box  or  to  the  taxi- 
meter itself  in  such  a  manner  that  it  cannot  be 
removed  without  either  removing  the  seals  affixed 
by  the  testing  authority  or  opening  the  taximeter 
or  taximeter  gear  box.  The  plate  shall  show  in 
raised  or  sunken  words  and  figures,  the  type  of 
cab  on  which  the  taximeter  is  to  be  used. 

These  seals  shall  be  such  that  all  access  to  pro- 
tected components  particularly  the  components  of 
adjustment,  is  impossible  without  damaging  the 
seal. 

9  MARKING 

9.1  Taximeters  shall  be  marked  indelibly  with  the 
following: 

a)  Indication  of  the  source  of  manufacture, 

b)  The  constant  K  in  rev/km  or  imp/km. 

9.2  Every  taximeter  shall  have  places  to  permit 
affixation  of  marks  of  initial  and  periodical 
verifications. 

9.3  In  the  vicinity  of  the  windows  of  all  indicating 
devices,  the  meanings  of  the  values  shown  shall  be 
given  clearly,  legibly  and  unambiguously. 

9.4  The  name  or  the  symbol  of  the  monetary 
unit  shall  be  alongside  the  fare  indication  for  the 
journey  and  the  indication  of  extras  to  be  paid. 


Standard  Mark 

The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  Act,  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  Standard  Mark  on 
products  covered  by  an  Indian  Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced 
to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well  defined  system  of  inspection, 
testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  BIS  and  operated  by  the 
producer.  Standard  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  BIS  for  conformity 
to  that  standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  uhich  a  licence  for  the 
use  of  the  Standard  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  producers  may  be  obtained 
from  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


Bareaa  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS   has   the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.    No  part  of  these  publications  may  be    reproduced  in 
any  form  without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.     This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the 
course  of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as   symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade 
designations.    Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (  Publications  ),  BIS. 

Reyision  of  Indian  Standards 

Indian  Standards  are  reviewed  periodically  and  revised,  when  necessary  and  amendments,  if  any,  are 
issued  from  time  to  time.  Users  of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of 
the  latest  amendments  or  edition  Comments  on  this  Indian  Standard  may  be  sent  to  BIS  giving  the 
following  reference: 

Doc  :  No.  LMD  6  (  4884  ) 


Amendmenti  Issued  Since  PoblicatioD 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  AflFected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters  : 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi   110002 
Telephones  :  331  01  31,    3311  3  75 


Regional  Offices  : 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  2^far  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  445-446,  Sector  35-C,  CHANDIGARH  160036 
Southern  :  C  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  6001 13 

Western  :  Manakalaya.  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (  East  ) 
BOMBAY  400093 


Telegrams  •  Manaksanstha 
(  Common  to   all  Offices  ) 

Telephone 

331  01  31 

331  13  75 

37  86  62 


2  18  43 

41  29  16 

6  32  92  95 


Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR. 
PATNA.  TRIVANDRUM. 


Printed  at  Printwtll  Prtnteri,  Delhi,  India 


