( Reaffirmed 2003 )

ls:5900-1970

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR HAIR HYGROGRAPH
Meteorological Instruments Sectional Committee, EDC 69
C%airrnan M~~~A.MANI Mamb*s The National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta SHPUN. R. t&AKRABORTY SHIU N. R. Drs GUPTA (Aknate ) DBpvry DIRECTOR ( METEORO- Indian Navy r-or=) STAFF OFFICER ( METEOROMOY ) ( Altaraate) Jo& DJRB~R, F&SEARCH (B&F) Research, Designs & Standards Organization ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow DEPUTY DIRECTOR, RESEARCH (B&F) (Ahmate) DR R. N. MATHUR SHRID. D. PURI(Alternate) Lawrence & Mayo ( India ) Private Limited, Calcutta SWRI R. H. MENDONSA SHRIS. VARADARAJAN ( Alternate) SHIU PREMPRAKASH Ssras Om P-H ( Alternate ) SHRI K. K. ROHAT~I National Physical Laboratory Government ( CSIR ), New Delhi Central Scientific Instruments Organization Chandigarh ( CSIR), Representing India Meteorological Department, New Delhi

Precision Instruments Factory, Calcutta

GP CAPT S. DAS SARA Indian Air Force Wo CDR P. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) SHRI M. V. PATANXAR, Director (Mech Engg ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojlcio Member )

SHRI S. M. RA~VI Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), IS1

iNDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR DELHI NEW

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

IS : 5900 - 1970

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR HAIR HYGROGRAPH
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 4 September 1970, after the draft finalized by the Meteorological Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The most common method of measuring atmospheric humidity is by means of psychrometers, either of the stationary screen type or the portable ventilated type. However, permanent records of the atmospheric humidity at meteorological and other observing stations are obtained with hygrographs in which the changes in length with relative humidity of a humidity sensitive element, usually human hair, are recorded on a paper chart wound on a revolving drum. 0.3 Specification for hair hygrographs in use at meteorological stations in the country have been prepared by the India Meteorological Department but no Indian Standard specification for these existed. With the increasing manufacture of these instruments in the country, the formulation of an Indian Standard for hair hygrographs and their initial certification by IS1 has become necessary. 0.4 This standard has been prepared in the interest of standardization of hair hygrographs in use in the country and of accuracy in the measurement of atmospheric relative humidity. The testing of all hygrographs made in the country and their initial certification after manufacture will in future be the sole responsibility of ISI. 0.5 In the formulation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the requirements laid down by the World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, in addition to the special circumstances obtaining in this country. 0.6 For the purpose of aeciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expresswith ing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same.as that of the specified value in this standard. ~.____.._.-._.*R&a for rounding off immcrical values ( revised ) . 2

IS : 5999 - 1970 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for hair hygrograph. The scale value of the instrument is such that atmospheric relative humidity correct up to one percent may be read on a suitable chart. 2. DESCRIPTION 2.1 The humidity sensor consists a bundle of human hair held between two adjustable jaws, the whole assembly being mounted on a hair movement plate. The variations with length of the hair strands due to changes in the relative humidity are measured by the displacement of the centre of the hair strands transmitted by a lever and a pair of cams to the pen arm so that the movement of the pen is a linear function of the relative humidity. A means of fine adjustment is provided by a setting screw which alters the distance between the jaws. The design also incorporates an arrangement for altering the scale value by adjusting the position of The complete recording mechanism, with the the hook on the lever. clock drum, is mounted on the base of the instrument. The hinged cover has a wide viewing window. The hair element is protected by a suitable guard. 3. MATERl.AL 3.1 The material used for the fabrication of the base and cover shall be either a light and durable meta.l like aluminium or any other material having the following properties: a) Rigidity and strength with no distortion or other deterioration when exposed to widely varying climatic conditions, while at the same time being light in weight; b) Freedom from attack by animal, insect and fungoid life; c) Smooth and permanent surface finish; and d) Low coefficient of thermal expansion so as to minimize alterations of the frame due to temperature changes. 3.1.1 WhiIe any material satisfying the above requirements may be used, aluminium and glass reinforced polyester are considered as suitable materials for moulding the base a?d cover. 3.2 The material used for the remaining components of the instrument shall be stainless steel, brass or similar material unless otherwise specified. The material used shall be such that it is capable of being finished to the specified dimensions and is not affected by exposure to widely varying climatic conditions both at inland and coastal stations. 3

of

IS f 5900 - 1970 4. DIMENSIONS 4.1 The general arrangement be as indicated in Fig. 1. and dimensions of the hair hygrograph shall are

4.1.1 While slight modifications in the details of the instrument permissible, the general arrangement shall be as shown in Fig. 1.

4.1.2 The means for zero adjustment and scale value alteration are left to the manufacturer who may also alter the system of linkages to suit his design provided the final product satisfies all the other requirements of this specification. 5. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

5.1 Hair Assembly 5.1.1 The hair strands usually consisting of 20 to 25 hairs shall have an effective length of 190 f 10 mm excluding the portions held in the The complete hair assembly shall be mounted on a hair adjustable jaws. movement plate fixed to the base of the instrument. The hair element shall be mounted outside the cover as shown and shall be suitably protected by a perforated guard so as to leave the hairs freely exposed `to the atmosphere. The guard shall have 6 perforations per square centimetre, the diameter being 3.2 mm. I 5.1.2 The hair strands shall be suitably treated to be free from all traces of oil and grease. 5.1.3 The various spindles shall be made of stainless steel or similar non-rusting .material and shall be perfectly straight and well polished. They shall be held in suitable bearings so that they rotate smoothly and freely with minimum friction and withstand normal wear and tear. 5.1.4 A setting key shall be provided to enable the zero position of the pen to be adjusted with a precision of one percent on the chart by smooth adjustment of the distance apart of the jaws. When not in actual use, the key shall be fixed to the base. 5.1.5 An arrangement for adjusting the position of the hair hook on the lever shall be provided for adjusting the magnification of the instrument whenever ntcessary. 5.1.6 The hair movement cam and the pen arm cam shall be made and assembled in such a manner that the pen arm is rotated relative to the pen arm cam and the pen arm is horizontal when the cams are in their mean position. 5.1.7 The contacting* surface of the two cams shall be smooth, wellpolished and free from lacquer, to keep frictional errors to the minimum 4

SETTING

SCREW

SPRING

TOPVIEW (COVER REMoVEO;)

LSETTING SCREW

M)Llu SHELL r--i \ / I I I

WEIGHT

___-_____

____

_-

c

I
I

r6ASE

I

\ Fro. !

CLOCK

MEC%lANISM

--

[PEN

WOVEMEN

CAM

~---_-------

Alldimulaionsillmillimctrcd. GSNERAL ARRANGEMENT AND DIMENSIONS OF HAIR HYGR~IXUPH

5

Is:5900-1970 and the two cams shall be held in contact light spring. at all times by means of a small

5.1.8 The counter weight placed at the upper end of the hair movement cam shall be such that the force applied by the hook on the hairs when the cams are in their mean position equals 16 g ( approx 0.16 N ). 5.2

Pm Arm Assembly

5.2.1 The pen arm shall be made of hard-drawn German silver sheet or The arm may be ribbed in the centre for rigidity and similar material. strength, if necessary. 5.2.2 The length of the pen arm with the pen shall be exactly 140 mm so that the pen shall follow exactly the time grid arcs on the chart. 5.2;3 The pen arm shall be mounted in such a way that there is no play of the arm in the suspension and the angle of contact of the pen on the chart, as well as the pressure of the pen on the chart may be adjusted. 5.3 Cover and Base

5.3.1 The cover shall be provided with a cut-away window to enable The winthe record on the chart to be seen without opening the cover. dow shall be covered with a transparent sheet of glass or acrylic plastic which may be slid in grooves framing the window and fixed in position. Alternatively, the cover shall be such as to provide a panoramic view of the In either case the cover shall be attached to the base with a strong inside. rustproof hinge. 5.3.2 A suitable rustproof locking cover to be locked to the base. 5.33 5.4 A suitab&andle device shall be provided to enable the

shall be fixed securely

on the top of the cover.

Recording Mechanism
shall be such that the movement of the the entire range of the instrument from and the pen travels a vertical distance of 81 mm for a humidity from 0 to 100 percent.

5.4.1 The recording mechanism pen on the chart is linear through
0 to 100 percent

?&ange in relative

5.4.2 The recording mechanism shall be free enough to denote clearly on the chart a change in relative humidity of the order of f2 percent. 5.4.3 The friction in the instrument shall be kept to the minimum so that the record obtained on the chart is continuous without steps, that is, when there is a gradual change in humidity, the record does not show abrupt changes of>elative humidity with traces showing periods of constant humidity interposed in between. 6

lsn!mo-1970
5.4.4 The recording pen shall have the dimensions shall yield a clear trace on the chart at all times. as given in Fig. 2 and

r-2.5 --j--0'"`"

(-_25 FIG. 2

.-A All dimensionsin millimctrcs. DIMENSIONS FOR RECORDING PEN with a clock mechanism and

5.4.5 The instrument shall be provided drum conforming to 15 : 5%4-1970*.

5.4.6 The chart ( SEC IS : 5947-19707 ) shall be depending upon the clock mechanism and drum. 6. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH shall

` daily'

or ` weekly'

6.1 The external surfaces permanent finish. 6.2 The instrument preferred. 6.3 All metal parts

of the hygrograph

have

a but

smooth light

and is

shall be painted

in any light colour,

blue

rusting or other deterioration,

shaI1 be suitably treated so as to protect particularly at coastal stations.

ihem from

6.4 When finally assembled, the movement of the pen arm on the chart shall have minimum friction so that the pen returns to its original position when gently moved down manually through a distance equal to one small division on the chart. The instrument shall meet this requirement positions of the pen on the chart. +Sp&ification for clock mechanisms and drum, for meteorological instruments. tC&+rts for recording meteorological instrumcntr.

IS:5888-1876
6.5 The movement of the pen up and down the chart shall be parallel the time grid marked on it. 7. TESTS AND CALIBRATION to

7.1 The hygrograph, when tested in a properly designed and operated humidity cabinet, giving enough time for the instrument to reach equilibrium, shall not have at any point above 20 percent on the scale, errors exceeding f5 percent. 7.2 The hygrograph shall have a sensitivity of about f2 conditions of relative humidity. percent in steady

7.3 After the instrument has been checked against a psychrometer and adjusted to read the ambient relative humidity, it shall indicate a relative humidity of 95 percent after attaining equilibrmm when the hair is wetted with distilled water. 7.4 When the hourly readings of the hygrograph are plotted against the corresponding relative humidity values from the readings of the psychrometer, the mean line passing through the scattered points shall be a straight line of slope 45' passing through the origin. 8. MARKING 8.1 Each hygrograph shall have the following information engraved legibly and neatly on a name plate which shall be cemented firmly on the base of the instrument: a) Name of the instrument - ` Hair Hygrograph `; b) Word ` Daily ' or ` Weekly' corresponding to the mechanism; c) Designation of the chart to be used with the instrument; d) Mandfacturer's name or recognized trade-mark; and e) Serial number No. 123/1969. 8.1.1 Mark. The hygrograph and year of manufacture, for clock

example,

may also be marked with the ISI

Certification

-The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the NOTE Indian Standards Institution ( Certication Marks) Act, and the Rules and R tiOlM made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Fatandard conveys the assurance that they have been producedto comply with the requirementa of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control during production. This system, which ia devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

8

l!3:9900-1970 9. PAGKING 9.1 Each hygrograph without the clock `mechanism and drum, shall be wrapped in dust-proof paper taking care not to damage the hair element, after lightly tying the pen arm to the pen lifter to prevent excessive oscillations of the pen arm during transit. It shall then be placed in a corrugated cardboard carton with suitable cushioning. The clock. mechanism and drum shall be carefully packed separately in another cardboard carton to avoid any risk of damage or deformation during transit. Both the cartons shall then be packed in a strong wooden box Alternatively, the instrument shall be using suitable packing material. packed as agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. 10. TESTING AND INSPECTION

10.1Each hygrograph shall be tested individually for conformity to all the requirements of this specification.

9

NO. 1 MAY 1994 TO IS 5900 :1970 SPECIFICATION FOR HAIR HYGROGRAPH ( Page
`aluiuiniult~`. (

AMENDMENT

3, cltrrrsc 3.1, line 2 ) -

Substitute

`Aturuinitlal

alloy'

for for

Page 3, clnmc

3.1.1,

line

2

) -

Substitute

`atualinium

alloy'

`alunliniulu'. ( `The

P~rgc 3, cltrrtsc 3.2 ) --- Substicu!c thc following
material used for the renraiGng and with suitable of being compo~wnts paint. non-corrosive non-rusting ar\ticorrosiw finished varying material

for tllc existing: of Itic itlslrunlcul sbatl bc

non-magtwtic, or similar

tikc slailltcbs The l~l;ttrri;ll dinlcn~ious

steel, brass used shalt bc
ilJld

malcrial

such that it is capable
CoitSlal

to the specified climatic

is 001

all`ccfcd by exposure IO widely
stations.'
C/UUSC

couditiow bolt1 at inland and
at the end of the L~lausc:

( Pc/~c 7, `Suifahle

5.4.4

) -

Add

~IIC

following

fibrc lipped

disposable ) -

yen can also bc used.' Substitute `IS 5924

( Ptrge 7, clnrrse 5.4.5 `tS 5924 :1970'.

: IOSS ( first

rwision

)'

for

(LM

21)

