RAT AAF IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


maga {Затен чап 


STET 2 Чет alae 


Mobile Device Security 


Part 2 Security Requirements 


ICS 33.050.10, 35.030 


© BIS 2021 


anda HIS SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR MAA, 9 serere TH AMT, ay Redi 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2021 Price Group 7 


Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional Committee, LITD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
Information Systems Security and Privacy Sectional committee had been approved by the Electronics and 
Information Technology Divisional council. 


There is no ISO/IEC Standard on this subject. 
This standard is one of the series of Indian Standards on Mobile device security. Other parts in this series are: 
Part 1 Overview 
Part 3 Security levels 
Part 4 Assessment and evaluation 
As mobile based services especially, financial services are gaining popularity, focus on the security of data and 
content on mobile devices is obvious. Mobile devices need additional protection because their extensive mobility 
(portability) and always on connectivity (generally using untrusted public network) places them at higher exposure 


to threats than other client devices, such as desktop and laptop devices which are normally used only within the 
organization's facilities and on the organization's networks 


It requires a totally different approach and strategy to address security of mobile devices as compared to normal 
computer based systems and applications. Mobile devices uses mobile ecosystem that involves various subsystems 
and components to provide an environment to enable the operations and connectivity of mobile devices and 
information systems. Therefore, security of mobile needs to be addressed at different layers (subsystems and 
components) of the mobile ecosystem covering mobile device technology stack (including Firmware, Embedded 
components, Operating System, Pre-installed Applications like Mobile Browser, Device Management Software 
Agent, VPN Client, Email Client, etc.), Third party mobile applications, networks and communication interfaces 
(including cellular, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, NFC), mobile infrastructure (including mobile app store and services) and 
enterprise mobile support/monitoring services (Enterprise Mobility Management [EMM]/ Device Management 
Software and Mobile Application Management [MAM]). All these components of the mobile ecosystem 
shall be considered for defining and assessing the security of mobile devices to meet the common security 
objectives-confidentiality, integrity and availability. 


This series of standards is applicable to the following: 
a) Organizations designing, developing, and manufacturing mobile devices; 
b) Customers seeking confidence in the security of mobile devices used by them; 
c) Organizations seeking confidence in the security of mobile devices used by them; and 
d) Organizations performing security assessment of mobile devices 
In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following standards: 


NIST Special Publication 1800-4b (Draft) — Mobile Device Security, Approach, Architecture, and Security 
Characteristics Cloud and Hybrid Builds 


NIST Special Publication 800-124 Revision 1; Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile Devices in 
the Enterprise, June 2013 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


CONTENTS 


0 INTRODUCTION 

1 SCOPE 

2 REFERENCES 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

4 USE CASE SCENARIOS 


5 MOBILE SECURITY MAP FROM SECURITY RISK TO 
SECURITY CONTROL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Mobile Device — High Level Security Risks 


6 RELATIONSHIP AMONG SECURITY RISKS, SECURITY 
THREATS AND SECURITY CHARACTERISTICS 


ANNEX A COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


LIST OF FIGURES 
Fig. 1 Mobile Security Map 


LIST OF TABLES 


Table 1 High Level Security Risks - Security Threats — Characteristics 
Table 2. Security Characteristics and Security Controls to Mitigate Threats 
Table 3з Security Control — Details and Explanation 


iii 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


Page No. 


12 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


0 INTRODUCTION 


Mobile devices are subjected to a unique set of security threats affecting the users which could be an individual or an 
enterprise. Typical mobile device protections against security threats, addressing mobile apps, malware, physical 
access, etc. may fail to fully mitigate the security challenges associated with the complex mobile ecosystem. 
Hence, a set of security controls and countermeasures that address mobile threats in a holistic manner shall be 
identified, necessitating a broader view of the entire mobile security ecosystem. This shall go beyond mobile 
devices to include, as an example, the mobile networks, and infrastructure used to support mobile applications 
and native mobile services. 


In this part of the standard, high level security risks and related security threats are identified and described. 
Further, to mitigate these threats, Security characteristics and associated security control requirements are 
defined for the mobile devices. It also identifies the minimum set of security requirements pertaining to Mobile 
OS and pre-installed Apps. This covers security threats associated with mobile device; mobile network; mobile 
user behavior; and untrusted third party applications and malicious systems. 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


IS 17737 (Part 2): 2021 


Indian Standard 


MOBILE DEVICE SECURITY 
PART 2 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS 


1SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) identifies high level security 
risks, related security threats, and define security 
characteristics with security control requirements to 
mitigate threats to mobile device technology stack 
consisting of mobile hardware, firmware, operating 
system, and pre-installed apps from the mobile 
ecosystem. 


The security threats to mobile device for personal and 
enterprise use covered in this standard are: 


a) Direct security threats by mobile device; and 


b) Indirect security threats from other components 
of mobile ecosystem like network, user and 
malicious apps. 


The security threats to other core components of the 
mobile ecosystem such as third party mobile apps, 
mobile network, and infrastructure are out of scope as 
independent entities. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards/documents given below contains 
provisions, which through reference in this text 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. AII 
standards/documents are subject to revision, and parties 
to agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards listed as follows: 


IS No./Other Title 
Publication 
17737 (Part 1) : Mobile device security: Part 1 
2021 Overview 
17737 (Part 4) : Mobile device security: Part 4 
2021 Assessment and evaluation 
IS 15256 (Part 1) Banking — Key management 
: 2011 (retail): Part 1 Principles 
(first revision) 
ISO/IEC 19790: Information technology — 


2012 Security techniques — Security 


requirements for cryptographic 
modules 

CIS Benchmarks (Android and iOS) 

OWASP Top 10 Mobile Security Risks, 2016 


OWASP Mobile Application Security Verification 
Standard (MASVS), Version 1.1 


SANS Mobile Device Checklist 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard (Part 2) the definitions 
given in IS 17737 (Part 1) shall apply. 


4 USE CASE SCENARIOS 


The mobile device may be used for various situations. 
The typical uses cases for mobile device are described 
below: 


a) Use Case-1 — Mobile device for personal use; 
and 


b) Use Case-2 — Mobile device for enterprise use 
and personal use. 


Depending up on the use case, a mobile device shall 
be evaluated against one of the two security levels as 
defined in Part 3 of this standard. 


The applicable security to these use cases may 
be different and has to be determined by the 
users/organizations using the mobile device. The 
security levels are defined in 4 of Part 3 of this standard 
and security control requirements are specified in 6. 


5 MOBILE SECURITY MAP FROM 
SECURITY RISK TO SECURITY CONTROL 
REQUIREMENTS 


The high level security risks, related security threats, 
security characteristics and security controls pertaining 
to mobile devices are described in this clause. 


The approach for defining security control requirements 
Is based on identifying security threats from high level 
security risk. 


5.1 Mobile Device — High Level Security Risks 


The high level security risks to mobile device (mobile 
hardware, firmware, mobile OS, and pre-installed apps) 
are grouped into following 4-different categories which 
covers CIA (Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability) 
objectives: 


a) Mobile device based security risks (untrusted 
mobile device); 

b) Mobile network based security risks (untrusted 
network); 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


High Level Security Threats 


Security Risks 


Security Control 
requirements to 
Mitigate Threats 


Security 
Characteristics 


Fic. 1 MOBILE SECURITY MAP 


c) Mobile user behavior based security risks (user 
behavior and awareness); and 


d) Malicious apps and malware based security risks 
(untrusted third party applications and malicious 
systems). 

The first category of security risks (that 1s, mobile 
device security risks) is the direct security risks to the 
mobile devices whereas the remaining three categories 
of risks are indirect and operational security risks to the 
mobile device. These 4-categories of high level security 
risks are decomposed into specific security threats. To 
address these security threats; security characteristics 
are defined, which are elaborated into security control 
requirements as in 6. 


Security risks are briefly described below: 


5.1.1 Mobile Device Based Security Risks (Untrusted 
Mobile Device) 


Mobile devices are used by end-users to perform a 
variety of business-related tasks and store a significant 
amount of sensitive data. This data can be compromised 
due to vulnerabilities in the insecurely designed mobile 
device leading to breach of device integrity and data 
security; the always-on connectivity of the mobile 
devices allowing opportunities to unauthorized parties 
to access data; and portable form-factor devices making 
them susceptible to theft and misplacement leading to 
misuse. 


5.1.2 Mobile Network Based Security Risks (Untrusted 
Network) 


The mobile devices in general are constantly connected 
to the internet. The end-users might use untrusted 
public networks enabling malicious parties to access 
and intercept transmitted data through rogue access 
points; the Wi-Fi sniffing; eavesdropping; skimming; 
and sophisticated Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) attacks. 


5.1.3 Mobile User Behavior based Security Risks (User 
Behavior and Awareness) 


Mobile empowers end-users and provides various 
features for their personal and business purposes. 
However, end-users often indulge in risky behaviors 
primarily due to lack of awareness that could 
compromise business data. The risky behaviors of end 
users include Jail breaking/rooting devices to bypass 
security controls; using un-approved cloud-based apps 
to share and sync data; Using un-approved productivity 
apps that maintain copies of corporate data; Using 
malicious apps from un-approved app-stores; and 
Exposing business data with malicious intent. 


5.1.4 Malicious Apps and Malware Based Security 
Risks (Untrusted Third Party Applications and 
Malicious Systems) 


Malicious apps and mobile malware can steal sensitive 
data and collect user data. In addition, mobile malware 
can be used to mount targeted attacks against mobile 
device users. Smartphones and tablets are susceptible 
to worms, viruses, Trojans and spyware similarly to 
desktops. 


6 RELATIONSHIP AMONG SECURITY RISKS, 
SECURITY THREATS AND SECURITY 
CHARACTERISTICS 


6.1 The security characteristics are related to the 
security risks and are given in Table 1 


6.2 Security characteristics are further associated with 
security controls and are given in Table 2. 


6.3 Explanation of each of the security controls and 
inputs required to check the implemented control is 
given in Table 3. The security control requirements 
mentioned below address the security of mobile device 
technology stack consisting of 4-layers (hardware, 
firmware, OS and pre-installed applications). 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


Table 1 High Level Security Risks - Security Threats — Characteristics 


( Clause 6.1) 


High Level Security Risks 


Security Threats 


Security Characteristics 


a 


— 


Device based security risks (hardware, 
firmware, OS and pre-installed apps related 
attacks) 


Loss of mobile device integrity; 
Device physical access (lost, stolen, disposal); 


Unauthorized access. 


b 


— 


Network based security risks (network 
based attacks on device) 


Eavesdropping; 
Skimming; 

Relay attack; 
Man-in-the-middle; 
Denial of Service; 
Sniffing. 


с 


) 


User based security risks (user behavior 
and awareness Issues) 


Social engineering; 


Loss of sensitive data. 


d 


YS 


Application based security risks (malicious 
apps, malware and other systems based 
attacks on device) 


Mobile malicious apps, spyware and malware; 
Un-approved cloud-based apps; 
Un-approved productivity apps. 


i) Device protection; 

ii) Data protection; 

Data isolation; 

Identity and authorization; 
v) Monitoring; 


Privacy protection. 


Table 2 Security Characteristics and Security Controls to Mitigate Threats 


( Clause 6.2 ) 


Security Characteristics 


Security Controls 


a 


) 


Device protection (device integrity) 


Baseband integrity checks, 
Application black/whitelisting, 
Device integrity checks: 

i) Boot validation, 
Application verification, 


Verified application and OS updates. 


b 


— 


Data protection 


2) 


3) 


Protected storage: 

i) Device encryption, 
ii) Secure containers, 
iii) Trusted key storage, 
iv) Remote wipe. 

Protected communications: 

i) Virtual private network (VPN), 
ii) To include per-App VPN. 

Data protection in process: 

i) Encrypted memory, 


ii) Trusted execution environment. 


с 


— 


Data isolation 


Sandboxing, 

Memory isolation, 

Trusted execution environment, 
Device resource management, 


Baseband isolation. 


d 


— 


Identity and authorization 


Local user authentication to applications, 
Local user authentication to device, 


Remote user authentication, 


Credential and token in storage and while in use 


е 


м 


Monitoring 


Privacy protection 


Auditing and logging, 
Root and jailbreak detection. 
Informed consent of user, 


Privacy notification provided to user. 


NOTE — Not all of these security controls may be applicable for a mobile device. Applicable security controls are selected and used to 


address the security of mobile device. 


IS 17737 (Part 2): 2021 


Table 3 Security Control – Details and Explanation 


( Clause 6.3 ) 


Security Characteristics 


Security Controls 


Details and Explanation of Security Controls 


Security Threats Addressed 


a) Device protection 
(device integrity) 


1) Baseband integrity 
checks 


The baseband is the subsystem of the mobile 
that controls radio communications - basically 
a chipset on the phone that directly controls 
cellular hardware and communications with cell 
towers. 


Each mobile platform has integrity checking 
mechanisms. 


Check what integrity checking mechanisms 
are used to verify software, firmware, and 
information files integrity. 


i) Loss of Mobile 
Device Integrity 


2) Application 
black/whitelisting 


Only mission appropriate content may be 
uploaded within the application. 


The application should employ functionality to 
restrict upload of file types to those expressly 
required for operations (for example, TIFF, 
JPEG, and PDF). 


Blacklist unauthorized apps 
authorized apps 


and Whitelist 


Using device management software апа/ 
or antivirus software this feature may be 
demonstrated. 


i) Mobile malicious 
apps and malware; 

ii) Un-approved 
cloud-based apps; 

iii) Un-approved 
productivity apps. 


3) Device integrity 
checks: 


i) Boot validation 


Boot validation: Validation that the device is in 
a known working state and unmodified at boot 


(for example, basic input output system (BIOS) 
integrity checks). 

Device-specific implementations of boot 
validation, verified application and OS updates. 


Each of the mobile platforms has integrity 
checking mechanisms - examine the native file 
integrity mechanisms as well as malicious code 
protection. 


i) Loss of Mobile 
Device Integrity 


4) Application 
verification 


Application verification: Ensures that 
applications being installed come from a valid 
source. 


OS-level capability provided by each mobile OS 
to verify the digital signature of applications. 


Each platform requires application developer 
to digitally sign applications before they are 
available for users — providing application 
verification capability. 


i) Mobile malicious 
apps and malware; 

ii) Un-approved 
cloud-based apps; 

ii) Un-approved 
productivity apps. 


5) Verified application 
and OS updates 


Verified application and OS updates: Ensure 
that OS and application updates being installed 
come from a valid source. 


OS-level capability provided by each mobile OS 
to verify the digital signature of applications and 
OS updates. 


i) Mobile malicious 
apps and malware; 


ii)  Un-approved 
cloud-based apps; 


ii) Un-approved 
productivity apps; 


iv) Loss of mobile 
device integrity; 


v) Unauthorized access; 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


Security Characteristics 


Security Controls 


Details and Explanation of Security Controls 


Security Threats Addressed 


b) Data protection 


1) Protected storage 


Device encryption, application-level 
encryption, and remote wipe capabilities. 


i) Device Device encryption: Cryptographic protection i) Device physical 
encryption of all or portions of a device’s data storage access (lost, stolen, 
locations - primarily flash memory locations. disposal); 
OS-level capability provided by each mobile ii) Unauthorized access; 
OS iii) Loss of sensitive 
ISO/IEC 19790 compliant mechanism may be data. 
used to secure data in storage. 
ii) Secure Data is accessible only to authorized users and i) Unauthorized access; 
containers services. 


iii) Trusted key 
storage 


Data is protected during storage and processing. 


Application isolation solution, such as a secure 
container provides application level encryption. 


Trusted key storage: Protected locations in 
software, firmware or hardware in which long- 
term cryptographic keys can be held. 


il) Loss of sensitive 
data. 


i) Loss of mobile 
device integrity; 
unauthorized access; 

ii) Loss of sensitive 
data. 


iv) Remote wipe 


Remote wipe: Renders access to enterprise data 
stored on the device infeasible, but may only 
wipe a portion of flash memory. 


Security incident remediation - The organization 
can perform remote remediation when a security 
incident is detected on the device. 


Options include disabling access to 
email/contacts/calendar from the server side or 
remotely wiping the mobile device. 


Using device management software , this feature 
may be demonstrated. 


i) Device physical 
access (lost, stolen, 
disposal); 

ii) Loss of sensitive 
data. 


2) Protected 
communications: 


All network communication channels in the 
architecture use transport layer security (TLS). 


i) Virtual private 
network (VPN) 


The confidentiality and integrity of information 
is protected while in transit using a cryptographic 
mechanism. 

ISO/IEC 19790 compliant mechanism shall be 
used to secure data in transit. 


i) Eavesdropping; 

ii) Skimming; 

iii) Relay attack; 

iv) Man-in-the-middle; 


V) Loss of sensitive 
data 


ii) To include per- 
App VPN 


Data in transit protection: Use of a VPN 
communication to cloud services is protected 
by TLS. 


i) Eavesdropping; 

ii) Skimming; 

iii) Relay attack; 

iv) Man-in-the-middle; 


v) Loss of sensitive 
data 


3) Data protection in 
process: 


Encrypted memory and trusted execution 


environment. 


i) Encrypted 
memory 


Encrypted memory to store information, such as 
sensitive data, passwords, or secret keys. 


ISO/IEC 19790 compliant mechanism may be 
used to secure data in process. 


i) Unauthorized access; 


ii) Loss of sensitive data 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


Security Characteristics 


Security Controls 


Details and Explanation of Security Controls 


Security Threats Addressed 


ii) Execution 
environment 


Trusted execution environment is a protected 
environment that runs a secure operating system 
in the main processor of a mobile device. 


The protected/secure execution environment 
includes — key-storage and management 
functionalities conforming to IS 15256 (Part 1). 


It also includes secure storage, which can be 
used to store transaction logs and authentication 
credentials in a private area. 


Protected/secure execution environment that runs 
independently from the main operating system 
(for example, Android or iOS). 


1) 
ii) 


Unauthorized access; 


Loss of sensitive data 


c) Data isolation 


1) Sandboxing 


Sandboxing: OS or  application-level 
mechanisms utilizing multiple protection, 
isolation, and integrity capabilities to achieve 
higher levels of overall isolation. 


OS-level capability provided by each mobile OS 


OS mechanisms that isolate user-level 
applications from each other to prevent data 
leakage between applications. 


ii) 


Unauthorized access; 


Loss of sensitive 
data 


2) Memory isolation 


Memory isolation: Processes should not be able 
to access or modify another process's memory 


OS-level capability provided by each mobile 
OS. 


Unauthorized access; 


Loss of sensitive 
data 


3) Trusted execution 


Trusted execution: A process is created and 
runs in a trustworthy and isolated execution 
environment leveraging distinct memory spaces 
and controlled interfaces. 


OS-level capability provided by each mobile 
OS. 


Unauthorized access; 


Loss of sensitive 
data 


4) Device 
management 


resource 


Device resource management: Ability to enable/ 


disable device peripherals. 
Automatic, regular device 


compliance checks 


integrity and 


Using device management software this feature 
may be demonstrated. 


The device management software and mobile 
Threat protection (MTP) clients periodically 
scan the device for threats and compliance. 


Results are accessible to system administrators. 


Unauthorized access; 


Loss of sensitive 
data; 


Denial of service 


5) Baseband isolation 


Baseband activities to manage network 
connections which include the cellular and 
Wi-Fi baseband, the NFC subsystem and others 
are isolated from main processor that runs the 
device’s primary operating system and SIM. 


Unauthorized access; 


Table 3 (Continued) 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


Security Characteristics 


Security Controls 


Details and Explanation of Security Controls 


Security Threats Addressed 


d) Identity and 
authorization 


e) Monitoring 


1) Local user 
authentication to 
applications 


Local authentication of user to applications 


Verify that only users authorized for local 
access via mobile devices are able to exercise 
the access. 


Using device management software this feature 
may be demonstrated -Users who are not 
members of the appropriate group attempt to 
access their email on an enrolled mobile device, 
and those attempts fail. 


i) Unauthorized access; 


2) Local user 
authentication to 
device 


Local user authentication to device 
Provided by all mobile OSs 


Using device management software this feature 
may be demonstrated: 


Verify device authorization - To ensure that only 
enrolled devices could access organizational 
resources. 


Verification includes users not enrolled and 
devices enrolled. 


Authentication of device owner - The device 
management software service enforces 
authentication of the device owner using their 
enterprise credentials. 


i) Unauthorized access; 


ii) Device physical 
access (lost, stolen, 
disposal) 


3) Remote user 
authentication 


Remote user authentication 


Using device management software this feature 
may be demonstrated: 


Verify that only users authorized for remote 
access via mobile devices are able to exercise 
the access. 


i) Unauthorized access 


4) Credential and token 


storage and use 


1) Auditing and 
logging 


Security of credentials and tokens in storage and 
while in use. 


Auditing and logging: Capture and store device 
and application information. 


Using device management software this feature 
may be demonstrated: 


Device, mobile operating system, and 
application information is available through 
an on-premises configuration manager (hybrid 
build) or a device management administration 
portal (cloud build). 


i) Unauthorized access; 


il) Loss of sensitive 
data 


i) Unauthorized access; 


ii) Denial of Service; 


2) Root and jailbreak 
detection 


Root and jailbreak detection: Ensures that the 
security architecture for a mobile device has not 
been compromised. 


i) Loss of mobile 
device integrity 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


Table 3 ( Concluded) 


Security Characteristics Security Controls 


Details and Explanation of Security Controls 


Security Threats Addressed 


1) Informed consent of 
user 


Permission model used for consent to use user 
data. 


i) 
ii) 


iii) 


Unauthorized access; 
Social engineering; 


Loss of sensitive 
data 


2) Privacy notification 
provided to user 


f) Privacy protection 


Notifications provided to users about the privacy 
implications of certain device and application 
functionality. 


Implemented via privacy policy presented to 
users. 


Privacy  notifications-Device owners аге 
informed of privacy implications of certain 
device and application functionality during 
device management enrollment. 


The ability to display a warning banner that a 
user shall accept before gaining access. As an 
alternative, redirect users to an organizational 


i) 
ii) 


Social engineering; 


Loss of sensitive 
data 


website containing a sample privacy policy. 


6.4 The mobile operating system security requirements 
and Pre-installed application security requirements are 
defined in this sub-clause. 


6.4.1 Mobile Operating System Security Requirements 


The security of the mobile operating system shall be 
verified by checking the configuration settings. This 
shall be based on the checklist with focus on security 
configuration issues that are unique to the mobile 
platform. The checklist shall be based on the following 
security principles: 


a) Dataatrest protection (protection of confidentiality 
and integrity of stored data); 


b) Data in transit protection (protection of 
confidentiality and integrity of data as it is 
transmitted from and to the mobile device); 


c) Access control (access to assets are authorized and 
restricted as per security requirements); 


d) Application updates (ensuring that updates of 
firmware, OS and Apps are only from legitimate 
and authentic source); 


e) Security updates (ensuring that security updates of 
firmware, OS and Apps are only from legitimate 
and authentic source); 


f) Integrity violation checking (ensuring that files, 
OS and Apps are not tampered); and 


g) Verified boot mechanism (ensuring that 
unauthorized entity is not able to modify the boot 
process of a device, and any attempt to do so is 
detected. 


10 


The evaluator may design a checklist covering above 
security principles or following checklists may be used: 


a) SANS checklist, 
b) CIS checklist for Android; and 
c) CIS checklist for iOS. 


A checklist for mobile operating system based on 
SANS and CIS checklists is given in Annex A of Part 
4 this standard. 


6.4.2 Mobile 


Requirements 


The app testing as per latest OWASP Top 10 mobile 
security risks and OWASP mobile application security 
verification Standard (MASVS) L1 shall be undertaken: 


a) Following tests shall be carried out as per OWASP 
Top 10 Mobile Security Risks: 


1) MI: 
2) M2: 
3) M3: 
4) M4: 
5) MS: 
6) M6: 
7) M7: 
8) М8: 
9) M9: 
10) 


Pre-installed Application Security 


Improper Platform Usage 
Insecure Data Storage 
Insecure Communication 
Insecure Authentication 
Insufficient Cryptography 
Insecure Authorization 
Client Code Quality 
Code Tampering 

Reverse Engineering 


M10: Extraneous Functionality 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


b) Following tests shall be carried out as per OWASP 5) V5: Network Communication Requirements 
Mobile Application Security Verification Standard 6) V6: Platform Interaction Requirements 
MASVS) LI: ; А А 
аи . . . 7) V7: Code Quality and Build Setting 
1) VI: Architecture, Design and Threat Modeling Requirements 
Requirements 


. . MASVS based checklist is given in Annex B of Part 4 
2) V2: Data Storage and Privacy Requirements of this standard. 


3) V3: Cryptography Requirements 
4) V4: Authentication and Session Management 
Requirements 


11 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Information System Security and Privacy Sectional Committee, LITD 17 


Organization 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Limited, Bengaluru 


Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, 
Pune 


Centre for Internet and Society, Bengaluru 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Data Security Council of India, Noida 


Defence Research Development Organization, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


HCL, Noida 
ISI Calcutta 


Indian Cellular and Electronics Association, 
New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Infosys Technologies Limited, Bengaluru 


KCPL 
Lady Shri Ram College for Women, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Science and Technology, Department of 
Science & Technology, New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 


National Accreditation Board for Certification 
Bodies, New Delhi 


National Payments Corporation of India, Mumbai 


Oxygen Consulting Services Private Limited, Pune 


Patanjali Associates Private Limited, New Delhi 


Representative (s) 
SHRI ARVIND KUMAR (Chariman) 


Ms SANGEETHA MANGAL 
SHRI DEvEsH KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


DR M. SASI KUMAR 
SHRIMATI P. R. LAKSHMI ESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL ABRAHAM 
SHRI AMBER SINHA (Alternate 1) 
SHRI GURSHABHAD GROVER (Alternate II) 


CoL SUHAIL ZAIDI 
SHRI RAMESH KARWANI (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA 


Ms NOOPUR SHROTRIYA 
SHRI G. ANIL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 
PROF BIMAL Roy 


SHRI RAJESH SHARMA 
Ms Arpita DE (Alternate) 


PROF ANIL PRABHAKAR 


SHRI SRINIVAS POOSARLA 
SHRI RAJEEV THYKATT (Alternate I) 
Ms AswarHYy ASOK (Alternate ЇЇ) 


Dr V. K. KANHERE 
Ms SUSHILA MADAN 


SHRI М. SATHYAN 
SHRI TIRUMALA КАО К. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. К. NEHRA 
SHRI RAKESH MAHESHWARI (Alternate I) 
SHRI SANTOSH SONI (Alternate II) 
DR SOMNATH CHANDRA (Alternate IIT) 
SHRI TARUN PANDEY (Alternate IV) 


SHRI SUJIT BANERJEE 
Dr RAJEEV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI KISHOR N. NARANG 


Suri A. S. BHATNAGAR 
Ms ANAJNA JAIN (Alternate) 


MR SATYA KANUNGO 
SHRI SATEESH PALAGIRI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR AGARWALA 
SHRI SACHIN PRAKASH JADHAV (Alternate) 


SHRI KANTI MOHAN RUSTOGI 


12 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


Organization Representative (s) 
Qualcomm India Private Limited, Bengaluru DR VINOSH BABU JAMES 
Reserve Bank Information Technology Private SHRI PRASHANT LOTLIKAR 
Limited, Mumbai SHRI DEEPNARAYAN TIWARI (Alternate) 
Smart Chip Private Limited, Noida Ms NISHA CHAUHAN 


SHRI PANKAJ AGARWAL (Alternate 1) 
SHRI ANKIT GUPTA (Alternate П) 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification SHRI А. K. SHARMA 
(STQC) SHRI А. K. UPADHYAYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI NAKUL AGGRWAL (Alternate II) 


Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai SHRI SATEESH SRINIWSAIAH 
SHRI NATARAJAN SWAMINATHAN (Alternate 1) 
SHRI ABHIK CHAUDHURI (Alternate II) 
SHRI ANUPAM AGRAWAL (Alternate III) 


Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi SHRI S. SRIDHAR 
SHRI ARVIND CHAWLA (Alternate) 


The Perspective, New Delhi SHRI RAHUL SHARMA 

WYSE Biometrics System Private Limited, Pune SHRI YOGENDRA D. WADASKAR 

In personal capacity SHRIMATI AMUTHA ARUNACHALAM 

In personal capacity, Kolkata DR GARGI KEENI 

BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (LITD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 
Member Secretary 


SHRI KSHITIJ BATHLA 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (LITD), BIS 


13 


IS 17737 (Part 2) : 2021 


Mobile Security Standards Panel, LITD 17 P4 


Organization 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 


(STQC) 


Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi 


Apple India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Cellular Operators Association of India, New Delhi 


Fime India, Bengaluru 


Google India, Bengaluru 
HCL, Noida 


Indian Cellular and Electronics Association, 
New Delhi 


KCPL 
Pavone Technologies, New Delhi 


Samsung India, Gurugram 


Sony India, Mathura 


Transsion India Limited, Noida 
UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


VIVO Mobile India Private Limited, Delhi 


Vincular Testing Labs India Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 


Xiaomi Corporation, Bengaluru 


14 


Representative(s) 
Suri A. K. UPADHYAYA (Convener) 


SHRI P. К. SINGH (Co-Convener) 
Mr JUNAID A. SIDDIQUEE 
SHRI ROHIT SINGH 


SHRI ANGAJ BHANDARI 
SHRI HARDIK MIRANI (Alternate) 


Ms TUHINA JOSHI 
SHRI SANJEEV CHHABRA 


SHRI RAJESH SHARMA 
SHRI TARON MOHAN (Alternate) 


DR V. К. KANHERE 
SHRI ABHINAV SHARMA 


SHRI ВАРРА MONDAL 
SHRIMATI NOOR KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI RAHUL GAUR 
SHRI VINOD KUNDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHISH MATHUR 
SHRI AJAY JAIDKA (Alternate) 


SHRI PAIGHAM DANISH 


SHRI VISHAL TOMAR 
SHRI SACHIN Юник (Alternate) 


Ms SuRBHI JAIN 
SHRI MANISH JAIN (Alternate) 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 17 (14997). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 СІТ. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
КОГКАТА 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


