**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10919 (1984) : Glossary of Terms for Electrostatic 
Precipitators [MED 17: Chemical Engineering Plants and 
Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



FOP OFFICIAL US&" 



UDC 621-359 : 621 '31 93 : 001-4 



IS: 10919 -1984 



■ r^ 'i iitm 



'irur 




/nd/an Standard 



(Reaffkmed t999) 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
FOR ELECTROSTATIC PRECIPITATORS 



^^, 



C6:a 



/ 



'?-^9 



3 



1. Scope— Covers the definitions of terms commonly used in the industry for efectrostatic 
precipitators. 

2. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the various components of the precipitators shall 
be as designated in Fig. 1 . 

2.1 Casing — The casing depends on the configuration of the precipitator. 

For rectangular precipitators, the roof, sides, ends, hoppers/bottoms, gas inlet and outlet constitute 
the casing. For cylindrical precipitator, the gas inlet, gas outlet, hopper/bottom, head and shall form the 
casing. 

2.2 Insulator Compartment— It encloses the insulators to the high voltage system. It does not contain 
the roof as a whole but the insulators only. 

2.3 Penthouse — It is a weatherproof gas-tight enclosure over the precipitator to contain the high 
voltage insulators. 

2.4 Weather Enclosure — lh\s is for the shelter of the maintenance/personnel on the roof of the 
precipitator. 

2.5 Baffles — IhBse baffles control the flow of the gas so that it does not pass through the precipitator 
without being influenced by the active field. 

2.6 Gas Distribution Plates — These are simple perforated plates to evenly distribute the gas with 
uniform velocity. 

2.7 Collecting Electrodes — These electrodes are a series of plates where particles get attracted and 
accumulate from where they are removed at regular intervals by vibrating the plates by rappers. The 
spacing of these plates depends upon voltage applied to the electrodes. 

2.S High Voltage Discharge Electrodes — These are either weighted steel wire type or see-saw strip 
type. Vibrators are provided to periodically remove accumulation of minor particles from surface of 
electrodes. 

2.9 Damper — A device installed in the duct to regulate the gas flow by degree of closure. 

2.10 Access for Maintenance 

a) If the accessibility is required frequently, a detachable cover or a cover with hinges is 
provided called door. 

b) If the accessibility is required at infrequent interval, a cover is provided with a number of 
bolts to ensure tight closure. This cover is called 'Bolted Plate'. 

2.1 1 Vanes — The vanes guide the gas flow around a bend thereby minimizing the effect of the band. 

2.12 Collecting Surface Area — The total i\at projected area of the collecting surface exposed to the 
active electrostatic field. 

2.13 High Voltage System — AW parts of the precipitator which are maintained at a high potential. 

2A^ Discharge Electrode Rapper— A device to impart vibration or shock to the discharge electrodes 
in order to dislodge the particles or dust accumulation. 

2.1 5 Rapper Insulators — A device to isolate electrically, forces necessary to create vibration or shock 
in the high voltage system. 

2.16 Single Chamber Precipitator — A precipitator without any internal dividing wall. 



Adopted 25 May 1984 



© July 1984, ISI 



Gr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 10919 -1984 



CHAMBER 



CHAMBER 



TRANSFORMER 
RECTIFIER 




GAS DISTRIBUTION 
DEVICE 



HIGH VOLTAGE . 
SYSTEM SUPPORT 
INSULATOR 



HOPP ER 



'DISC HARGE 
ELECTRODE 



FIG. 1 ELECTROSTATIC PRECIPITATOR 



2.17 Multi-chamber Precipitator— Pk precipitator having more than one internal dividing wall. 

2.18 PouverSi/pp// — A transformer rectifier to supply high voltage d c with an automatic voltage 
control to maintain optimum voltage for the electrostatic precipitator to work at maximum efficiency 
under varying conditions. 

2AB High Voltaga Conductors — Conductors to transmit the high voltage from transformer-rectifier 
to the precipitator high voltage system. 

2.20 Coiiector Efficiency — The mass of the dust collected per unit mass of the dust entering the 
precipitator at a particular time interval. 

2.21 Dust Concentration — The mass of the dust contained in a unit mass of the gas. 

2.22 Gas Velocity — The volume rate of gas flow through the precipitator divided by the effective 
cross-sectional area of the precipitator. 

2.23 Treatment Time — The time for which the gas remains in the precipitator. This is obtained by 
dividing the effective length of the precipitator in metres by the gas velocity. 



IS : 10919- 1984 

2.24 Effective Length — Tota\ length of the collecting surface measured in the direction of gas flow. 

2.25 Effective Width — The centre-to-centre spacing of the collecting surfaces multiplied by the total 
number of gas passages. 

2.26 Effective Height — The total height of collecting surfaces measured from top to bottom, 

2.27 Gas Passage — The passage formed between two adjacent rows of collecting plates. 

2.2S Hopper Capacity — Total volumetric capacity of hoppers measured from a plane 25 cm below 
high voltage system to hopper outlet flange, 

2.29 Bus Section — The smallest portion of the precipitator which can be independently de-energized. 

2.30 Field — A field is an arrangement of bus-sections in the direction of gas flow, that is energized 
by one or more high voltage power supplier situated laterally across gas flow. 

2.31 Aspect Ratio — Active length divided by active height. 

2.32 Precipitator — Arrangement of electrodes and all other equipment for one independent casing. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The glossary of terms for electrostatic precipitators given in this standard will enable better 
commercial understanding of various terms used in the field of electrostatic precipitators. 

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from 'Specifying air pollution 
Control equipment', edited by Richard A. Young and Frank L. Cross Jr., published by Marcel Dekker, 
Inc., New York in 1982. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



