( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 9374 - 1979

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO FLOUR MILLING INDUSTRY
Foodgrains and Foodgrain Products Sectional Committee, AFDC 32

Chairman

Representing Indian Agricultural New Delhi Research Institute,

DR B, R. MURTY
Members

Storage and Inspection Division ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi DR K. KRI~HNAMURTHY ( Alternate ) Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore SHRI SADA SINC+H ARYA SHRI L. A. RAMANATRAN ( Alternate ) Research, Indian Council of DR A. AUSTIN Agricultural New Delhi Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry SRRI D. S. CRADRA of Health & Family Welfare ), New Delhi S&T D. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) Directorate of Supplies and Transport, Army COL S. K. CHIB He;lqueat$rs ( Ministry of Defence ), SHRI N. S. AURAWAL LT-COL K. N. ACHARYA ( Alternate ) Central Rice Research Institute ( SCAR ), DIRECTOR Cuttack DR S. B. LODH ( Alternate ) Federation of All India Foodgrain Dealers' SRRI SATYA NARAIN GUPTA Association, Delhi SHRI A. K. J. SAHEBA ( Alternate ) Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI HARJINDER SIN~H Modern Bakeries ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi DR V. B. MITBANDER DR M. N. KRISHNA ( Alternate ) National Institute of Nutrition ( ICMR ), DR K. C. PANT Hyderabad Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry SHRI E. S. PARTHASARTI~Y of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad DR M. P. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Food and Nutrition Board ( Ministry of DR S. S. PATHAK Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi Agra Dal1 Mills Association, Agra SBRI SHITAL PRASAD SHRI BAIJ NATH ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) 6 INDIAN Copyright 1980 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:

9374 -1979
paze

( Continuedfrom
PUBLIC

1)
Rcpresctding Public Analyst, Government Chandigarh Directorate General of Technical New Delhi of Haryana;

Members ANALYST

SHRI S. Rax~swhax~

Development,

SHRI B. B. D.4nRAL ( z'ibW7te) Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi SHRI P. RANDAS SBRI A. S. SAX\IPATTI KEarhlt ( Altsrnatt ) Federation of Biscuit Manufacturers of India, SHRI R. B. Rao Delhi SHRI P. C. KHANNA ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute &RI S. R. S3lURPALEI<.4R ( CSIR ), h1ysore Dn H. S. R. DESI~-ACIIAR ( Alternate ) Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Ds K. KIRPAL SINGII DR G. S. BAIN~ ( Alttrnate ) Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agricultural KU~~AIII M. S. USH.~ and Technology, Pantnagar Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, SHRI S. P. VlRiK4NI New Delhi SHRI K. B. THIAQARAJAN ( Alternate) Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar DR D. S. WAQLE DR 14. S. NA~NAWATEE ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SERI T. PURNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary MRS SIIASHI SAREEN Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Foodgrain Convener
SIIRI S. P. VIRXANI Mcm hers
SHRI N. s. AoR_4\v_4L

Products

Subcommittee,
Roller Flour New Delhi

AFDC

32 : 2
of India,

Representing Millrrs' Frderation

Storage and Inspection Division ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi DR K. KEISHNAMURTWY ( Alternate ) SHRI A. AROXA Modern Bakeries ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi SHRI P. C. JOSHI ( Alternate ) SHRI D. S. CHADHA Central Committee for Food Standards (Ministry of Health & Family Welfare) New Delhi Food Manufacturing SHRI S. P. GUPTA Breakfast Hindustan Factory, Delhi SARI HARJINDER SINIXI Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI E. K. JAYANARAYANAN Mohan Meakin Brrweries Ltd, Ghaziabnd SHRI JAIPAL SINCH ( Alternate ) SHRI LAJPAT R. KANDHARI The Society of India Bakers, Bomhay' SHRI D. V. TANDON ( Alternate ) SHRI P. C. KHANNA Britannia Biscuit Co Ltd, New Delhi SHRI B. M. LAL ( Alternate ) SARI P. N. SAPRA M/s Jagatjit Industries Ltd, Distt. Kapurthala SHRI S. K. DUBLISH ( Alternate ) SHRI M. G. SATHE Federation of Biscuit Manufacturers of India, Delhi SHRI J. M. THAPAR All India Starch Manufacturers' Association Private Ltd, Bombay

2

IS : 9374 - 1979

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO FLOUR MILLING INDUSTRY
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 5 October 1979, after the draft finalized by the Foodgrains and Foodgrain Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Various terms relating to flour milling are frequently being used by the industry. In order to have a uniform terminology and to give authoritative defiinitions of these terms, the Foodgrains and Foodgrain Products Sectional Committee decided to prepare this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard defines the various concerned with flour milling. 2. DEFINITIONS 2.1 Acetic Acid ( CH&OOH ) - An organic acid, sour in colourless, and with sharp odour; an active constituent of vinegar. in bread formula as mould/rope inhibitor. 2.2 Aeration - Air being forced through a stationary layer or of, grain for the removal of the end products of respiration cooling and drying. taste, Used column and for terms frequently used in industries

2.3 Air Classification - A process which uses air currents in combination with centrifugal force, to effect the separation of flour particles into different ranges according to size and density. 2.4 Albumin and is coagulable A class of protein that can be dissolved in by heat and is also present in wheat flour. pure water

2.5 Alcoholic Acidity - The degree of acidity soluble in 90 percent ( V/V) neutral alcohol expressed in terms of sulphuric acid. It is a test for degree of soundness of grain, 3

IS:9374-

1979

2.6 Aleurone Layer - A botanical term denoting the proteinaceous cellular layer which envelopes the endosperm and separates it from the bran or seed of the wheat kernel. 2.7 Alpha Amylase - An enzyme that develops in cereal sprouting, which, in the presence of water converts starch sugar ( maltose ) units. grains during molecules to

2.8 Alveograph - A dough testing instrument that measures the resistance to deformation and extensibility of a clamped disc-shaped piece of unleavened dough by forming a bubble, by means of air pressure applied from below the test piece, at a constant temperature. 2.9 Amino Acids - A group of nitrogenous organic compounds that serve as units of structure of the proteins and contained the chemical The structure of a groups COOH ( carboxyl ) and - NH2 ( amine ). simple amino acid is as follows: HaN - CH - COOH R 2.10 Amino Acids, Limiting - When the essential amino acid pattern of a food protein is compared to that of a standard reference protein such as that of whole egg, the essential amino acid which is in shortest supply relative to the reference protein is called the most limiting amino acid. The utilization of the protein depends on the amount of the most limiting amino ~acid. 2.11 ~Amylases large molecules - Enzymes which, in the presence of starch to sugar ( maltose ) units. of water, will convert

I

NOTE - The beta amylase can saccharify the amylase chain and terminal sugar groupings of the amylopectin. This will leave a residue termed dextrin of high molecular weight. The alpha amylase attacks more complex branch chain of amylopectin, and in doing so, releases the simple straight chain glucose groupings capable of being attacked by beta amylase. A purely beta amylase attack markedly reduces the viscosity of gelatinised starch, giving rise to dextrins of low molecular weight. Amylases in the baking industry are identified by their source as cereal of fungal amylase. 2.12 Amylograph - An instrument that measures the consistency or viscosity of a slurry of a starchy flour and water, when it is heated through a pre-determined cycle. The viscosity is measured by the resistance that the slurry offers to a mixing paddle. It is used to measure the alpha-amylase activity of the flours. 4

Is : 9374
of starch, consisting 2.13 Amylopectin - ft is a constituent branched 1 : 4 linked 50 000 to 500 000 glucose units. It gives colour with iodine.

-1919

of highly a purple

of starch and consists of long 2.14 Amylose - It is a constituent unbranched chains of 500 to 5 000 glucose units ( 1 : 4 linkage ). It gives a blue colour with iodine. 2.15 Analytical Test - A test based on the determination portion of constituents in a mixture or a compound. of the pro-

- The amount of incombustible residue, left after 2.16 Ash Content incinerating a weighed amount of material and expressed as percentage. 2.17 Aspiration - Is a process of separation of particles of chaff, straw, small seeds, etc, from wheat, in the aspirator in which an air current is directed through a thin falling stream of stock, 2.18

ATTA

-

Whole

wheat flour of 90-95 percent

extraction

rate. chain of lactose ) reducing and are

2.19 Available Lysine - Lysine molecules in a polyeptide proteins that remain unreacted with reducing sugars ( glucose, and hence are available and utilizable. Those that react with form chemical bonds resistant to digestive enzymes sugars unavailable to the body. 2.20 Baking Quality product. Breadmaking - The quality

capacity of a flour to produce a baked refers to baking quality of flour used. is

2.21 Benzoyl Peroxide ( C6H&Oz )aOa - A chemical powder that added to flour in small quantities for its beneficial bleaching action.

2.22 Bleaching Agent - A substance added to flour to bleach out the yellow pigment, naturally present in flour and thereby gives a whiter appearance to the flour and the bread produce from it, for example, benzoyl peroxide. 2.23 Blending Capacity - The ability or capacity a proportion of low quality flour and still produce quality. of a flour to carry br,ead of satisfactory amount blend. silk or

2.24 Blending of Wheat - The process of drawing measured of different lots from bins and mixing these parts into a uniform 2.25 Bolting nylon covered Sifting sieves. of mill

stocks ( flour ) by means of wire,

5

IS : 9374 - 1979 2.26 Bran The outer most covering or seed coat of the wheat grain.
of the

NOTE - Commercially, it is a by-product of the milling process consisting large pieces of bran remaming after the flour has been extracted from wheat. 2.27 Break Flour - Flour produced by the break passes through the break system of the milling process. 2.28 Break rolls

as the gram

enclosperm

Middlings - A mixture of particles of pure endosperm and with adhcricg bran produced by break rolls as the grain passes through the break system of the milling process.

2.29 Break Roll Mill -- A mill equipped with a pair of corrugated rolls placed diagonally or horizontally in parallel alignment, rotating at differential speed tolvards each other. 2.30 Break System - l'hc stage in the milling process where the grain is broken open and treated on successive rolls to separate the endospcrm from the bran coat. 2.31 Brushing - A step in cleaning of w?lcat, whcrc dust remaining after scouring is removed by action of brushes on the surface of grains. 2.32 Bulgur Wheat -A product of wheat obtained by parboiling.

2.33 Bushel Weight -- `I'hc test weight in pounds of a measured bushel An important grading factor in most ( 64 pints -36'37 litres ) of grain grain crops in Western couutries. 2.34 Carotenes - An orange pigment in plants \f.ith isoprenoid structure which is converted in the body to vitamin A. `ihe p-form is the most active precursor of vitamin A. 2.35 CellMose - A polymer of glucose wlrich is not digested by monogastric animals. Forms the supporting cell structure in p!ants. Chemically it is a B-D glucon composed of D-glucopyranose anhydride units linked by 4-l-B-D-glucosidic bonds. 2.36 Cereal Chemistry - The branch of science dealing with composition and propcrtics of foodgrains and foodgrain products. 2.37 Chlorine Dioxide which has both bleaching ( ClO, ) - A g~eous and maturing properties. flour-improving run other the agent

that has been 2.38 Clean Wheat - The wheat receiving separator for the removal of dockage and materials such that it is fit for conditioning and milling. 6

through a extraneous

1s : 9314 - 1979
2.39 Clothing - The term applied to any of the nylon and other synthetics ) used to sift and by size. 2.40 Cockle - A round black ment, for effecting its separation. seed requiring materials separate (silk, wire, mill stocks equip-

special

cleaning

2.41 Composite Flour - A flour made by blending varying amounts of non-wheat flours with wheat flour and used for the production of baked goods that arc traditionally made from wheat flour. 2.42 Conditioning - Adjustment of moisture content under controlled conditions, followccl by a resting period to. gchicve a proper equilibrium of moisture through individual grains which toughens bran and mellows the separation of endosperm from the endosperm, thereby improving bran. 2.43 Crease wheat kernels. The lengthwise folded indentation characteristics Crease helps in identification of varieties. of

2.44 Crude Fibre - General term for indigestible compouents of foods. It is the residue left after sequential extractions of a food Lvith petroleum ether, 1'23 percent sulphuric acid and 1'25 percent sodium hydroxide. The ash content is deducted from above to obtain crude f&e.

2.45 Damaged Grain - Kernels or pieces of kernels that are sprouted or internally damngecl as a result of heat, moisture, I\-cathcr or microbes. 2.46 Damping - Addition of water for inducing optimum moisture for operation of millirg process and for gettin, 0` the desired moisture content of the final products. 2.47 Degradation -- Breakdown of a large molecule of an>: substance into smaller fragments. Here it pertains to the breakdown of starch by amylases or proteins by proteoses. 2.48 Denaturation - Alteration molecul-cs by physical or chemical in the methods. configuration of protein of

2.49 Dextrin - An intermediate product starch by chemicals or by amylases.

formed

in the degradation

2.50 Diastatic Activity - In flour quality evaluation, it is the measure of the activity of the starch degrading rnzymes of the flour; it can be expressed in terms of the maltose ( sugar ) produced or in terms of the peak viscosity in the amylograph test. 7

Its : 9374 -

1919

2.51 Disc Separator - Particles longer or shorter than wheat grains but similar in diameter can be separated from wheat by means of indented discs with indents of pre-determined shape and size. of foreign matter 2.52 Dockage - The amount straw and stones which may be readily removed from a sample of wheat. such as seeds, sand, by mechanical means

2.53 Dough Expansion Test ( Pelshenke) - The time that is required for a dough ball made from wheat meal, water and yeast and suspended in water at 3O"C, to disintegrate. It is a rough measure of the quality of wheat protein for breadmaking and is used in screening for baking quality in new varieties of wheat during the early generations. 2.54 Durum Wheat preparation of macaroni, Hard wheat from Triticum spaghetti and semolina. durum, used for

2.55 Dye Binding Capacity ( DBC ) - The capacity of basic imidazole, guanido and amino groups which occur in the polyeptide chain on histidine, arginine and lysine of a protein to bind to an acid azo dye ( orange G ). It is a measure of the quality or quantity of protein. ,Since the proportions of basic amino acids and terminal groups are reasonably constant in cereal proteins, the correlations between dye -binding capacity and total protein content are high. 2.56 Endosperm ground into flour. The starchy portion of the wheat grain which is

2.57 Enzyme - A protein that has the ability to speed up a biological reaction without itself undergoin g any change, also known as biocatalyst. 2.58 Ergot - Black grain-like highly toxic fungal bodies, formed in the ear heads of cereals by different species of fungi belonging to genus Claviceps. The toxins are powerful alkaloids belonging to either clavine group ( ray and wheat ). group ( BAJRA) or ergatoxine eragoramine 2.59 Essential Amino Acids - Those amino acids that cannot synthesized ( produced ) by a living organism and therefore must supplied by the food consumed. be be

2.60 Extenso Graph - An instrument for measuring the elastic and plastic properties of flour doughs. The instrument stretches a cylinder of dough ( approx 4 X 15 cm ) held by the two ends, by a hook engaging the dough piece in the middle and measures the resistance of the dough to extension. In some countries the instrument is used to measure the quality of wheat flour for breadmaking. 8

IS:

9374 -1979

The proportion of milled product obtained 2.61 Extraction Rate from whole wheat grain during milling process, expresssed as percent by mass. 2.62 Falling Number ( FN ) - A test for measuring amylase activity. It is defined as the time in seconds required to stir and hallow a viscometer stirrer to fall a fixed distance through a hot aqueous flour suspension being liquified by the enzyme in a standardized apparatus. 2.63 Falling Number Test - Test devised by Hagbarg alpha amylase activity in wheat and its products. 2.64 Farinograph dough and produces to the mixing blades. flour. for measuring

An instrument that mixes flour and water into a a record of the resistance that the dough offers Used in evaluation of the breadmaking quality of

2.65 Fat -A chemical constituent of plant or animal tissues, comprising t=sters of various fatty acids and glycerol ( for ~glycerine ). In cereal technology, it may refer 10 the natural flour fat or the fat ( shortening ) that is added in the bread formula. of short or long chain of 2.66 Fatty Acids - Organic acids comprising bearing H atoms with a terminal co-valently linked carbon atoms, carboxyl group. 2.67 Flour Final ground meal of grains.

by a 2.68 Flour Colour Gradation - The colour of Aour determined as Kent Jones and Martin Colour special photo-electric instrument, Grader or Agtron Colour Instrument. Usually a measure of the branny contamination in flour and thereby milling efficiency. 2.69 Foreign Matter - Includes organic and inorganic matter. The inorganic matter shall include sand, gravel, dirt, pebbles, stones, lumps ~of earth, clay and mud. Organic matter shall include husk, chaff, straw, weed seeds and other inedible grains. Paddy shall be considered as foreign matter in commodities other than paddy. 2.70 Fortified ATTA - A product obtained by adding one permissible material like calcium carbonate, nutrients like iron, riboflavin, niacin and amino acids, etc, to wheat ATTA. or more thiamine,

2.71 Fructose
honey;

also called

A monosaccharide as fruit sugar. 9

sugar

found

in sweet fruits

and in

IS:9374

-1979

2.72 Fumigants - Fumigants are chemicals which, at a required temperature and pressure, can exist in the gaseous state in sufficient concentration to be lethal to a given pest organism. 2.73 Fumigation - Fumigation for pest control is a process of exposing pests or pest affected stocks to the fumes of chemicals at a lethal strength in gas tight space. 2.74 Gelatinization - The breakdown of the granular structure of starch The starch granules swell and as by heating starch slurry or a dough. subsequently burst. Gelatinization is important in relation to the development of crumb structure of bread. 2.75 Geneti.c 2.76 Germ plant. Pertaining The embryo to characters in a cereal that are inherited. grain which grows into the new

2.77 Gliadin - The fraction of wheat flour dissolved in a 70 percent solution of ethyl alcohol. prolamine. It provides elasticity to dough. 2.78 Globulin - The fraction dissolved in dilute salt solution. of wheat flour

proteins that can be It is also classified as protein that can be

2.79 Glucose - A monosaccharide fruits. It is the sugar that is formed by yeast enzymes. 2.80 Gluten - The rubber-like that remains after the water dough in a stream of water. Its making quality. It is a mixture

sugar, occuring naturally in some in the degradation of starch of flour

yellowish grey proteinaceous material solubles and starch are washed out of content in flour is a measure of breadof two proteins gliadin and glutenin.

2.81 Gluten Swelling Test - A test for breadmaking quality which determines the volume of gluten swollen in a dilute solution of lactic acid, also known as Berhner test and is similar to the sedimentation test. 2.82 Ghtenin - The fraction of wheat flour proteins that is insoluble water, salt solution, or 70 percent ethyl alcohol solution, but soluble dilute alkali. It provides strength to dough. in in

2.83 Grading - In terms of milling, it means the classification by sifting, prior to purification, of the endosperm particles emanating from the break system into a relatively narrow range of particle size. 10

IS:9374-1979 2.84 Gradual Reduction - This is the process by which wheat is broken down to flour and by-products in several stages. This makes it possible to separate much of the bran before wheat is pulverized into flour particle size, resulting in a whiter flour with improved baking properties. 2.85 Granulation - The coarseness or fineness of a powder such as flour In baking technology, it pertains to the particle size and size or sugar. distribution of the flour. of several 2.86 Grist - The wheat mixture ( may comprise wheats ) that is made up in the mill to produce a specific flour. different

2.87 Grit Content - Grit in the form of small particles of stones, metal, coal, etc, present in semolina which may be detected by floatation of the semolina in carbon tetrachloride. 2.88 Hard Wheat - Wheat, which as a result of variety of breeding in combination with environmental factors during growth, has a vitreous endosperm, generally considered an advantage for the production of breadmaking flours, as the protein content is generally superior in quality and quantity. 2.89 Hectolitre Weight - Weight determined on dockage free basis. of 100 litres of the commodity

2.90 Hydration - The absorption or uptake of water by solid materials, for example, flour. In breadmaking, two aspects of hydration are important - the total amount absorbed ( hydration capacity ) by the Aour and the rate at which it is absorbed ( rate of hydration ). 2.91 Hydrolysis - The degradation proteins, into smaller fragments with the process. of large molecules, such as starch or the direct involvement of water in

2.92 Impact Milling - The reduction in size of particles them at very high speed against a hard surface.

by

flinging

2.93 Improving Agent - Any substance that is added to flour or to dough to improve its performance during breadmaking and to improve the quality of the bread that can be produced from the flour, for example, potassium bromate, and ascorbic acid ( vitamin C ). 2.94 Inactivation ( Enzyme catalytic activity of the enzyme ) The by chemical 11 destruction or physical of the means. natural

IS : 9374 - 1979 2.95 Insect Damaged bored by insects. 2.96 Insecticides prevent infestation Grains Kernels that are partially are used or wholly to kill or

are chemicals - These of insects/pests.

which

2.97 Insecticide Residues - A pesticide chemical, its derivatives and Insecticides may leave residues when aejuvants in or on plant or animal. Residues are expressed as parts per used on foodstuffs for insect control. million ( ppm ) based on fresh mass of the sample. 2.98 Invertase fructose. An enzyme that converts sucrose into glucose and

2.99 Invert Sugar - A mixture of glucose and fructose which is It is laevoobtained from hydrolysis of sucrose by enzymes or acids. rotatory. 2.100 Irradiated Wheat - A method mainlv for controlling insect infestation in stored wheat, for example, wheat is exposed to gamma rays 60~0 with a maximum radiation dose of 1OOKRad and stored for 12 weeks after irradiation Sor usage. 2.101 Kernel husk. The body of a seed ( for example to wheat wheat ) within its

2.102 Kernel Weight - A quality its potential milling value.

test applied

to determine

for determining the total 2.103 Kjeldahl Procedure - A procedure Estimation is done by assuming nitrogen content in organic substances. the entire nitrogen to be present as protein. The amount of nitrogen is converted into protein content by multiplying by a constant factor ( 5'7 for wheat ). .J 2.104 Lipids heterogeneous waxes. - Term used synonymously with fat but comprise group of substances like fatty acids, phosphatids, sterols and

and 2.105 Lipase - Enzymes that hydrolyse oils and fats to glycerol fatty acid. Presence of lipase in some whole grain cereals can cause rancidity upon storage due to action of lipase on fats of grains. 2.106 Lysine - It is a basic amino nutrition and is found to be most wheat. acid which is essential in human limiting in cereal grains including 12

f$ : 9334 2.103 Magnetic Separator metallic pieces are recovered magnet. 2.108 MAIDA consists mostly --- Part of the grain cleaning from the grains by action

1919

section where of an electro-

- Term used of endosperm.

in India

for

70

percent

extraction

flour,

sugar 2.109 Maltose - A disaccharide amylases or acids on starch. It comprises main fermentable sugar in dough.

obtained by the two glucose units

action of and is the

2.110 Maltose Value - An index of diastatic measured as the number of milligrams of maltose flour under standardized conditions.

activity of flour. It is produced from 10 g of

2.111 Malted Cereal Flour - Flour produced by ( sprouted or germinated and dried ) wheat and barley adjunct to bread flour to improve its gassing power.

grinding malted and used as an,

2.112 Maturing Agent - Any _ substance, usually a chemical ( for example potassium bromate ), that is added to flour or dough to improve the breadmaking quality of the flour. 2.113 Middlings - Particles of wheat endosperm extracted from the Also commercially, break system which have yet to be ground into flour. a by-product of milling, consisting mainly of the coarse material tailing over the end of the reduction system. 2.114 Middlings Rolls - A pair or pairs of smooth rolls used to reduce middlings in process, to flour particles size. Also called reduction rolls. 2.115 Milling Loss - The amount by which the weight of total products is less than the weight of raw wheat used. It is usually expressed as a percentage of raw wheat used. 2.116 Milling Quality - The measure of the ability produce a high yield of flour with required characteristic mined milling method. as a natural constituent of a wheat to by a predeter-

2.117 Moisture - The water that is contained of most food and other biological materials. 2.118 Mould Aspergillus. toxic. - Fungi that reproduce by Some species of the latter produce 13

spores, aflatoxin

for example, which is highly

Is : 9374- 1379
2.119 Niacin - It is a vitamin as nicotinic acid. of the B-complex group. Also germ known that arc

2.120 Offals - Term used in flour milling removed during milling of white flour.

for bran and

2.121 Optimum - The best or most favourable degree, condition or amount in processing for the production of the best or highest quality product. 2.122 Oxidation - One of the many ways by which the handling properties of dough can be improved so as to improve the quality of bread. It is brought about by substances referred to as oxidants, improvers or maturing agents. 2.123 Patent Flour - `I'he portion of a straight run flour, brighter in colour and with a lo*Vver ash content than the remainder of the flour. The first processes used to make such flour were patented, hence the name. 2.124 Pearling Index - percentage of material pearled off from a sample of wheat of prescribed weight in a laboratory pearler operated It is an index of hardness of grain. for a prescribed period of time. 2.125 Pekar Test - A test of flour quality made by comparing the Such s:rmple is placed side by colour of flour against a standard sample. side on a fiat rectangular piece of wood, prcsscd down to a smooth surlitcc and compared with the standard. the potential breadmal;ing 2.126 Pelshenke Value - It estimates strength of wheat. The time required for a small dough balls with yeast suspension, that are immersed in water at constant temperature, ( 36�C ) when divided 111 to disintegrate, gives ` test number `. The number percent of protein in wheat gives the quality of gluten. 2.127 Pentosen pentoses ( 5 carbon These sugars arc ). complex carbohydrates formed from

2.128 Pericarp - The outer layers of wheat and other erains consisting of fibrous material which is composed of cellulose, hemlcellulose and a nor:-carbohydrate substance called lignin. The pericarp is rich in pllytic acid ( see 2.130 ). 2.129 pH - The negative logarith of the hydrogen ion concentration a solution or a mixture; a measure of acidity or alkalinity; acid below alkaline above 7 and neutral at PI-I equal to 7. 14 of 7,

1s : 9374 - 1979
2.130 Photometry -- A technique commonly applied in analysis, for measurement of optical density of solution with the help of a photometer.' 2.131 Phytic Acid - Chemically it is called inositol hcxo-phosphoric acid. It is present mostly in the husk or pericarp of cereals. Has strong chelating effect on biva!ent metal ions calcium, ircn and zinc which when combined with it form insoluble salts that render these mineral nutrients unavailable lo the body. 2.132 Flank Sifter - A sifting machine consisting of a number imposed sieves gyrating together in a horizontal plant, having motion. of supera rotary

2.133 Pigment - Any natural rolouring matter in the cells and tissues of` plants and animals. In wheat, the main interest is in the yellow pigments which are mainly carotenoids. 2.134 Pneumatic Canvcying -- The transporting of material enclosed tubes using air untlcr negative or positive pressure as conveying medium. in the

2.135 Proteose - An cnzyme ( biological catalyst ) that brings about a Lrrak down of proteins. In the baking industry, this enzyme from cereal or fungal source's is used to improve tile handling propertics of dough. 2.136 Protein -~-- One c,f the important constituents of plant and animal tissuc,s containing carbon, hydlogcn, oxygen, nitrogen and frequently sulphur. In wheat, protrin is important for baking and nutritional quaiitics. 2.1137 Purifier - A machine M.ith one to set in an oscillating fi-amt. It employs size and density to separate a mixture pieces of endosperm and bran and branny tlJ:cc layers or ducts of sieves the principle of separation by of pure endospcrm, composite matcri;ll from each other.

2.138 Pyridoxine - It is mcmbcr of the H-compltx group of vitamins also known as vitamin l3j~. Three fbrms are known, phyridoxinr, pyridoxal phosphate and pyridoxamine. 2.139 RAVA low extraction

-- SGjlI

or `IZAF/l'

rate, GO-65 percent,

derived

r?rc Iagt,c particles
prcferab!y

of endosperm from wheat.

of

2.140 Reconstitntion constituents in the same substance.

Tiw bler!ciit:g or' mixing together of original pr0j)ortions as found in the original complex

15

is : 9374 - 1979 2.141 Reducing Sugars - Sugars solutions, for example, glucose. 2.142 Reduction Rolls that reduce Rolls Fehling's ( 2.114 ). or Benedict's

See Middlings

2.143 Resultant ATT/l - A by-product of roller flour mills. After removal of MAIDA, SUJI and bran, the rest of the endosperm adhered with bran is ground to make resultant ATTA. This ATTA is quite different from whole meal ATTA.

2.144 Rheograph properties of dough.
2.145 Rheology matter. 2.146 Roller by-products. arranged with be corrugated -

An

instrument dealing

that with

measures

the

machanical and flow of

A science

the deformation

used to grind wheat into flour and Mill - A mechanism It consists of one or more pairs of cylindrical rolls their axis parallel and set in a heavy frame. Rolls may ( break rolls ) or smooth ( reduction rolls ). which act as the

2.147 Riboflavin - Vitamin Bz, part of flavoproteins coenzymes in transfer of H in the oxidation chain. 2.148 Rounder - A mechanical dough piece into a ball. device used in bakeries

for rolling

2.149 Scouring - This is part of the cleaning section in the wheat mill where superficial dirt and loose shreds beeswing are removed by abrasion of wheat surface against perforated metal or emery lined cylinder and thereby blowing away the dirt by air current. 2.150 Screenings - Impurities wheat cleaning section. of wheat removed from the grain in the

2.151 Screens - Impurities, larger or smaller than wheat grains removed by screens of perforated metal; the size and shape of perforations being chosen in relation to the wheat grain also.

are the

2.152 Sedimentation Test (Zeleny ) -A wheat protein quality test ( for breadmaking ), in which the flour is suspended and allowed to swell in a solution of lactic acid. The volume of the sediment ( in millilitres ), consisting of swollen gluten and starch, after standing for predetermined period is the sedimentation value. 2.153 Semolina -. Same as RAVAjSUJI

16

IS : 9374 - 1979
2.154 Shorts - A mixture of small pieces of bran and fibrous material remaining after the flour has been extracted from the wheat. It is a byproduct used for animal feed.

2.155 Sick Wheat

-

Wheat in which the germ is discoloured and dead.

2.156 Soft Wheat - Wheat with white opaque endosperm and low gluten. Generally considered more suitable for production of cake and biscuit flour.
2.157 Solubility

particular

- The amount of a substance that dissolves in a solvent under controlled conditions ( PH, temperature ).

made with microscope 2.158 Spore Count - An examination which a calculated estimate of mould phase concentrate is made.

from

2.159 Spiral Trieur - A device used principally for separating raw seeds from fractioned or shrivelled wheat kernels. It consists of several spiral cannals wound concentrically round a vertical shaft. 2.160 Sprouted Grain - Grain which has begun to germinate causing changes in the maltose value which, in turn, reduces the milling value. 2.161 Starch - A major hydrogen and oxygen. constituent of wheat flour containing carbon,

2.162 Starch Damage - Disruption of the natural structure of the starch granules by biochemical ( amylases ), chemical ( alkali ) or physical ( grinding or milling ) measures. 2.163 Straight Run Flour - A grade of flour produced together all the basic flour streams made in the mill. by combining

.2.164 Strength ( Flour ) - The capacity of a flour to produce well leavened leaves of large bold volume. A desirable characteristic of breadmaking flour. 2.165 Strong Flour - A flour that takes up a relatively large quantity of water and produces a dough that requires a relatively long mixing for proper development. Usually a flour of high quality for breadmaking. 2.166 SUJI Same as RAVA. the

2.167 Supplemeat

- An additive to flour or dough to improve processing, eating or nutritional qualities.

17

IS : 9374 - 1979 2.168 Tail End - The final changes last particles of flour arc extracted. 2.169 Tails ( Overtails end of a sieve. ) The of the milling process where the

material

that

is discharged

over

the

2.170 Tempering - A process less elaborate than conditioning which produces desired physical changes, resulting in optimum milling in wheat by means of (1) water additions (2) time for penetration. 2.171 Thiamine of enzyme thiamine acid in carbohydrate Also called vitamin B1 or anti-beri-beri factor. Part pyrophosphate TPP which decarboxylates pyruvic metabolism.

2.172 Triticale -- It is an artificial genus synthesized by combining genomes of wheat ( genus Triticum ) and rye ( genus Secale ). Potential substitutes for wheat grains with better protein content and quality. They are still under experimentation for breeding and nutritional quality. 2.173 Tyrosinase substances forming - Enzyme that oxidises tyrosine brown and black pigments. and other phenolic

2.174 Uric Acid - End product of nitrogen metabolism in insects; The true `Uric acid' content in flour indicates insect activity in flour. for human consumption should not exceed 10 mg/lOO mg. 2.175 Variety - A group of strains or a single strain wkich, by its structural or functional characters, can be differentiated from another In plant breeding, usually a strain that has been adopted or group. licenced for commercial production. 2.176 Viscosity Test -- A test based on the determination of the viscosity ( thickness, consistency, resistance to flour ) of a mixture or a solution of a substance and water. In flour testing, sometimes used as a measure of baking quality. 2,177 Water Absorption Power retained, expressed as percentage, to produce a-proper dough. - The amount of water absorbed and based on flour mass, which is required

2.178 Weak Flour - A flour that takes up a relatively small quantity of water and produces a dough that requires a relatively short mixing for development. Usually a flour of low quality for breadmaking. 2.179 Wheat Selection tion of wheat with the - In wheat breeding, the sorting out or retendesired quality characteristics. In commercial

IS: 9374 - 1979
operations, the sorting end products. out and retention of wheat suitable which for the desired and whiten

agents 2.180 Whitening Agents - Chemical the wheat flour for making white bread.

bleach

2.181 Whole Meal ATTA - Flour or meal of 100 percent rate prepared by grinding whole wheat grains to fine powder. 2.182 Whizzer - A machine which after washing by centrifugal force. removes surface wheat

extraction from grain

2.183 Yellow Pigment - The natural yellow pigment in flour is mainly xanthophyll. It detracts from the desirable white colour and is usually bleached by chemicals such as benzoyl peroxide. 2.184

Zeleny Test -

See Sedimentation

Test

( 2.152 ).

19

INDAN ON

STANDARDS AND FOODGRAIN PRODUCTS

FOODGRAINS IS

:
MAIDA for general purposes ( second revision ) SUJr or RAVA ( semolina ) (first revision ) Wheat AT'TA ( second revision ) Pearl barley Barley powder Corn flakes Rolled oats ( quick-cooking type ) ( first r&ion ) Macaroni, spaghetti and vermicelli ( J;rsr reuision ) IDLI mix BESA.N ( jirst revision ) Malt extract ( Jirst revision ) PAPAD ( jirst revision ) Terminology for foodgrains ( Jirst revision ) Method for sampling of cereals and pulses ( ,/;rst revision ) Slotted tube sampler Grain sampler ( PARKHI type ) Thermo-sampler Method for sampling of bigger size foodgrains ( Jirst revision ) Corn sampler ( PARKHI type ) Method of analysis for foodgrains: ( Part I )-1977 Refractions ( Part II )-1967 Moisture ( Part III )-1967 Determination of hectolitre weight Weight of 1 000 grains ( Part IV )-1968 ( Part V )-1970 Determination of uric acid Method for determination of sedimentation value of wheat ( Flour ) Sample divider Methods of sampling for milled cereals and pulses products ( Jrrsf revision ) Method of analysis for detection of insect and rodent contamination in grains and milled products Malting barley Barley malt Improver wheat Wheat flour for use by biscuit industry Wheat flour for use in bread industry Method for determination of wet gluten in wheat flour Method for determination of ergot in foodgrains Maize SUJI or RAVA ( semolina ) Wheat flour for use by cake industry

1009-1979 1010-1968 1155-1968 1156-1957 1157-1957 1158-1973 1484-1974 1485-1976 2234-1962 2400-1976 2404-1972 2639-1972 2813-1970 2814.1978 2815-1964 2816-1964 2821-1964 3714-1978 3729-1966 4333 4333 4333 4333 4333 4333 4782-1968 4940-1968 5315-1978 6261-1971 6894-1973 6895-1973 7462-1974 7463-1974 7464-1974 8162-1976 8184-1976 8574-1977 9194-1979

