IS 10106

( Part l/Set

5 ) : 1990

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

PACKAGING
PART 1 Section 5 Marking, PRODUCT Addressing

CODE
PACKAGING and identification

UDC

621'798'7

: 006'76

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110 002

-aMarch

1991

Price Group 1

Packaging Codes Sectional Committee,

LMD 26

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part l/Set 5 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on g May 1990, after the draft finalized by the Packaging Codes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Light Mechanical Engineericg Division Council. The Packaging Code is being issued in the following parts, each having one or more sections: Part Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Product Packaging; Packaging Materials; Ancillary Materials; Packages; Packaging Operations; Storage and Transportation; Packaging Machinery

and

This section ( Part l/Set 5 ) of the packaging code deals with marking, addressing and identification of packages which together constitute the most important aspect "communication function" of packaging activity.

IS 10106 ( Part l/Set

5 j : 1990

Indian Standard

PACKAGINGCODE
PART1
Section 5

PRODUCTPACKAGING
Addressing and Identification

Marking,

1SCOPE 1.1This standard ( Part l/Set 5 j lays down guidelines for marking, addressirg and identification details which would normally appear on packages.
2 REFERENCES 2.1 I-he following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. Title

could be greatly reduced if not eliminated, if outer containers where properly addressed and mar-ked. The essential requirements are given below. 4.2 Marking for Shipmerat All marks should be on the sides of packages, not on the tops and should be placed in positions where they are least liable to be obliterated. Care. should be taken to achieve maximum legibility. It is preferable to show identical marks on at least two sides. It should be borne in mind that weathering during transit and storage generally reduces the legibility of markpings on outer containers. 4.2.1 Marking and Background These should be in contrasting colours unless otherwise specified by the customer. Clear decisive colours should be used and intermediate shades should be avoided. 4.2.2 In addition to any port markings, all packages with: consignee's and/or should be marked

arenecessary

1260 ( Part 2 ) : 1979 6928 ( Part 1) : 1986

6928 ( Part 2) : 1986

for markings Pictorial handling and labelling of goods, Part 2 General goods ( second revision j Code for marking of freight containers, Part 1 Coding, identification and marking ( jirst revision j Code for marking of freight containers, Part 2 Layout and location of marks ( first
revision j

3 GENERAL of identifying merchandise and products during packaging and the addressing and marking of their containers when they are transported by carrier, cannot be overemphasized if they are to be conveyed safely with speed and easily recognized upon arrival Addressing, marking and at their destination. identification should therefore be regarded as an integral and fundamental part of packaging. The method which should be employed is dependent to a large extent on the character of the product or container and the stage at which the marking is carried out. The following are some of the more common methods in use: Branding Coding Embossing Etching Metal tag Painting Printed label ~4 MARKING
OUTER

3.1The importance

a> gross weight bj net weight cj country of origin dj overall dimensions in metric units When a consignment consists of several associated packages, each should be clearly identified in relation to the other for example. `Consignment Number 655' comprising four individual cases should be individually marked: `Number 655/l/4' - being the first of the four cases `Number 655/2/4' - being the second of the four cases being the third of the four cases `Number 65514.14'- being the final of the four cases Packages which need to be slung at particular positions should have the slinging points clearly This applies particularly to packages marked. which are heavy at one end and where it is of importance that the correct way up should be indicated. For detailed information on suitable methods of marking reference should be made to IS 1260 ( Part 2 j : 1979 and IS 6928 ( Parts 1 and 2): 1986.
1

Printing Silk screening Stencilling Tie-on tag label Transfers

`Number 6551314' -

AND ADDRESSING CONTAINERS

OF

4.1General
Analysis of data has shown that with a little care the amount of merchandise reported lost

IS 10106 ( Part l/Set
4.3 Labelling

5 )

:1990

Labelllng and marking should conform to the Indian railways addressing and labelling regulations and any other statutory regulations. 4.3.1 Labels should be of durable material to withstand a reasonable amount of rubbing. Tie-on tag labels should be used when necessary. 4.3.2 Labels should be printed in bold type with a printer's non-fading ink and where they are liable to come into contact with grease, dirt or moisture, they should be protected by means of transparent self-adhesive cellulose film or a coat of cellulose lacquer varnish. 4.3.3 Where an adhesive is to be used for affixing the label, it is essential that this should be of suitable type and quality and sufficient time should be allowed to permit it to dry before the package is despatched. 4.3.4 Where it is necessary to affix paper or manilla labels to wooden cases or crates, it is often necessary to use metal-backed type or high strength card board labels. 4.3.5 Labels should be affixed in a position where thev are not likely to be ripped off when the container is man-handled. 4.3.6 Where items are sent loose or bundled and the address is not painted on the items, wooden or metal-backed or other suitable labels are necessary and these should be fastened firmly to the consignment by means of a wire. 4.3.7 Where reversible labels are used, it is necessary to ensure that they are reversed before an empty is tendered to the carrier. 4.4 Other Marking The possibility of pilferage should be considered if the package exterior is used for advertising purposes, particularly if the merchandise is of Advertising an attractive and valuable nature. matter should never interfere with, nor obscure, shipping marks or other identification. 5 LABELLTNG AND MARKING OF INNER CONTAINERS 5.1 It is generally necessary for the inner container to provide means of identifying its contents; this ~would apply for instance, to a carton containing components of a piece of machinery. The information to be furnished should be considered on its merits according to the nature of the article packed. 5.1.1 The type of information to be given on intermediate and/or unit packs is a matter that can only be decided in relation to the particular The following suggestions are made product. as a guide: a) Full description of article or commodity;

b) Size, weight, length, number of units; etc. 4 Instructions for use, cleaning and main4 Legal markings

tenance, recipes, recommended uses; when the law requires certain information to be shown for example on pharmaceutical products;

including any special receiving location; d Marking for electronic warehouse sorting and manufacturer's code number; h) Dates of manufacture and expiry for items having limited life; j) Trade mark or name of manufacturer and country of origin; and

e) Supplier's address; f> Address of the consignee

W Advertising matter.
An attractively designed container and/or label can play an important role in the sale of They land themselves to window merchandise. display thereby bringing the mrnufacturer's product before the customer. 6 WARNING
AND CAUTIONARY LABELS

6.1 Where delicate items

are packaged, cautionary labels or markings drawing attention to their fragility should be affixed in a prominent position. containers or 6.1.1 Packages, receptacles, vehicles containing dangerous goods should be clearly labelled to comply with statute, railway, shipping or air transport regulations. In addition it may be desirable to label a pack intended for household use such as bleaches, polishes, film bags, etc. indicating that they should be kept away from children. 6.1.2 Where containers need special care in handling, storage or opening, appropriate mrrkings should always be provided. Consideration may also be given regional and foreign languages. 7 REMOVAL OF OBSOLETE to labelling in MARKINGS

7.1 Where containers are to be used, obsolete labels and markings should always be removed or obliterated in order to avoid any subsequent doubt as to the nature of contents or destination. 8 PACKING NOTES

8.1 It is recommended that a packing note indicating the contents should be included with consignment and it should be headed with the same identification used on the -exterior of the package.

2

I

Standard Mark
I

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the proStandard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to ducer. that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

: ,-.

I'

.-

,?.,. I Buiea'u of Iudkh Standards
.:,.*i-. * <*..vr_. A 1.

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1985 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious*de$el%pment of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publicatio~ns may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent possession of the latest amendments or edition. to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. LMD 26 ( 917 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I IOOCZ Telephones : 331 01 31, 371 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGA~RH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road,

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Ofices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

37 86 62 53 38 43 41 29 16

160036

MADRAS 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALOR E. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARTDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 95

(Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat Press,,uelhl,

India

