Wdta Ah IS 718 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


TAA SETANG — ART 


(There FAETO ) 


Carbon Tetrachloride — 
Specification 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 71.080.20 


© BIS 2023 


ameda AH SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


E AF A, 9 FTL ME MHL MT, Ag fref - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 8 


Organic Chemicals, Alcohols and Allied Products Sectional Committee, PCD 09 


FOREWORD 


This Indian (Third Revision) Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Organic Chemicals, Alcohols and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, 
Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


Carbon Tetrachloride is used extensively as a solvent and diluent. It is also used for the manufacture of refrigerants 
of chlorofluoromethane series, in grain fumigants, in fire extinguishing blends and for moth control purposes. 


This standard was first published in 1955 and subsequently revised in 1970 and 1977. The first revision was taken 
up to formulate two grades of the material and requirement for methyl chloride, methylene chloride and 
chloroform content were included. 


In the second revision, the requirements for relative density and distillation range for both the grades were 
modified. For Grade | the non-volatile matter content was changed. The characteristic of colour was included. 
Further, test method for determination of Sulphur compound modified to spectrophotometer method. 


In this (third revision), Grade 2 for technical grade has been deleted, as it is not manufactured nowadays. The 
major changes in this revision are as under: 


a) The characteristic of purity, which is tested by gas chromatography has been incorporated; 


b) Gas chromatography test method has been modified for impurity and purity for better separation, low 
level detection and quantification of impurities, as gas chromatography method is more authentic and 
accurate as compared to distillation method; 


c) Free chlorine and acidity or alkalinity methods have been modified and alternative test method for color 
determination has been incorporated; and 


d) With the advancement in technologies in production of carbon tetrachloride, carbon disulfide (CS2) is 
not produced nowadays and hence carbon disulphide characteristics has been deleted from the 
specifications. 


The composition of the committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex K. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 718 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE — SPECIFICATION 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements, methods 
of sampling and testing for carbon tetrachloride 
(CCl). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below, contain provisions 
which through reference in this text constitute the 
provisions of the standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1070: 1992 Reagent grade water — 
Specification (third revision) 


IS 2362 : 1993 Determination of water by Karl 
Fischer method — Test method 
(second revision) 


IS 2837 (Part 2) Specification for porcelain 
: 1977 crucibles and basins: Part 2 
Basins (first revision) 


IS 4905 : 2015/ Random sampling and 
ISO 24153 randomization procedures (first 
2009 revision) 

IS 5311:1969 Code of safety for carbon 


tetrachloride 

IS 8768 : 2000 Method of measurement of 
colour in liquid chemical 
products platinum — Cobalt 
scale (second revision) 


3 REQUIREMENTS 
3.1 Description 


The material shall consist essentially of carbon 
tetrachloride (CCl4) and shall be a clear liquid free 
from sediment and suspended matter. 


3.2 The material shall also comply with the 
requirements given in Table 1, when tested 
according to the methods prescribed in col (4) and 
col (5) of Table 1. 


3.2.1 Quality of Reagents 


Unless specified otherwise, ‘pure chemicals’ and 
distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in 
tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do 
not contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


4 PRECAUTIONS IN HANDLING 


Widespread application of carbon tetrachloride 
often without evidence of ill-effects has resulted in 
underrating its toxicity. Careful investigations have 
shown carbon tetrachloride to be one of the most 
harmful of the common solvents. Extreme care, 
therefore, shall be taken in handling it 
(see 5.2.2 and IS 5311). 


5 PACKING AND MARKING 
5.1 Packing 


5.1.1 The material shall be packed as agreed to 
between the purchase and the supplier. It is 
recommended that, as a finished product, carbon 
tetrachloride, be handled in galvanized or epoxy- 
lined mild steel containers or HM-HDPE drums 
rather than plain steel and cast-iron drums. 


5.1.2 The material may be also transported in mild 
steel or stainless-steel road tanker which shall be 
free from contaminations like oil and grease, rust, 
etc. Main holes and loading and unloading points 
shall be hermetically sealed with suitable non- 
reacting gaskets like PTFE and NAF etc. 


5.1.3 The material shall be stored in original 
container, protected from direct sunlight. Containers 
shall be tightly closed and sealed until ready for use. 
Containers that have been opened must be carefully 
resealed and kept upright to prevent leakage. 


5.2 Marking 


5.2.1 Each container shall bear legibly and indelibly 
the following information: 


a) Name of the material; 


b) Name of manufacturer and his recognized 
trade-mark, if any; 


IS 718 : 2023 


c) Month and year of manufacture; 
d) Lot or batch number; 

e) Net weight; and 

f) Any other statutory requirements. 


5.2.2 All containers in which the material is stored 
or transported shall be suitably marked with word 
‘TOXIC’. The label shall also be prominently and 
clearly marked with the following marking: 


STORE IN COOL AND DRY PLACE. 
PROTECT FROM DIRECT SUNLIGHT. 


USE WITH ADEQUATE VENTILATION, 
WEAR MASK AND NECESSARY 
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENTS 
DURING HANDLING 


5.2.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


6 SAMPLING 
The method of drawing representative samples of 


the material and the criteria for conformity shall be 
as prescribed in Annex J. 


Table 1 Requirements for Carbon Tetrachloride 
(Clause 3.2) 


SI No. Characteristics Requirements Method of test, Ref to 
N 
| | 
Annex IS No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Relative density at 27 °C/27 °C 1.584 - 1.590 A — 
ii) Colour, Pt-Co, Max 15 — IS 8768 
iii) Distillation range at 760 mmHg” 2 to 97 ml shall B — 
distil between 
76.0 to 77.0 °C 
iv) Non-volatile matter, percent by mass, Max 0.002 C == 
v) Purity, percent by mass, Min 99.5 D = 
vi) Methyl chloride, Methylene chloride and 0.025 D — 
Chloroform, percent by mass, Max 
vil) Moisture content, percent by mass, Max 0.01 E — 
viii) Acidity (as HCl) or alkalinity (as NaOH), 5.0 F = 
ppm, Max 
ix) Spot test To pass test G — 
x) Free Chlorine To pass test H — 


D Distillation range at 760 mmHg is an optional parameter or as agreed between the purchaser and the 


manufacturer. 


IS 718 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
[Table 1, SI No. (i)] 
DETERMINATION OF RELATIVE DENSITY 


A-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


In this method, mass of equal volumes of the 
material and water at the same temperatures are 
compared using relative density bottle. 


A-2 APPARATUS 


A-2.1 Relative Density Bottle, with well-fitting 
ground-glass joints. 


To calibrate, clean and dry the bottle thoroughly, 
weigh and then fill with water, freshly boiled and 
cooled to 27 °C, after removing the cap. Fill to 
overflowing by holding the bottle on its side in such 
a manner as to prevent entrapment of air bubbles, 
insert the stopper and immerse in a water-bath at 
(27.0 + 0.2) °C. Keep the entire bulb completely 
covered with water and hold at that temperature for 
30 min. 


Carefully remove any water which has exuded from 
the capillary opening. Remove from the bath, wipe 
completely dry, replace the cap, cool to a lower 
temperature and weigh. Calculate the mass of water. 
The relative density bottle of about 50 ml capacity 
and of either of the two shapes, as shown in Fig. 1 
is recommended. 


A-2.2 Water Bath, maintained at (27.0 + 0.2) °C. 


A-2.3 Thermometer, any convenient thermometer 
of a suitable range with 0.1 °C or 0.2 °C 
subdivisions. 


NOTE — The thermometer shall bear a certificate from any 
institution authorized to issue certificate traceable to 
international or national measurement standards. 


A-3 PROCEDURE 


Fill the relative density bottle with the material 
previously kept at about 27 °C to overflowing, 
holding the bottle on its side in such a manner as to 
prevent entrapment of air bubbles after removing the 
cap of the side arm. Insert the stopper, immerse in 
the water-bath maintained at (27.0 + 0:2) °C and 
hold for 30 min. Carefully wipe off any liquid which 
has come through the capillary opening. Remove the 
relative density bottle from the bath, clean dry it 
thoroughly, cool and weigh. 


A-4 CALCULATION 
A-B 
Relative density at 27 °C/27 °C = ar 


where 


A = mass of the relative density bottle filled 
with the material at 27 °C, in g; 
B = mass of the relative density bottle, in g; 


C = mass of the relative density bottle filled 
with water at 27 °C, ing. 


NOTES 


1 The relative density determined at any temperature within 
the range 25 °C to 35 °C can be adjusted to 27 °C/27 °C 
using the correction factor of + 0.0 016 for every degree 
celsius fall, and - 0.0 016 for every degree celsius rise in 
temperature. 


2 Digital density meter may also be used. 


FIG. 1 RELATIVE DENSITY BOTTLE 


IS 718 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
[Table 1, SI No. (iii)] 


DETERMINATION OF DISTILLATION RANGE 


B-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


The material is distilled in the specified apparatus 
under the prescribed condition of heat input and rate 
of distillation of 100 ml of the material distilled and 
percentages by volume of the distillate recovered at 
the specified temperatures are recorded. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 Distillation Flask, of the shape and 
dimensions shown in Fig. 2. 


SIDE-TUBE 


75° + 3° 


LIQUID SURFACE 


niya Ele 
QUANTITW EQUAL 
TO NOMINAL 
CAPACITY 


All dimensions in millimeters 
FIG. 2 DISTILLATION FLASK 


B-2.2 Thermometer, a suitable partial immersion 
thermometer having a range of 48 °C to 100 °C, 
graduated at each 0.2 °C and with a maximum scale 
error of 0.2 °C. The maximum overall length of the 
thermometer shall be 385 mm and stem diameter 
shall be 5.5 mm to 8.0 mm. 


NOTE — The thermometer shall bear a certificate from any 
institution authorized to issue certificate traceable to 
international or national measurement standards. 


B-2.3 Rectangular Draught Screen, rectangular in 
cross-section, made of 0.8 mm thick sheet metal, 
with dimensions as shown in Fig. 3 and open at the 
top and bottom. It shall comply with the following 
requirements: 


a) In each of the two narrower sides of the 
draught screen there shall be two circular holes, 
each 25 mm diameter, and in each of the four 


sides of the draught screen there shall be three 
holes with their centers 25 mm above the base 
of the draught screen. These holes shall occupy 
the position shown in Fig. 3. The diameter of 
each of the holes centrally situated in the longer 
sides shall be 25 mm and of the remaining ten 
holes shall be 12.5 mm. At the middle of each 
of the wider sides a vertical slot with the 
dimensions as shown in Fig. 3 shall be cut 
downwards from the top of the screen. A 
removable shutter conforming to the 
dimensions in Fig. 4 shall be provided for 
closing the vertical slot not in use. 


b) A shelf of hard asbestos board, 6 mm in 
thickness and having a central circular hole 
110 mm in diameter, shall be supported 
horizontally in the screen and shall fit closely to 
the sides of the screen to ensure that hot gases 
from the source of heat do not come in contact 
with the sides or neck of the flask. The supports 
for this asbestos shelf may conveniently consist 
of triangular pieces of metal sheet firmly fixed 
to the screen at its four corners. 


c) In one of the narrower sides of the screen a 
door shall be provided having dimensions and 
position as shown in Fig. 3. In each of the 
narrower sides of the screen a mica window 
shall be placed centrally with the bottom of the 
window on a level with the top of the asbestos 
shelf. The dimensions and position of the 
windows are shown in Fig. 4. 


d) An asbestos board 150 mm x 150 mm x 6 mm 
in size having a central hole 50 mm in diameter 
shall be so placed on the asbestos shelf that the 
two holes are approximately concentric and the 
distillation flask when in position completely 
closes the hole of the asbestos board. 


B-2.4 Liebig Condenser, with the bent end made 
and wall thickness of 1.0 mm to 1.5 mm and 
conforming to the shape and dimensions shown in 
Fig. 5. The bent portion may, however, be 
substituted by an adapter fitted externally in such a 
manner that distillate does not come in contact with 
the cork. 


IS 718 : 2023 


SLOT IN EACH WIDER SIDE 


MICA WINDOW IN EACH 
NARROWER SIDE 
ASBESTOS BOARD 

150 mm sq 


@25mm OPENINGS IN 
EACH NARROWER SIDE 


DOOR IN NARROWER 
SIDE 


@12.5mm OPENINGS IN 


THREE OPENINGS EACH NARROWER SIDE 


IN EACH WIDER 
SIDE 


All dimensions in millimeters 
FIG. 3 RECTANGULAR DRAUGHT SCREEN 


110 mm 


50 mm 


FIG. 4 REMOVABLE SHUTTER 


£ 97°+3° 
SMOOTH 


GROUND 
FINISH 


All dimensions in millimeters 
FIG. 5 LIEBIG CONDENSER 


IS 718 : 2023 


B-2.5 Receiver, of 100 ml capacity, with 
dimensions and graduation shown in Fig. 6. 


250410 110210 


| — @70+25 —| 


1545 


All dimensions in millimeters 
FIG. 6 RECEIVER 


B-2.6 Electric Heater, Gas Burner or other Flame 
Type Heater, any suitable heater or burner that 
enables the distillation to be carried out as described 
in B-3. 


B-3 PROCEDURE 


Assemble the apparatus as shown in Fig. 7. Measure 
100 ml of the material at laboratory temperature by 
means of the receiver and transfer it to the 
distillation flask. Add a fragment (about 2 mm cube) 
of porous or other suitable inert material to prevent 
bumping, connect the flask to the condenser and 
insert the thermometer. Fit the thermometer in the 


flask so that the bottom of the capillary is in level 
with the lower edge of the side-tube joint. Pass an 
adequate supply of cooling water at 0 °C to 5 °C, 
through the condenser. To receive the distillate, use 
the receiver in which the sample was measured, 
without rinsing or drying. Heat the flask slowly; 
especially after ebullition has begun, in order that 
the mercury column of the thermometer may 
become fully expanded before the first drop of 
distillate falls into the receiver, care being taken that 
the total period of this preliminary heating shall be 
not less than 5 min nor greater than 10 min. Place 
the receiver in a manner that the condensate flows 
down its side. Continue the distillation at the rate of 
4 ml/min to 5 ml/min (about 2 drops). Read the 
temperature on the thermometer when 2 ml and 
97 ml of the distillate have been collected in the 
cylinder. 


B-4 CORRECTION OF THE THERMOMETER 
READING 


B-4.1 Error of Scale 


In all the thermometer readings, make the 
corrections as indicated on the certificate of the 
instrument. 


B-4.2 Correction for Barometric Pressure 


If the barometric pressure prevailing during the 
determination is normal, namely, 760 mmHg, no 
correction need be applied to the specified 
temperature and the thermometer scale as corrected 
under B-4.1 shall be used as such. If, however, the 
prevailing pressure deviates from 760 mmHg, the 
specified temperatures shall also be corrected as 
follows: 


a) For every 10 mmHg above 760 mmHg, 
subtract 0.43 °C from the specified temperature; 
and 

b) For every 10 mmHg below 760 mmHg, add 
0.43 °C to the specified temperature. 


NOTE — These corrections are valid only for pressures 
above 700 mmHg. 


THERMO METER 


DISTILLATION FLASK 


IS 718 : 2023 


RETORT STAND 


LIEBIG CONDENSER 


All dimensions in millimeters 
FIG. 7 ASSEMBLY OF APPARATUS FOR DETERMINING DISTILLATION RANGE 


ANNEX C 
[Table 1, SI No. (iii)] 
DETERMINATION OF NON-VOLATILE MATTER 


C-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


A known quantity of the material is evaporated on 
a water-bath and the residue is weighed. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Porcelain Basin, 150 ml capacity 
[see IS 2837(Part 2)] 


C-2.2 Water Bath 


C-2.3 Oven, capable of maintaining temperature 
between 105 °C to 110 °C. 


C-3 PROCEDURE 


Clean the basin and dry in a desiccator. Weigh the 
empty basin (previously conditioned in the oven at 
105 °C to 110 °C for 30 min and cooled in a 
desiccator) to the nearest 0.0002g¢ (M)). 


Take 100 ml of the material in the basin. Evaporate 
the material over a water bath in a fume cupboard to 
almost dryness. Further heat in the oven at 105 °C to 
110 °C for 30 min. Cool in a desiccator and weigh 
accurately (M2). Repeat the heating for 15 min, 
followed by cooling and weighing till, two 
consecutive weighing do not differ by more than 
0.5 mg. 


C-4 CALCULATION 


. M 
Non-volatile matter, percent by mass = saa 100 
where 

M = mass, of the residue obtained (M2 - M7), in 

8; 

v = volume, of the material taken for the test, 
in ml; and 


d = relative density, of the material (see Annex B). 


IS 718 : 2023 


ANNEX D 


[Table 1, SI No. (v) and (vi)] 


DETERMINATION OF PURITY, METHYL CHLORIDE, METHYLENE CHLORIDE AND 
CHLOROFORM BY GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY 


D-1 APPARATUS 
D-1.1 Gas Chromatograph 


D-1.1.1 Any gas chromatograph equipped with a 


flame ionization 
injector and a 
software may be 
accessories and 


detector (FID), a split-splitless 
suitable electronic integrator/ 
used with following 
operating condition: 


6 percent cyanopropyl phenyl and 94 percent 


dimethylpolysiloxane with length: 30 m; internal diameter: 0.53 mm and film thickness: 


Column Column of fused silica, with 
3.0 um 

Carrier gas and Hydrogen (Ho) and 10 ml/min 

flow rate 

(ml/min) 

Split ratio : 10:1 

Make up (No) : 25 

flow rate 

ml/min 

Hydrogen flow 30 ml/min 

rate 

Zero air flow 300 ml/min 

rate 

Septum purge 3 ml/min 


flow rate 


Sample size 


Detector 


Flame ionization detector (FID) 


2 ul (may vary as per user method suitability) 


D-1.1.2 Temperature Program of Oven, Detector and Injector: 


Detector 


Oven 


Injector a ~ 
Temperature, °C Temperature,°C Temperature, °C Hold Time, min Ramp Rate, °C/ min 
250+ 1 250+ 1 40+1 5 10 
160 1 — 
NOTES parameters, provided standardization and calibration of the 


1 The above gas chromatographic (GC) conditions are 
suggestive. However, any GC method having difference in 
detector, column packing material and type (like 
packed/capillary, diameter, length, film thickness etc.), 
calibration technique (internal standard, external standard, 
area normalization, percent area etc), carrier gas 
(He, Ho, No) may be used with applicable GC operating 


components is established after setting GC parameters for 
the resolution and accuracy level as specified in this 
standard. 


2 Helium or Hydrogen or Nitrogen may be used as the 
carrier gas. The operating parameters of the gas 
chromatograph given above are according to hydrogen, as 
carrier gas. 


D-1.2 Syringe, 10 pl capacity 


D-1.3 Recorder, chromatogram is displayed on the 
computer screen 


D-2 REAGENTS 
D-2.1 Acetone 


D-2.2 Synthetic Standard of Pure Carbon 
Tetrachloride 


For synthetic standard, mix methyl chloride, 
methylene chloride and chloroform in pure carbon 
tetrachloride as given below: 


Component Concentration, percent by mass 
Methyl 0.008 — 0.009 
chloride 
Methylene 0.008 — 0.009 
chloride 
Chloroform 0.008 — 0.009 
Carbon Balance 
tetrachloride 


D-3 PROCEDURE 
D-3.1 Sample Injection 


Rinse 10 ul syringe with acetone twice and dry for 
2 min or longer. Rinse the syringe twice with the 
synthetic standard. Inject standard solution (as per 
sample size defined in D-1.1.1) into the gas 
chromatograph and obtain a standard chart. Rinse 
the syringe twice with the material under test and 
inject the same sample size used for standard 
solution into the gas chromatograph. It is imperative 
that the same injection technique is used, and the 
syringe used in the operation is not used with any 
other type of solvent. It is very necessary to prevent 
contamination. 


D-3.2 The components will elute in the order of their 
boiling points: 


a) First — Methyl chloride; 

b) Second — Methylene chloride; 
c) Third — Chloroform; and 

d) Fourth — Carbon tetrachloride. 


IS 718 : 2023 


D-4 CALIBRATION 


Internal normalization is the method used for 
calibration of the results of the analysis. Because of 
low contents of unknown impurities, it is not 
necessary to use correction factors for converting the 
percentage of the areas into percentage by mass, so 
that these factors in the calculation formula have the 
value Rf = 1. In case of examples with higher 
contents of known impurities, there is a need for 
determining correction factors; this should be done 
by using a synthetic standard solution. The mixture 
is run through the chromatograph. This would give 
the positions at which each component would elute. 
By comparison of the actual values obtained for the 
standard and the composition of the standard 
prepared the correction factor for the component 
may be calculated. 


D-5 DETERMINATION OF RESPONSE 
FACTOR (Rf) 


D-5.1 Inject synthetic standard mixture (D-2.2) 
three times, one by one and read the response/area 
percentage of methyl chloride, methylene chloride 
and chloroform. Calculate the response factor for 
impurities in standard by using given formula, 


Response factor (Ri) of methyl chloride, methylene 
chloride and chloroform: 


Rf= 


Actual concenteration (percent of intereseted impurity) 


Area percent from GC 


D-5.2 Calculate the average response factor for all 
individual impurity as average of three readings. 
The final response factor of individual impurity shall 
be taken for the calculation of impurities 
concentration in chloroform. 


D-6 CALCULATION 
D-6.1 For Impurities 


Interested impurity, percent = (Area percent 
of Interested Impurity) x (Rf of Interested Impurity) 


D-6.2 For Purity 


Purity, percent = 100 — (Sum of all impurities) 


IS 718 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
[Table 1, SI No. (vii)] 
DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE CONTENT 


E-1 Take 100 ml of the material and determine its 
moisture content as prescribed in IS 2362. 


NOTE — As an alternative test method, Karl Fischer (KF) 
auto titrator may also be used. 


ANNEX F 
[Table 1, SI No. (viii)] 


DETERMINATION OF ACIDITY (as HCl) OR ALKALINITY (as NaOH) 


F-1 PREPARED AQUEOUS EXTRACT 


Shake 25 ml of the material with 25 ml of freshly 
boiled and cooled water for 3 min and allow the 
layers to separate. Reserve the aqueous layer for the 
test. 


F-2 REAGENTS 
F-2.1 Methyl Orange Indicator 


Dissolve 0.50 g of the methyl orange in water and 
dilute to 1 litre. 


F-2.2 Bromothymol Blue Indicator Solution 


Dissolve 50 mg of bromothymol blue in 4 ml 
of 0.02 M sodium hydroxide and 20 ml of ethanol 


(95 percent). After the solution is effected, add 
sufficient water to produce 100 ml. 


F-3 PROCEDURE 


Take 10 ml of the prepared aqueous extract (F-1) 
and add 4 drops of methyl orange indicator. Carry 
out a control test by adding the same amount of 
indicator to 10 ml of freshly boiled and cooled 
distilled water and compare the colour produced in 
both. Repeat this test using 4 drops of bromothymol 
blue solution in place of methyl orange indicator. 


F-4 The material shall be taken as neutral if the 
colour obtained with the prepared aqueous extract 
shows no difference when compared with the colour 
produced in the control test. 


ANNEX G 
[Table 1, SI No. (1x)] 


SPOT TEST 


G-1 PROCEDURE 


G-1.1 Place 5 drops of the material near the center 
of a filter paper (Whatman No. 40 or equivalent), 
taking care that the wet portion of the filter paper 
does not come into contact with any object. Allow 


to evaporate in a well-ventilated room and keep for 
2h. 


G-1.2 The material shall be taken to have satisfied 
the test if no spot or stain is left on the filter paper. 


IS 718 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
[Table 1, SI No. (vii)] 
TEST FOR FREE CHLORINE 


H-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


The material is shaken with potassium iodide 
solution (H-3.1) and the blue colour developed, is 
noted. 


H-2 APPARATUS 


H-2.1 Graduated Measuring Cylinder, 25 ml 
capacity, glass stoppered (see IS 878) 


H-3 REAGENT 


H-3.1 Potassium Iodide Solution 


Dissolve 100 g potassium iodidein 1000 ml of 


distilled water. Store the solution in the dark. 


H-4 PROCEDURE 


H-4.1 Place 5 ml of sample in a ground glass stopper 
tube. Add 5 ml of potassium iodide solution and 
0.2 g of soluble starch. Shake the tube for 30 s and 
keep in the dark for 5 min. 


NOTE — The test shall be carried out in the dark and colour 
developments shall be checked immediately. 


H-4.2 The material shall be regarded to have passed 
the test if no blue colour is developed within 5 min. 


ANNEX J 
(Clause 6) 


SAMPLING OF CARBON TETRACHLORIDE 


J-1 GENERAL 
SAMPLING 


REQUIREMENTS OF 


J-1.1 The sampling instrument shall be clean and 
dry. 


J-1.2 Precautions shall be taken to protect the 
samples, the material being sampled, the sampling 
instrument and the containers for samples from 
adventitious contamination. 


J-1.3 To draw a representative sample, the contents 
of each container selected for sampling shall be 
mixed thoroughly by shaking or stirring or both by 
suitable means or by rolling. 


J-1.4 The samples shall be placed in suitable, 
clean,dry and airtight, metal, or dark or amber glass 
containers on which the material has no action. 


J-1.5 The sample containers shall be of such a size 
that they are almost completely filled by the sample. 


J-1.6 Each sample container shall be sealed airtight 
after filling and marked with full details of sampling, 
the date of sampling, and the month and year of 
manufacture of the material. 


J-1.7 Samples shall be stored in the dark. 
J-2 SAMPLING INSTRUMENT 


J-2.1 The following sampling instrument may be 
used: 


a) Sampling bottle or can, for taking samples 
from tanks or drums; and 


b) Sampling tube, for taking samples from 
bottles or small containers. 


J-2.1.1 Sampling bottle or can, consists of a 
weighed glass or metal containers with removable 
stopper or top to which is attached a light chain 
(see Fig. 8). The bottle or the can is fastened to a 
suitable pole. For taking a sample, the bottle or the 
can is lowered into the tank to the required depth and 
the stopper is then removed by means of the chain. 


J-2.1.2 Sampling tube, made of metal or thick glass, 
20 mm to 40 mm in diameter and 400 mm to 
800 mm in length (see Fig. 9). The upper and lower 
ends are conical and reach 5 mm to 10 mm diameter 
at the narrow ends. Handling is facilitated by two 
rings at the upper end. 


IS 718 : 2023 


FIG. 8 SAMPLING BOTTLE 


y 


5TO10 
Ø 20 TO 40 
400 TO 800 
Ø 
All dimensions in millimeters 
FIG. 9 SAMPLING TUBE 


5 TO 10 


12 


J-2.1.2.1 For small containers the size of the 
sampling tube may be altered suitably. 


J-3 SCALE OF SAMPLING 


J-3.1 For Tanks and Drums, each tank or drum 
shall be sampled separately. 


J-3.2 For Bottles and Small Containers, each lot 
(see J-3.2.1) shall be sampled separately. 


J-3.2.1 Lot 


In any consignment, all the containers of the same 
grade and drawn from a single batch of manufacture 
shall constitute a lot. If a consignment is known to 
consist of different batches of manufacture or of 
different grades, the containers belonging to the 
same batch and grade shall be grouped together and 
each group shall constitute a separate lot. 


J-3.2.2 The number of containers (n) to be selected 
from a lot shall depend on the size of the lot (M) and 
shall be in accordance with Table 2. 


J-3.2.3 These containers shall be selected from the 
lot at random. In order to ensure the randomness of 
selection, a random number table may be used. For 
guidance and use of random number table, IS 4905 
may be referred. In the absence of random number 
table, the following procedure may be adopted: 


Starting from any container in the lot, count the 
containers as 1, 2, 3, ......... , etc, up to r so on, in one 
order. Every r' container thus. counted shall be 
withdrawn to constitute the sample where r is the 
integral part of N/n (N and n being the lot size and 
sample size respectively). 


J-4 TEST SAMPLE AND REFEREE SAMPLE 
J-4.1 From Tanks and Drums 


As far as possible, samples from a tank or drum 
should be drawn during the operation of filling. In 


IS 718 : 2023 


that case, equal amounts of the material shall be 
collected at regular intervals so as to get a total 
amount of about 1 500 ml. Where it is not possible 
to take a sample during filling, the material shall be 
drawn from different positions and depths with the 
sampling bottle or can after thoroughly agitating the 
material to ensure a fair amount of homogeneity. 
The total amount of the material collected shall be 
thoroughly mixed and divided into three equal 
portions, one for the purchaser, another for the 
supplier and the third for the referee. 


J-4.2 From Bottles and Small Containers 


From each of the bottles or containers selected 
according to J-3.2.3, a small representative portion 
of the material shall be drawn with the help of the 
sampling tube. Equal quantities of the material so 
drawn from the various containers shall be 
thoroughly mixed to form a test sample of about 
1 500 ml. This shall be divided into three equal parts, 
one for the supplier and the third for the referee. 


J-4.3 All the test samples shall be transferred to 
separate sample containers and sealed and labelled 
with full identification particulars. The referee test 
sample bearing the seal of both the purchaser and the 
supplier shall be kept at a place agreed to between 
the two and shall be used in case of a dispute. 


J-5 TESTS 


J-5.1 Tests for the determination of all the 
requirements given in this specification shall be 
performed on the composite sample obtained as in 
J-4.1 or J-4.2. 


J-6 CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


The lot shall be declared as conforming to this 
specification if all the test results satisfy the 
prescribed requirements. 


Table 2 Scale of Sampling 
(Clause J-3.2.2) 


SI No. Lot Size No. of Containers to be Selected 

N n 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 15 3 
ii) 16 to 40 4 
iii) 41 to 65 5 
iv) 66 to 110 7 
v) 111 and above 10 


IS 718 : 2023 


ANNEX K 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Organic Chemicals, Alcohols and Allied Products Sectional Committee, PCD 09 


Organization 


National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune 
Alkyl Amines Chemicals Ltd, Mumbai 


All India Alcohol-Based Industries Development 
Association (AABIDA), Mumbai 


All India Distillers Association (AIDA), New Delhi 


BASF India Ltd, Mumbai 


Chemical And Petrochemicals Manufacturers 


Association (CPMA), New Delhi 


CSIR — Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI), 
Lucknow 


Deepak Fertilizer, New Delhi 


Deepak Phenolics Ltd, Vadodara 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, 
New Delhi 


Dow Chemical International Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Godavari Biorefineries, Mumbai 


Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers Company Ltd, 
Ahmedabad 


Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd (HOCL), Mumbai 


India Glycols Ltd, Uttarakhand 


Indian Chemical Council (ICC), Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Panipat 


INEOS Styrolution India Ltd, Vadodara 


Representative(s) 


DRC. V. RODE (Chairperson) 


SHRI S. V. NIKUMBHE 
SHRI SAMEER KATDARE (Alternate) 


SHRI K. L. RAPHAEL 
SHRI KIRTI GAJJAR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. N. RAINA 


SHRI KIRAN BHAT 
SHRI HEMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI UDAY CHAND 


DR SANJEEV KANOJIYA 


DRL.B. YADAWA 
SHRI SURESH AMLE (Alternate) 


SHRI DHARMESH SIDDHAPURIA 
SHRI SANDIP KUMAR PANDYA (Alternate) 


SHRI O. P. SHARMA 
SHRI V ARUN SINGH POONIA (Alternate) 


SHRI V. MOHANDOSS 
SHRI GOVIND GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANUL LAXMANRAO PAGAR 
SHRI APPASAHEB J. WANI (Alternate) 


SHRI R. M. PATEL 
SHRI C. S. PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI DELEEP KUMAR K. 
SHRI PRADEESH NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


DRR. K. SHARMA 
SHRI ALOK SINGHAL (Alternate) 


DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY 
SHRI J. SEVAK (Alternate) 


DR Y. S. JHALA 


DR KANAK DASS 


IS 718 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 
Jubilant Life Sciences Ltd, Noida SHRI MANSUKH D. KANZARIYA 
Laxmi Organic Industries, Mumbai SHRI J. P. SURYAVANSHI 


DR VUJAY S. MISHRA (Alternate) 


National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune DR RAVINDAR KONTHAM 
DR UDAYA KIRAN MARELLI (Alternate) 


National Test House (NTH) , Kolkata SHRI DEBASHIS SAHA 
DR GOPAL KRISHAN (Alternate) 


Reliance Industrial Ltd (RIL), Mumbai SHRI SREERAMACHANDRAN KARTHA 
SHRI VASANT WARKE (Alternate) 


United Phosphorus Ltd (UPL), Mumbai SHRI M. D. VACHHANI 


In Personal Capacity (37 Nandanvan Society, Near DR MAYUR J. KAPADIA 
GNFC Township, Narmadanagar, Bharuch — 
392015) 


BIS Director General SHRIMATI MEENAL PASSI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (PETROLEUM, COAL AND 
RELATED PRODUCTS) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
KUMARI ADITI CHOUDHARY 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED PRODUCTS), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 09 (19468). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


