rte IS 5508 (Part 1) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


HA WASA & MR di omtelgtert 


AT 1 ATHTA 
( Teel TATA) 


Guide for Fishing Gear 
Part 1 General 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 65.150 


© BIS 2020 


anda get SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERE TH AMT, ay ect 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2020 Price Group 3 


Textile Materials for Marine/Fishing Purposes Sectional Committee, TXD 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by Textile Materials for Marine/Fishing Purposes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 


This Indian standard (Part 1) was first published in 1969 and has now been revised to incorporate the latest 
developments in this field. 


The idea behind compiling a guide for fishing gear designs was that the construction of a specific fishing design 
would be of particular value in a country like India where the fisheries is a big industry It would provide assistance 
in selecting the suitable gear, the criteria in respect of dimensions and facilitate in placing complete and correct 
orders for the construction of gear. Besides, it would also be of tremendous value to fisheries training centres. 
It is also expected that the guide would be most useful in serving as a link between the fishermen and the gear 
technologists. 


Hitherto, there was no common denominator by which fishing gear could be specified and, consequently, no 
adequate means of comparing the various types of gear. To achieve this purpose of intelligent communication in 
respect of gear construction between gear technologists and net makers, the gear drawings in the guide had to, 


a) be clearly understandable, 
b) provide information on the main dimensions by direct reading of. numbers from the drawings, and 


c) allow direct comparison of shape between different gears of the same type. This has been achieved by 
using a minimum of words in the drawings; by making the drawings of all trawl nets on a 1 : 2 presentation 
of the mesh hanging and by providing a prominent scale indicator on all drawings. 


It has to be noted that not all the drawings are complete to the last detail, but sufficient detail has been given in all 
cases for anyone initiated into the general principles and practices of net making, to construct anyone of them. The 
intention is to provide more than a construction manual. The guide has been got up in a form whereby one net or 
gear may readily be compared with another as to its size, shape and strength. 


Both drawings and data sheets are used to present the information, the former to give an impression of the size 
and shape of the gear as well as certain constructional details, the latter to convey certain information that cannot 
easily or tidily be shown in the drawings. Some of the information on the drawings and data sheets is duplicated, 
but it is believed that this will save the reader and user of the guide the time and effort in quickly comparing nets 
with one another as well as in rapidly grasping their constructions. 


The detailed drawings are neither to scale nor exact. They are meant to give essential impressions to any gear 
expert who wishes to ‘ choose one gear rather than another and who may wish to construct one. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


15 5508 (Part 1) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GUIDE FOR FISHING GEAR 
PART 1 GENERAL 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This guide (Part 1) specifies the principal construction 
details of various types of nets like trawl, gillnet, 
seines, etc, for fishing. The constructional details for 
fabricating a particular type of net has been given in the 
form of drawing and data sheet. Each such drawing and 
data sheet is complete enough for the fabrication of a 
particular type of net and as such forms a distinct part 
of the guide. The method of representation followed on 
the data sheets and on the drawings has been detailed 
out in 2 and 3. When a set of drawings and data sheets 
consisting of several parts falls into a natural group, it 
is followed by an explanatory note given in the form of 
an appendix giving the terminology and other related 
details applicable to that group. 


2 METHOD OF REPRESENTATION ON DATA 
SHEETS 


Each data sheet consists of 5 sections - the first section 
classifies the gear; the second specifies the webbings; 
the third specifies the ropes; the fourth specifies the 
floats, sinkers and any additional accessories indicated 
by reference numbers on the drawings; while the last 
section deals with any vital additional information. 


2.1 Netting Panels 


2.1.1 The various panels in the drawings are specified 
in capital letters using subscript numericals where 
necessary. The panel letters are cross-referenced with 
the data sheets. Mesh sizes have been indicated by 
symbol 0 in the appropriate panel. 


2.1.2 Material 


Polyamide, polyethylene, polypropylene and polyester 
are all taken as names being in common use and have 
been used as such. Reference to trade names bas been 
avoided. 


2.1.3 Twine Size 


This is specified according to relevant Indian Standard. 


2.1.4 Stretched Mesh 


Mesh sizes have been specified in millimetres, True 
mesh size has been used, that is, the length of one 
lumen plus knot with the meshes stretched. 


2.1.5 Upper Edge 

The number of meshes along the top of each panel has 
been given. 

2.1.6 Lower Edge 

The number of meshes along the bottom of each panel 
has been given. 

2.1.7 Depth 

The number of meshes down in one vertical line of 
each panel has been given. 

2.1.8 Baiting Rate 


Decreasing or reducing the number of meshes in 
successive rows so as to make a tapering piece of 
webbing. Wherever the webbing is tapered differently 
on its two edges, then the baiting rate for both the inner 
and outer edges is specified separately. 


2.1.9 Hanging 

Ratio of attachment of webbing to a supporting rope 
or line. 

2.2 Lines, Ropes 

The various ropes and lines are designated in lower 
case letters. These letters are cross-referenced with 
drawings. 

2.2.1 Material 


Polyamide, polyethylene, polypropylene and polyester 
are all taken as names being in common use and have 
been wed as such. Reference to trade names has been 
avoided. 

2.2.2 Diameter 


In all cases, this is specified in millimetres. 
2.1.3 Length 
In all cases, this is specified in metres. 


3 METHOD OF REPRESENTATION ON 
DRAWINGS 


3.1 For facilitating comparison of designs, the drawing 
normally contains the following details which also 
appear in the date sheet: 


IS 5508 (Part 1) : 2020 


a) Number of meshes at the top and bottom of each 
panel, 


b) Depth of each panel in meshes, 
c) Mesh size in the panels, in millimetres, and 
d) Rates of baiting and cutting of each panel. 
3.2 Depending on the layout of the net, the number of 


meshes in depth and the mesh size appear either inside 
or alongside the panels thus: 


Number of Meshes 
Meshes Mesh Size 
Deep Number of Meshes 


4 DESIGNS FOR TRAWLS 


According to construction, trawls could be classified 
as two-seam, four-seam, six-seam, et , according to 
the number of seams with which it is constructed. 
Constructional details of four most popular designs of 
two-seam trawls have been covered in this guide. The 
designs relating to trawls of four-seam and six-seam 
types would be added to this guide at a future date. 
The terminology and classification details related to the 
fabrication of trawls have been given in Annex A. 


IS 5508 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.1 ) 
TERMINOLOGY RELATING TO TRAWL NETS 


A-1 CLASSIFICATION 


Trawl nets are classified as under: 


TRAWLS 
According to Mouth According to Depth of According to Construction 
Opening Device Operation | 
Beam Otter Bull Bottom Mid-water Pelagic Two Four Six 
trawl trawl trawl trawl trawl trawl seam seam seam 
Over hang | 
Over Non- Over 
hang over hang 
hang 
Non- 
over 
hang 


A-2 SIZE OF TRAWL 


In beam trawl, the size of the trawl is indicated by the 
length of the beam used. In otter trawls, the size of the 
trawl is the length of head rope. 


A-3 PARTS OF THE TRAWL 


A-3.1 Each part of the trawl is named according to its 
main function. It is convenient to group the parts under 
three main heads, namely, webbings, ropes and lines, 
and accessories. 


A-3.1.1 Webbings 


The material, mesh size and the dimensions in length 
and breadth in number of meshes are to be specified. 
The baiting, the creasing or the cutting rate, if any, are 
also to be indicated. 


A-3.1.2 Ropes and Lines 

The material, lay, construction, thickness and the 
quantity required are to be specified. 

A-3.1.3 Accessories 


The material, size, the quantity required and the mode 
of use are to be specified. 


A-4 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS RELATED TO 
WEBBINGS 


A-4.1 Wings 


The forward extension of webbings on either side for 
guiding the fish towards the bag of the trawl. They are in 
pairs, one on either side. The upper wings are attached 
on either sides of the upper belly and the lower wings, 
on either side of the lower belly, The upper edges of the 
wings are attached to the head rope and the lower edges 
to the foot rope. 


A-4.2 Jibs 


The triangular pieces of webbing attached on either 
side of the upper and lower bellies at their junction 
with wings to present a smooth catenary at the mouth 
of the net. These are made in pairs, one for each side. 
The four-seam type of trawls are invariably provided 
with jibs. 


A-4.3 Dogear 


They are similar to jibs, having all bars along the 
hanging edge and points on the wings . In two-seam 
trawls, sometimes the dogears are attached on either 
ends of the quarter to form a smooth catenary. They are 
also made in pairs. 


IS 5508 (Part 1) : 2020 


A-4.4 Bosum 


The middle portion of the trawl net between the wings. 


A-4.5 Side Pieces 


These are also termed ‘side wedges’. They are identical 
pieces of webbing attached on either side of the belly to 
join the upper and lower portions of a four-seam trawl. 
The portion or the webbing that comes above the belly 
is termed ‘top wedge’ and the portion placed adjacent 
to belly is known as ‘lower wedge’ or ‘side wedge’. 


A-4.6 Quarter 


The two junctions where the top wing joins the square. 


A-4.7 Square 


The front portion of the upper portion of a trawl which 
overhangs the lower part of the net. The webbing for 
the square extends from the’ baiting’ to the head rope. 


A-4.8 Top Belly 

The portion of the webbing between the square throat 
or cod-end on the upper side of a trawl. It is also called 
‘top body’ or ‘baiting’. 

A-4.9 Lower Belly 


The section of the webbing that forms the lower body 
of the trawl from the foot rope to the fore-part of the 
throat or cod end. It is also called as ‘lower body’, 


A-4.10 False Belly 


Old pieces of thick webbing or raw hides attached 
below the belly of a trawl as a chafing gear. It is also 
known as ‘rubber’. 


A-4.11 Throat 


The portion of webbing placed in between or 
intermediate to the belly and cod-end. It is also known 
as the ‘extension piece’ or ‘lengthener’. 


A-4.12 Cod-End 


The narrow end section of the trawl net, usually of 
heavy construction with small meshes where the fish is 
collected during the operation of the net. 


A-4.13 Flapper 


The webbing attached to the fore-part of the cod-end 
as a safety device to prevent the escape of fish from the 
cod-end. ‘Funnel’, ‘pocket’, ‘valve’, ‘floppa’, ‘sack’ 
and ‘trap’ are the other names used for the flapper. 
A-4.14 Apron 


Old piece of thick netting attached below the cod-end 
as a chafing gear. It is also called ‘dress’. 


A-4.15 Selvedge 


The net is sometimes fastened to the ropes by meshes 
made of thicker twine than the rest of the webbing, 


known as selvedge. The selvedge usually extends for 
3 to 6 meshes. 


A-4.16 Baiting 


A baiting or reducing the number of meshes in 
successive rows so as to make a tapering piece of 
webbing during hand braiding. This is brought about 
by picking up two-half meshes of the previous row and 
bringing them under a single knot in the successive row. 


A-4.17 Creasing 


Increasing the number of meshes in successive rows so 
as to alter the shape of the webbing. In this method, 
additional loops are made at the required row. 


A-4.18 Cutting Rate 


The method of intermingling different types of cuts, at 
distinct rates in a rythmical way during the tailoring to 
shape of machine-made webbing. 


A-5 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS RELATED TO 
ROPES AND LINES 


A-5.1 Head Rope 


The rope or line to which the upper edge of the net is 
finally attached. ‘Head line’, ‘float line’ and ‘cork line’ 
are the common names used for this rope. Floats are 
attached to this rope for keeping the net buoyant. 


A-5.2 Foot Rope 


The rope to which the lower edge of the net is attached 
finally. ‘Ground rope’, ‘ground line’, ‘foot line’ and 
‘lead line’ are the other common names used for this 
rope; Weights are attached to this rope for stretching 
the net downwards. 


A-5.3 Bolch Line 


A line or thin rope of strong construction to which the 
webbing is initially hung, prior to the rigging of the net 
to the relevant head or foot ropes. 


A-5.4 Lacing Twine 


A thin strong twine used for seaming or joining the 
longitudinal edges or adjacent panels of webbings. 


A-5.5 Cod-End Rope 


A strong rope laced through the end meshes of the cod- 
end used for securing as well as releasing the catches 
from the cod-end. 


A-5.6 Bridle 


Name given to the four short chains or iron bars that 
hold the otter board at the proper angle, or the short 
pair of lines (legs) attaching the board to the wing of 
the trawl, or the short lines that hold the spreader in 
position. 


A-5.7 Sweep Line 


The ropes or cables that connect the wing of the trawl 
and the otter board, used to make the otter boards sweep 
a wider area. 


A-5.8 Quarter Rope 


Ropes used for hauling the trawl on to the vessel. 
They are used in pairs. Starting from the lower quarter 
junctions of the trawl, they are taken on the outside 
of the netting and pass through the ‘beckets’ (eyes) 
provided for the purpose on the head rope and are 
attached to the otter boards or dan-le-nos. 


A-6 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS RELATED TO 
ACCESSORIES 


A-6.1 Beam 

A metal or wooden beam to which the beam trawl net is 
attached during operation. 

A.-6.2 Dan-le-no 


Strong short sticks or iron pieces attached to the ends. of 
either wing of the trawl to keep the wing tips stretched 
vertically. “Dheenleno’, ‘brail’ and ‘spreader’ are the 
other terms used for this. 


A-6.3 Tickler Chain 


Iron chain attached ahead of the foot rope of a trawl net 
to disturb the bottom fish and to induce them to enter 
the net. 


A-6.4 Otter Boards 


Boards made of planks and steel plates used for keeping 
open the mouth of the trawl net horizontally. They are 


IS 5508 (Part 1) : 2020 


of different shapes; but the flat rectangular and the oval 
are the common forms. They are constructed in pairs as 
one ‘right’ and the other ‘left’. 


A-6.5 Towing Rope 


Strong manila or coir rope used during hand operation 
or strong wire rope used during winch operation of the 
trawl net to drag the net. 


A-6.6 Floats 


Buoyant materials, like wood cork, glass, aluminium 
alloy, steel, plastic, etc; in various shapes and sizes 
used for keeping the head rope of a net upwards. 


A-6.7 Weights 


Sinking materials, like lead, iron and cement in various 
shapes and sizes for keeping the foot rope of net 
downwards. 


A-6.8 Bobbins 


These are of spherical shape with a cylindrical channel 
large enough to allow an eye spliced wire rope through 
the centre. They vary in size and weight, and are made 
of wood, rubber or iron. Bobbins are used to prevent 
the gear from catching on the sea bed by rolling along 
the bottom. 


A-6.9 Butterfly 


It is an angle bar of fiat iron, one side of the angle being 
shorter than the other. The shorter side is connected to 
the foot rope and the longer side is connected to the 
head rope. Its purpose is to spread the wings vertically. 


IS 5508 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Textile Materials for Marine/Fishing Purposes Sectional Committlee, TXD 18 


Organization 


ICAR — Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, 
Kochi 


Association of Indian Fishery Industries, 
New Delhi 


Centre for Marine Living Resources and 
Environment, Kochi 


Central Institute of Fisheries, Nautical & Engg 
Training, Kochi 


ICAR - Central Institute of Brackishwaterc 
Aquaculture, Chennai 


ICAR -Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, 
Kochi 


ICAR - Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, 
Kochi 


Fisheries Development Commissioner, New Delhi 
Fisheries Survey of India, Mumbai 


Garware Technical Fibres Ltd, Pune 


Indian Fishnet Manufacturers’ Association, Chennai 
National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 
Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 

SRFP Limited, Chennai 

The Silk and Art Silk Mills’ Research Association, 


Mumbai 


The Karnataka Fisheries Development Corporation 
Ltd, Bangaluru 


The Kerala State Cooperative Federation for Fisheries 


Development Ltd, Kochi 


The Marine Products Export Development Authority, 


Kochi 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRIMATI (DR) SALY N. Tuomas (Chairperson) 


SHRI T. RAGUNATH REDDY 
Dr C. Basu Rao (Alternate) 


Dr SHERINE SONIA CUBELIO 
Dr Hasu (Alternate) 


Suri M. G. MAKWANA 
SHRI JOSE ANTONY 


SHRIMATI (DR) SALY N. THOMAS 
Dr Sanpuya K. M. (Alternate) 


Dr RATHEESH 


Dr PAUL PANDIYAN 
Dr SANJAY PANDEY (Alternate) 


Dr. S. RAMACHANDRAN 
Suri A. E. Ayoos (Alternate) 


SHRI R. M. TELANG 
SHRI S. V. Raut (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. UNNI KRISHNAN 


Dr G. DHARANI 
DR N. V. VINITHKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. VERMA 
SHRI KESHAV PAREEK (Alternate) 


SHRI N. SANTHAN 
SHRI R. RAGHVENDRA SAYEE (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ASHWINI A. SUDAM 
SHRI Ravi SINGH (Alternate) 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 


SHRI P. SURENDREN 


Dr. M. K. RAMMOHAN 
Suri A. SAKTHIVEL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. Bera, Scientist ‘F’ AND Heap (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI A K. BERA 
SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND Hean (TXD), BIS 


6 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 18 (14223). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


