**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11491 (1985) : Blasting soluble nitrocellulose for 
explosives industry [CHD 26: Explosives and Pyrotechnics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18; 11491 -IMS 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

BLASTING SOLUBLE NITROCELLULOSE FOR 

EXPLOSIVES INDUSTRY 



UDC 662-231-21 : 662-15 




<£) Cepyrig^ 1986 

lN]>t'AM STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK WHAVAJf. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MaRO 
NEW DELHI 1 10002 

Or 9 June !986 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JULY 1988 

TO 

IS : 11491 - 1985 SPECIFICATION FOR 

BLASTING SOLUBLE NITROCELLULOSE FOR 

EXPLOSIVE INDUSTRY 

I Page 4, Table 1, SI No. (ii). col 2] — Substitute 'PaS'/of 'mPa.S'. 



( CDC 51 ) 

Printed at Swataniia Bbarat Press. Delhi, India 



IS 1 11491 -IMS 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

BLASTING SOLUBLE NITROCELLULOSE FOR 

EXPLOSIVES INDUSTRY 

Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee, CDC 51 

Chairman 

Shri R. G. Dsolaliksb 

Bramhapuri, Dandia Bazar 

Vadodara 

Mmkirs Refires$niing 

Shri Avtar Sikoh National Fenilizers Limited, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Bav&slibk National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 

Hyderabad 

Shri S. O. Oaro ( AUimait ) 
Shri B. R. Davr Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shri H. Mukhrrjxk < AUtrnaU ) 
Shri C. M. Dxosthaxjb IBP Co Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr p. R. Nambiar ( AUitnate ) 
DiRBOTOR ( Mikes Safbty Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 
Eqxjxpmbnt ) 

Joint Dirbotor of Mimrs Safbtt ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri M. L. Dutta ' Ordnance Factory, Bhandara 

Shri B. M. Lal ( Altt/matt ) 
Shri A. Graraditrai National Fireworks Factory, Sivakasi 

Shri S. Rambsh Bab0 ( AlUmaU ) 
Shri N. K. Jain Narendra Explosives Ltd, Dehra Dun 

Shri J. W. KawATHificAR ( Alitrnate ) 
Shri V. KRisKHAMiXRTBt Central Mining Research Station, D|ianb^ 

Shri M. M. Bhattacharya ( AU§maU ) 
Shri B. MiM;r Directorate Ge^neral of Technical t>evelopmcnt, 

New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Chattbrjxb ( AUirnaii ) 
Shri K. P. R. Pill at Directorate General Ordnanc4 Factories, 

Calcutta 
Dr S. B. Ray Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri G. D. Palkar ( AlUrnat$ ) 
Shri P. R. Roy Central Min^ Planning & Design Institute 

Limited, Ranchi 
Db, N. Sadasivan Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri K. U. B. Rao ( Alumat$ ) 

( Continued on pag$ 2 ) 



O Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act {HIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by voy means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infnngement of copyright under the said Act. 



istn#i.iMS 

( C9»Hiiutd Jrmn pagi 1 ) 

Mtmbifs Reprtstntwi 

Shri S. S. Saioorab Coal India Ltd, Calcutta 

SbRX S. N. NaHDY ( AlliTMii ) 

Shez P. Sattanabayama Development Commiiiioner (Small locale 

Industrie! ), New Delhi 
Db S. K. Kafoor ( AlUmati) 
Sbbi H. N. Sbihabi Indian Exploiives Ltd, Calcutta 

SjBRi S. SBtRAM ( Alttmati ) 
D» S. R. Y00ANABA8IMHAK IDL Chemicals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Dr G. D. Pbasad ( Alitrnatt ) 
Sbbi Satish Chaitdsr, Director General, ISI {Ex-offieu Mmhtr ) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Sterttary 

Db R. K. Bajaj 

Assistant Director ( Chem ), IS! 



Raw Materials Subcommittee, CDC 51 : 4 

C^nviner 
Sbbi A. F. Makjrbkar IDL Chemicals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Mmbtrs 

Sbbi R» Sriniva8am ( AUtrnaU to 
Shi'iA.P. Maxijrekar) 
Sbbi D. P* Babu Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Sbbi N. V. Piz.lai ( AlttrnaSi ) 
Db N. S, Bankab Explosives Research & Development Laboratory^ 

Pune 

Sbbi K. M. Aoarwai. ( AUtrnaU ) 
Db p. R. Nambiab IBP Co Ltd, New Delhi 

Db p. Rastoqi ( Altimat$ ) 
Sbbi A. Gbabapitbai National Fireworks Factory, Sivakati 

Sbbi S. Rambsb Babtt ( AltirnaU ) 
Sbbi V. N. S. Matbvb Directorate General Ordnance Factories, Calcutta 

Sbbi M. K. Gaoaa ( AlUrnatt ) 
Db Amil Panpit Deepak Nitrite Ltd, Vadpdara 

Sbbi J. T. Vobba ( AU$rnaU ) 
Sbbi N* K. Saxabta Indian Explosives Ltd, Calcutta 

Sbbi B. S. Rot ( AlUmaii ) 



IS { 11491 - IMS 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

BLASTING SOLUBLE NITROCELLULOSE FOR 

EXPLOSIVES INDUSTRY 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 28 November 1985, after the draft finalized by the 
Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Chemical Division Council. 

2 IS: 1091-1985* covers the requirement of nitrocellulose for general 
use. This standard has been prepared with a view to cover the require- 
ments of the material used in nitroglycerine based explosives as jelling 
agent where the requirements are completely different from those of 
paints^ lacquers and general application. 

0*3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : S|-1960t. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

!•! This standard prescribes requirements and the methods 6f sampling 
and test for blasting soluble nitrocellulose for use in explosive^ industry. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Blasting Soluble Niti^ocellalose — The product obtained by 
nitration of suitable form of unbleached and bleached cellulose, used 
in the manufacture of gelatinous nitroglycerine based explosives. 



* Specification for nitrocelluloie ( third nmion ). 
tRulei for rounding off numerical valuet ( rtvisid). 

3 



18 1 11491 - IMS 

2.2 Dampenifig Mediam ~ Water used for keeping mtrocellulose in 
wet condition to minimize risk of self-ignition of the material. 

S. REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Form mad Gondyitloa — The material shall be supplied in the form 
of uncompressed pulpy mass dampened with the media prescribed 
in 3.1.1. 

3*1.1 Dampening Medium — The dampening medium shall be water 
and shall be present to the extent of not less than 35 percent by mass of 
wet material when determined by the method prescribed in Appendix A. 

3.2 The material shall also comply with the requirements specified in 
Table 1 when tested according to the methods prescribed in col 4 of the 
table. 



TABLB 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR BLASTING SOLUBLE 
NITROCELLULOSE 



Sl 
No. 



(1) 



Charaotebistic 



(2) 



t) Nitrogen content ( calculated on dry basis ), 
percent by mass 

ii) Viscosity, mPa.s 

iii) Acidity ( a» HtSOf ), percent by mas% Max 

iv) Residue on ignition, percent by mass. Max 

v) ^Stability at 132 db 0*2**C, mg nitrogen/g of 
the dried material. Max 

vi) Heat test at 77 db 0*2*C, (on dried and 
sieved material ), minutes^ Min 

vii) Solubility in other-alcohol, percent by mast, 
Min 

viii) Alkalinity ( as GaCO, ), percent by mass 
ix) Pulping finenncss, ml 

x) Magnetic ferruginous matter ( as Fe )» p<^rcent 
by mass, Max 



Requirbaieist Method ov 
( ON Dry Basis ) Test ( Ref 
TO Appbhdix ) 



(3) 


(4) 


11-95 to 1225 


B 


20 to 35 


C 


005 


D 


1-0 


£ 


1-50 


F 


10 


G 


95 


H 


0*2 to 0-4 


J 


80 to 120 


K 


0-005 


L 



^For Defence use, the requirement shall be 1*0, Max 



18 1 11491 • 19BS 

4. PACKING AND MARKING 

4»1 Paddag — The material shall be packed dampened in suitable well 
dosed containers as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier; 
the containers shall not have any action on the material. 

4.1.1 When the material is required to be transported by rail, the 
packing shall conform to the provision of Indian Railways Conference 
Association, Red Tariff No. 18. 

4Jl Marldug — Each container shall be securely closed and shall bear 
legibly and indelibly the following information: 

a) Name of the material; 

b) GrosSf net and tare mass; 

c) Manufacturer's name or his recognized trade-mark, if any; 

d) Date of manufacture; and 

e) Batch number. 

4.2.1 The containers shall be suitably marked with pictorial marking 
as given in SI No. 7 of Appendix A of 18:9457-1980* indicating the 
hazardous nature of the material. 

4.2«2 The container may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ] Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thi^reunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that Standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervbed by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conlbrmitv to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for 
the lue of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

5. HANDLING AND STORAGE 

5.1 In handling and storage of the material the precaution prescribed in 
Appendix M shall be observed. 

6. SAMPLING 

6.1 Representative samples of the material shall be drawn and their 
criteria for conformity shall be determined as prescribed in Appendix N. 



*Code of practice for safety colours and safety signs. 

5 



IS 1 11491 -1185 

7. TESTS 

7Jl frmpmrmtion of Sample — For the determination of the 
requirements given in 3.2, 3«3 and Table 1 except heat test the material 
shall be dried as described below. 

7.L1 Place the sample of blasting soluble nitrocellulose between three 
or four sheets of thick filter papers iree from chemical impurities and press 
the material twice by hand to remove excess of water. Mix the sample 
thoroughly by rubbing it gently between the hand and transfer the 
material to a rubber stoppered bottle. Dry a portion of the sample on 
an aluminium tray in a water oven at 50 to 55®C for 16 hours or 
alternatively at 60 to 70''C for atleast 4 hours. 

7.2 Preparmtion of Dried and Sieved Samples — For the heat test, 
the material shall be dried and sieved as described below. 

7.2.1 Place sufficient sample of blasting soluble nitrocellulose between 
six sheets of thick filter paper, pure and free from chemical impurities, 
such that 5 to 6 g of sample is obtained after final pressing. Fold 
the filter paper sheets over the sample such that six filter papers are 
above and below the sample and put it under a handscrew press. 
Subject it to an even pressure for about 3 minutes. On removal from the 
press, rub the sample by hand on the filter paper and again press for 
3 minutes on fresh filter papers. Transfer the sample to a rectangular 
sieve of 10 mesh and rub it through with the hand. 

7.2. 1«1 Weigh 5 g of the sieved sample in scoop and spread evenly 
on an aluminium tray. Place this in a hot water oven maintained at a 
temperature of 48*9'' C. Allow the tray to remain in the oven for 15 
minutes. Remove the tray from the oven, spread the sample on an 
aluminium tray and expose the material for 4 hours at room temperature 
to dry air free from dust. 

NoTB — The oven uied for drying nitrocellulose fhall be effectively earthed in 
view of the risk due to electrostatic charge associated with the handling of dry 
nitrocellulose. 

7*3 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled water {sn 
IS : 1070- 1977* ) shall be employed in tests. 

NoTB — * Pure chemicals * shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. « 



*^>ecification for water for general laboratory use (suwdnvism)* 

6 



IS s 11491 *1S85 

APPENDIX A 

(Clause 3.1.1) 

DETERMINATION OF DAMPENING MEDIUM CONTENT 

A-1. PROCEDURE 

A-1.1 Weigh accurately about 3 g of the material into an aluminium dish 
with ah outside lid or in a glass weighing bottle with tight fitting outside 
cover. Dry to constant mass in a water oven at a temperature 
of 65 ± 2^6, After drying, cool in a desiccator and weigh again. 

A-l«2 Precaution —Do not use a naked flame at any time for heating. 
Wet with water dry nitrocellulose obtained at the conclusion of the 
determination and destroy it {see M-5 ). Do not allow it to remain in the 
laboratory in the dry state for any length of time. 

A-2. CALCULATION 

A-2.1 Dampening medium, percent by mass = -^ — j^ — — x 100 

where 

M «■ mass in g of the material taken, and 
Ml « mass in g of the residue. 



APPENDIX B 

[ Table \, Item (i)] 

DETERMINATION OF NITROGEN CONTEI^r 

B-0. GENERAL 

B-9.1 Oatline of the Methods — The two methods prescribed herein 
are based on decomposing nitrocellulose with sulphuric acid in the 
presence of mercury and in the ajbsence of air. This results in the 
liberation of nitric oxide, which is measured quantitatively and converted 
into percent of nitrogen. In the case of dispute, the first method shall be 
used. 



I8tn«l-1M5 

B-1. BfETHOD 1 

B»l«l AppmraMs 

B*L1.1 Jfitrometer — Use the nitrometer as shown in Fig. 1 to 4. 

B-1.2 RcAg^ttts 

B*1.2«t — Concentraiid Sulphwk Acid — of strength 940 db 0*2 percent 
{mlm)^ prepared by diluting the concentrated acid conforming to 
analytical reagent grade of IS : 266-1977*. 

B-1.2.2 Potassium NitraU ^ crystals, recrystallized twice from distilled 
water and ground to pass ISOMm IS-sieve. 

B*1.2«3 Mercury — Pure and dry. 
B-1»S Procediire 

B-*l«3.1 Precaution — As a precaution against explosion, a face mask, so 
constructed that a thick piece of cellulose acetate sheet or other 
transparent plastic sheeting protects the face, shall be worn during the 
generation and measurement of the gas. 

B-l*3*2 Standardiiation of Apparatus 

B-I.9*2.1 Fill the compensating and measuring tubes and the reaction 
bulb along with rubber connections with mercury. Run 20 to 30 ml of 
concentrated sulphuric acid into the reaction bulb through the cup at 
the top and admit about 210 ml of air. Close the stopcocks, shake the 
bulb well and allow to stand overnight to desiccate the air. Admit the 
air into the compensating tube after making appropriate connections 
with the reaction bulb ( not shown in Fig. 3 ) until the mercury is about 
on a level with the 12*50 percent mark on the measuring tube, the two 
tubes being held at the same height. Then seal the compensating tube 
using a small blowpipe flame. 

NoTB — At a preferred alteroitive, nitrogen may be used in place of air. Alto, 
the ute of lulphuric acid as a desiccant may be eliminated and the air or nitrogen 
may be dried by patting through a toHd deticcant like anhydrout calcium sulphate. 

B*1.3.2«2 Place 0*9 to 1*0 g of potassium nitrate in a weighing bottle 
and weigh. Dry the material for 2 to 3 hours at 135 to XilOPC. Stopper 
the bottle, cool in a desiccator and weigh accurately. Thto transfer 
potassium nitrate to the cup of the reaction bulb and re-weigh the 
weighing bottle to obtain the mass of potassium nitrate transferred. Add 



^Specification for tulphurtc acid ( i§c^ rmirivH ). 

8 



IS s 11491 - 198S 

1*0 ml of water and stir the mixture in the cup with a small glass rod to 
liberate entrapped bubbles of air; work the undissolved crystals into the 
lower part of the cup keeping them below the surface of the solution. 

Note — It it not necessary that potassium nitrate should dissolve before it is 
drawn into the reaction bulb. 

B*1.3.2.3 Make sure that the lower stopcock is open; then admit the 
mixture into the bulb by a series of quick openings of the upper stopcock, 
keeping the crystals in the meantime below the surface of the liquid. 
In this way, all but a small amount of potassium nitrate may be run into 
the bulb. Rinse the cup with a second 1*0 ml portion of water; then 
repeat with a third 1*0 ml portion ( 3'0 ml in all ). This volume should 
be sufficient to dissolve all the remaining particles of potassi\im nitrate in 
the cup. 

B-1.3.2.4 Transfer 25 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid, in several 
portions, to the cup and subsequently into the bulb by lowering the 
reservoir slightly and opening and closing the upper stopcock, care being 
taken that no air enters through the bore in the stopcock. When 
introducing potassium nitrate, the wash water and the acid, always apply 
a slight suction but never so much as to cause air to be sucked into the 
reaction bulb. Keep the quantities of water and concentrated sulphuric 
acid used constant. Then with the bottom stopcock still open, lower 
the reservoir bulb to give reduced pressure in the reaction bulb and 
gently shake the reaction bulb to start the decomposition. 

NoTB — It is extrfmely important that the bottom stopcock be left open until 
the major part of the decomposition has occurred; otherwise sudden involution of 
gas will burst the bulb, scattering acid and f^lass. 

B-1.3.2.5 After the evolution of nitric oxide has slowed down, lower 
the reservoir bulb until all but 25 ml of mercury in the reaction bulb is 
withdrawn. Close the bottom stopcock and shake the reliction bulb 
vigorously for 5 minutes. When the reaction is complete, allow the gas to 
cool for SO minutes; then transfer the gas to the measuring tubd. By means 
of the levelling device, make careful adjustment of the mercuty levels so 
that mercury in the measuring tube is at the 13*85 percent mark (the 
theoretical percentage of nitrogen in potassium nitrate ) if an exactly 
1 '000 g sample was used, or a proportional reading if a different an?ount 
was used. Paste a strip of paper on the compensating tube at the lex el 
of the mercury and complete the standardization. Make several check 
determinations, preferably on different days, to ensure accurate 
standardization. Determinations should check within plus or minus 
0*01 percent. 



IS 1 11491 - I9B5 
B-1*3»S Ditermination of Nitrogen Content in the Material 

B*l«3.3«l Dry the material ( see 7.1*1 ). Place the dried material 
1*0 to 1*2 g in a weighing bottle which has been previously dried and 
weighed. Wipe off any particles of material adhering to the upper part 
of the weighing bottle. Dry at 100 db 2''G for 1 hour. Stopper the 
weighing bottle cool in a desiccator and weigh accurately. The 
difference gives the mass of the material. Add carefully 5 to 8 ml of 
concentrated sulphuric acid into the weighing bottle. Allow the acid to 
wet the material for a few minutes and then gently swirl the weighing 
bottle till the material is well dispersed. With the help of a small glass 
rod, pour the mixture into the cup of the reaction bulb« Lower the 
mercury reservoir and then, with the lower stopcock open, draw the 
mixture in by opening the upper stopcock. Take care that no air is 
drawn in. Rinse the weighing bottle and the cup of the reaction vessel 
several times with concentrated sulphuric acid using a total of 25 ml 
for dissolving and rinsing. Complete the determination as described 
in B«l«3.2«4 and B»1«S.2,5 and take the reading after adjusting the level 
of mercury in the two tubes at the mark on the compensating tube. 

B*l*4 Calculation 

Nitrogen content, percent by mass of the dried material "^nrT- 

where 

R » reading of the level in the measuring tubes, and 
M «■ man in g of the dried material taken for the test. 

B«-2« METHOD 2 

B-2.1 Apparatus — Lunge nitrometer 150-ml capacity ( see Fig. 5). 

B*2.S Reagents 

B-2.2.1 Sulphuric i4aV— -of strength 94*0 ± 0*2 percent ( mim ); prepared 
by diluting concentrated sulphuric acid conforming to analytical reagent 
gradeof IS:266.1977*. 

B»2«2«2 Mercury — VwttLXid dry. 
B«2#3 Proeednre 
B»2«3.1 Precaution — Observe precautions as prescribed in B«1«M. 



^Speeiiicatian for suphuiic acid ( sicend rtvitiM ). 

10 



U)1H91-1985 




55 



a 

H 

Q 



. 

s 2 

u K 



issssssszssX 



i^ 



c 

M 

Ik 



11 



IS 1 11491 - 19BS 



i;tO TAPER 
OP GRINDING 




SQUARE 6N0 
FIRE POLISHED 



GRADUATED 
lO TO I4»0 
IN 0»0I 



CALIBRATE IN THIS POSITION 
SO THAT MERCURY MENISCUS 

WILL BE THUS AT THE l4«Oi 

MARK WHICH SHALL BE EQUAL 

TO 240*36 ml AT 20**C 



Fk>.2 



4«8 

^Theie noiei and dsmeniioni are important. 
All dimenfions in millimetret. 
Mbasurxno Tube for Nitrogbn Dbtbrmination 



13 



UtUtfl-lMS 



iOM6 6IIA0UAL TApen 
MUit tLOPE Aft SNOW 



ftOUARt CNO 
Pint POkiSHCO 

• •S TO ll*0 



MAKC ftTRONG AND UPVt 
GRADUALLY Aft ftHOWN 
•C61NN1N6 ••! ftftLOW 
ftTOPCOCX 




MUftT ftC ftmOMO 



rHOLft CNDft NOT TO ft 
s^COUNTCRSUNK 

1:10 TAPCA 0» 
GRlNOtNG 




.HOLC ffNOft NOT TO BC 
VCOUNTCRSUNK 




1:10 TAPtR Of 
GAtNOING 



*Tbefe not«f and dtmeiiiioiit arc important. 
AU dimtnfiont in milUmttrct. 

Fto. S Rbaction Bulb 



14 



IS 1 114f 1 • IMS 



/s 



CAPACITY 
27S m% 

APPflON 



S 

a 
a 

% 

o 



%. d 



ao- 






In 



9*S 

*Tlilt dimension it important* 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

FXO. 4 COMPENSATINO TUBE 



15 



IS 1 11491 . 1M5 




too ml BULB- 




FlO. 5 LUNOE NiTROMBTBR ISO-ml SiZB 

B-2.3.2 Fill the levelling tube along with the rubber tube connecting 
the nitrometer with mercury and displace all the air from the nitrometer 
by operating the stopcock and raising the levelling tube. Close the 
stopcock. 

B»2.3.2.1 Place 0*51 to 0*52 g of the material, dried as in 1AA in a 
tared weighing bottle. Wipe off any particles of material adhering to 
the upper part of the weighing bottle. Dry at 100 ± 2^C for one hour. 
Stopper tfie weighing bottle, cool in a desiccator and weigh accurately. 
The difference gives the mass of the material. Add carefully 5 ml of 
sulphuric acid into the weighing bottle. Allow the acid to wet the 



16 



IS 1 11491-1985 

material for a few minutes and then gently iwirl the weighing bottle till 
the material is well-dispersed. Pour the mixture with the help of a glass 
rod into the cup of the nitrometer. Lower the levelling tube and draw 
the mixture into the nitrometer by operating the stopcock and taking 
care that no air is drawn in. Rinse the weighing bottle and the cup of 
the nitrometer and rinsing. After an interval of 15 minutes, shake the 
nitrometer vigorously for 2 minutes to complete the liberation of nitric 
oxide. Allow the gas to cool to room temperature and then measure its 
volume under atmospheric pressure by lowering or raising the levelling 
tube. 

II-2.4 GmlcvlatioA 

V I P ^ B) 
Nitrogen, percent by mass » 002246 — / 273 -4- M G 

where 

V » observed volume of gas in ml, 
p ax observed barometric pressure in mm of mercury, 
B >■ barometric corrections, 
t n observed temperature in'^C, and 
G » mass in g of the dried material taken for the test. 



APPENDIX C 

[Table I, Item iii)] 

DETlkMINATION OF VBCOSmr 

G-0. GENERAL 

C4.1 OotUne of <li* Method — The viscosity of nitroctflulose is 
determintd by the falling-sphere method using a solution o^ specified 
concentration and noting the time of fall of a 1*58 ± 0*01 mm; diameter 
steel ball through a known height of the solution. 

C-1. TEST TEMPERATURE 

C-1.1 The viscosity determination shall be carried out at 27 d: 0'2°C. 

€-2. APPARATUS 

C*2.1 Vlscomoter — This consists of a glass tube 28*5 cm long with 
2 cm internal diameter, as shown in Fig. 6<- It is fitted with 3 mm stopper 

17 



IS 1 11491 • 1985 

bored with a single hole and carrying a glass tube 7 cm long with 3 mm 
internal diameter, called the releasing tube, which has a small hole blown 
in the side 4*5 cm from its lower end. The wi^e glass tube is etched all 
round its circumference at the points a, b, c^ a, e and /, the distance 
between adjacent marks being 5 cm except in a^b where it is 3 cm. 






aOfliwnlO-^ 

« 



KJL 



Fio. 6 Viscometer Tube 

&2«2 Steel Balls — Each of diameter 1*58 ±001 mm and 
mass 0*016 Og. 

G-S. REAGENTS 

G-3.1 Aqaeons Acotosie — Prepared by mixing 95 parts by volume of 
acetone {se9 IS : 170-1976* ) with 5 parts by volume of distilled water 
( relative density of mixture » 0*809 7 at 20/4*C }, 

G«3.2 Gaator Oil — Conforming to medicinal grade of IS : 435-1973t. 

G*4. PROCEDURE 

OAA PrepmrmtioB of Sotatiosi — Prepare a solution by adding 4 g of 
the dried nitrocellulose ( sa 7.L1 ) to 100 ml of aqueous acetone in a glass 



^Speclficatioii for aettone ( JMsmff^vMit). 
tipeclficatioa fer CMtor oil ( i$€wd riMim ). 



18 



IS I 11491 . 1985 

tube 45 cm long and of 2*5 cm internal diameter ( alternatively^ a glass 
tube of 2*5 diameter and of suitable height may be used ). Stopper the 
tube securely, shake by hand to prevent the caking of the nitrocellulose 
into a hard mass, and then rotate on a wheel until the mixture is quite 
homogeneous. Carry out the actual viscosity determination within 
48 hours of making the solution. 

CM«2 Determination of Density of Steel Balls 

C-4.2.0 For routine work, it is not necessary to determine the density of 
the balls as steel may always be taken to have a density of 7*64 g/cm' 
without introducing any significant error. However, in case it is desired 
to carry out the density determination, the method given below may be 
adopted. 

C-4.2.1 Thoroughly clean a 50-ml density bottle, rinse with some 
acetone and allow to dry in a warm place. Fill the bottle carefully with 
distilled water and place it in a thermostat maintained at the test 
temperature {see C-1.1 ) for 15 minutes. Close the bottle with a stopper, 
make sure there are no air bubbles, wipe the outside dry and weigh. 

C-4.2.2 Introduce a convenient number ( say six ) of steel bails to the 
pan of the balance in which the relative density bottle has been placed 
and weigh again. Now carefully drop the steel balls into the relative 
density bottle. Place the bottle again in the thermostat for 25 minutes and 
put the stopper on. Make sure there are no air bubbles, wipe the outside 
dry and weigh again. 

C-4.3 Determination of Density of Nitrocellulose Solution — Clean 
a 50 ml stoppered graduated cylinder, diy it and weigh.) Fill the 
cylinder to about 1 cm below the 50 ml mark with th^ solution 
( see C-4.1 ). While filling, care shall be taken not to wet the jbortion of 
the cylinder above the 50 ml mark with the solution. Close tKe stopper 
and set aside till the air bubbles have escaped. Fill almost tokhe mark, 
allow to stand in the thermostat, maintained at 27 dh 0'2*C. When the 
solution in the cylinder is completely free from air bubbles, ^adjust the 
height of the solution accurately to the 50 ml mark with mot^ solution 
and weigh again. 

C-4.4 Determination of Density of Castor Oil — Carry out the 

determination using castor oil in place of nitrocellulose solution, exactly 
as described in C-4.3. 

C-4«5 Determination of Time of Fall — As temperature affects 
viscosity results vary markedly, after transferring a portion of the solution 
to the viscometer, stopper the viscometer and clamp it in a vertical 
position in a thermostat and allow it to stand in the thermostat until 

19 



18 1 11491 • 1985 

?uite free from air bubblei and until it has attained the temperature 
7 db 0*2''C. Then replace the stopper by the one carrying the release 
tube and introduce the steel ball into the liquid by this means. Note the 
time of a fall of the ball through 15 cm from the mark c to the mark/. 

C-4.5.1 Carry out the test under similar conditions using castor oil of 
known viscosity in place of nitrocellulose solution and note the time of 
falL 

G-5. CALCULATION 
G4«l Dettaity of Steel Balls 

Density of steel balls, g/ml ~ a/Z^ \m ^ ^ 

where 

Afi «= mass in g of the relative density bottle with water alone; 

M^ aar total mass in g of the relative density bottle filled with 
water alone and the steel balls; 

Afa == mass in g of the relative density bottle containing the 
steel balls and then filled up with water; and 

a «= having a value 0*996 5 for test temperature 27®C. 
C*5.2 Desisity of Nitrocellalose Solvtion 

Density of nitrocellulose solution, g/ml « — S-Il — L 

where 

Mt, « mass in g of the cylinder with solution, and 
M^ » mass in g of the empty cylinder. 

C»5*3 Viacoaity of Nltrocellnloae Solution 

Viscosity, mPa. s « =74-= s-^ X viscosity of castor oil 

where 

T^ time of fall in seconds in nitrocellulose solution, 
S «» density of steel balls ( ut C«5.1 ), 
S\ a» density of nitrocellulose solution ( s$€ 04.2 ), 

20 



IS 1 11491 -lies 



7i » time of fall in seconds in castor oil, and 

S2 •■ density of castor oil ( sef C-4.4 ). 

( Viscosity of castor oil at 27^C is 0*561 Pa.s ). 



APPENDIX D 

[Table 1, Item (iii) ] 

DETERMINATION OF ACIDITY 

D-0. GENERAL 

D-0.1 Outline of the Method — The dried material is dissolved in 
neutral acetone, water added to the solution and then titrated with 
sodium hydroxide solution. 

D-1. REAGENTS 

D*l*l Acetone — Neutralized to methyl red indicator (see 
IS : 170-1976* ). 

D-1.2 Stsindard Sodium Hydroxide Solution — O'Ol N 

approximately. 

D«l*3 Methyl Red Indicator — Dissolve 1 g of methyl red ( water 
soluble ) in water and dilute the solution to one litre. 

D-2. PROCEDURE 

D-2.1 Add about 2 g of the dried material ( see ?•%! ) weighed 
accurately to O'Ol g to 100 ml of acetone. Shake the mixture vigorously 
for several minutes until solution is complete. Add 100 )nl of freshly 
boiled and cooled water to solution with efficient stirring, ' Boil off the 
acetone on a water-bath» cool, filter through a filter paper ( Whatman 
No. 1 or its equivalent ), wash with two 10-ml portions of water and 
titrate the filtrate with standard sodium hydroxide solution using methyl 
red as indicator. 

D«2*2 Run a blank determination using the same quantities of reagents. 



^Specification for acetone ( stcandnvision ). 

21 



IS s 11491 - IM5 

D-3, CALCULATION 

D-S.1 Calculate the acidity at follows: 

Acidity ( as H.SO^ ), percent by mass « *'^i^-^)^ 

where 

V «B volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution 

required by the material, 

V » volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution 

required by the blank, 

Jf » normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution, and 
Ai as mass in g of the dried material taken for the test. 

APPENDIX E 

[ Table I, Item (iv) ] 

DETERMINATION OF RESIDUE ON IGNITION 

E*L REAGENTS 

E-Ll Paraffisi Wax or Liquid Paraffin ( Ash-Free ) 

E*l,2 Ammoiilism Carbonate Solation — Approximately 10 percent 
(m/»). 

E-2. PROCEDURE 

E-2.1 Place about 2*0 g of dry nitrocellulose {see 7.L1 ) inio a tared 
silica cruciblei and cover with molten paraffin wax or liquid paraffin. 
Ignite the mixture gently and allow it to burn away. Moisten the 
residue with a few drops of ammonium carbonate solution in a slight 
excess, dry and heat at 105 to 1 lO^C to constant mass. 

E*2.1«l Carry out a blank determination using paraffin wax or liquid 
paraffin as described under E-2«l. 

B^. CALCULATION 

E-3.1 Calculate the percentage of mineral matter as follows: 

Mineral matter, percent by mass ,nA / 1^ w \ 
of the dried material „i2LLi^Zl^^ 

22 



IS 111491 -IMS 

where 

Ml or mass in g of mineral matter in the materia]^ 
JIf s » masts in g of mineral matter in the blank, and 
Af «s mass in g of the dried material taken for the test. 

APPENDIX F 

[Table 1, ItemiV)] 

DETERMINATION OF STABILITY 

F-0. GENERAL 

F-0.1 Ovtlioe of the Method — The method is based on Bergmann 
and Junk test. In this test nitrocellulose is heated for two hours at 
132 db 0*2° C» the extent of the decomposition being measured by the 
absorption of evolved gases in water and their determination in the 
solution so obtained. 

F-0.2 Precaution — This test is of a hazardous nature. Therefore, it is 
necessary that the operator wears a cellulose acetate face mask and heavy 
gloves and the reaction tube assembly is handled with long forceps. 

F-l. APPARATUS 

F-1.1 Bath — The bath ^'consists of a cylinderical copper vessel with a 
side outlet to adjust the level of the heating liquid. The cover is fitted 
with a condenser and six copper tubes each 190 mm long and 40fmm in 
diameter for holding the reaction tubes and thermometers {see f'ig. 7). 
Alternately, the cover and the tubes may be in one piece or brass ^sting. 
The bath is covered on the sides and top with asbestos lagging; about 
15 mm in thickness and is surrounded with a screen to protect v, against 
draughts. The bath shall preferably be protected in front by a sl^ield of 
perspex or safety glass. 

F*L2 Remction Tube Assembly — This consists of a reaction tube and 
an absorption cut ( see Fig. 7A). Each reaction tube is 350 mm Ipng and 
20 mm in diameter and is made of transparent colourless glass of Type 1 
(we IS: 2303.1963*). 

MoTB — Season each new tube before use. For tbis^ rinse it with water and then 
allow it to stand for 12 hours filled with cold 0*1 N hydrochloric acid. Rinse with 
water again and dry. 



^Method of grading glan for alkalinity. 

23 



iSill4»l-lM5 



SIDE 




ISO 



CONOCNSER 



THGRMOMeUR 




CAR (R«m^iaM<] 



AtSORPTtCM 
CUR 



COPPCR 
TUBE 

BATH 



-RCACTlOf) 
TUBS 



'*-20 



Fto. 7 Apparatus for Determination 
OF Stability 



All dimentioni in mtllimetrtt. 
Fio. 7A Reaction Tube Assembly 



F-l«3 Hmter — preferably an electric hot-plate for heating the bath. 

F-1.4 Face Mask — so constructed that a thick piece of cellulose acetate 
sheeting protects the face. 

F-1,5 Gloves — A pair of heavy gloves. 

F-1.6 Forcepa — Long forceps for handling the reaction tubes. 

F-1.7 Thersttometere — capable of reading a temperature of 
132±0*2"C. 

V«2/ REAGENTS 

f^a Glycerine- Water Mlature — Approximately 86-4 percent {vM 
adji^^ed to a boiling point of 132 ± 0'2''C!. 

24 



IB 1 11491 - IMS 
F-2.2 Uqvid ParaAB 

F*2.S Standard Hydrochloric Acid — 1 N approximately. 

F-2»4 Standard Sodinm Hydroxide Solution — 0*1 N. 

F-2*5 Methyl Red and Methylene Blue Mixed Indicator — Dissolve 
1 g of methyl red (water soluble) and 0*6 g of methylene blue in water 
and dilute to 100 ml. 

F-S PROCEDURE 

F-3.1 Fill the bath with glycerine-water mixture to the level of the side 
outlet, and the six copper tubes with liquid paraffin so that level in them 
rests at 50 mm below the top of the cover plate when reaction tubes are 
inserted to a depth of 150 mm. Heat the batch and maintain its 
temperature at 132 d: 0*2 C. 

F-3.2 Application of the Test — Sieve 10 g of the dried material 
(w^ 7.1.1) through 212 [Lxn IS-sieve. Weigh out accurately three 
portions, each of 2 g into weighed squat weighing bottles and re-weigh 
after re-drying at 50^ G for one and a half hours. Place the weighing 
bottles under a bell jar containing a saturated solution of calcium- 
nitrate and allow the|e to remain until the increase in mass is equivalent 
to an absorption of 0*8 to 1*0 percent of water. Transfer each portion to 
a reaction tube and liettle by gently tapping the tube. Set apart a fourth 
reaction tube to be included as a blank. Fill four absorption cups 
with 8 to 10 ml of w|iter in each and fit them to the four reaction tubes 
using a non-reactive grease at the joints. Place the cao over each 
absorption cup in order to seal the apparatus. Place each of these four 
reaction tube assemblies in the copper tubes of the bath .to a depth 
of 150 mm by means of cork with a central hole. Leave ^e reaction 
tube in the bath for exactly two hours, taking care to lee that the 
temperature is constant at 1 32 ± 0*2^C. Remove the t!|bes, add a 
further quantity of 20 to 30 ml of water to the cups and alloyr to cool for 
not more than one hour to room temperature. Rinse each cup into a 
conical flask and add 20 ml of standard hydrochloric acid to each 
reaction tube and to the blank. Cork the tubes and shake for 15 minutes; 
filter the contents of each tube without delay into appropriate flasks and 
wash thoroughly. Add 25 ml standard sodium hydroxide solution 
to each flask* Adjust the contents of each flask to a uniform bulk of 
300 ml and titrate with standard hydrochloric acid, adding a few drops 
of the mixed indicator immediately before titration. Take the average 
of the three titrate values obtained with the sample. 

25 



IS 1 11491 -^ 1985 

rA. CALCULATION 

F-4.1 Stability at 132 i: 0*2^ C in terms of tng of nitrogen/g of the dried 
material =-- VO{B—A)J^ 

where 

B = volume in ml of standard hydrochloric acid used with 
the blank, 

A a= volume in ml of standard hydrochloric acid used with 
the material, and 

JV=: normality of standard hydrochloric acid. 



APPENDIX G 

[ Table 1, Item (vi)] 

HEAT TEST 
G-0. GENERAL 

G*0«1 Outline of the Method — This test consists in maintaining the 
material at 77 ± 02° C in a test tube which is fitted with a special test 
paper. The length of time which elapses till the appearance of a 
standard tint on the test paper is a measure of the stability of the 
material. 

G-1. APPARATUS 

G«*LO The apparatus consists essentially of a water-bath and a special 
type lid, both made of copper as shown in Fig, 8. The copper sheet 
used for making the bath should not be less than 0*5 mm in thickness 
and that for the lid not less than TO mm. 

G-i*l Wat«r-Bath — The water-bath is spherical in shape and of 20 cm 
diameter with an opening of 14 cm diameter at the top The upper and 
lower parts of the body are joined together firmly and soldered. The 
top edge is turned overall round. Three metal projections are provided 
equidistantly on the lower part. 

6«LL1 Lid — The lid has an overall diameter of 15 cm and is fitted 
loosely to the opening of the bath at the top* It is provided with three 
positioning studs at the rim and punched with seven holes, one to receive 
thermometer and the rest to accommodate test tubes containing the 
material to be tested. Brass clips or wire cages are soldered around all 

26 



IS s 1H91 - 19S5 

the holes on the lower surface of the lid to hold the test tubes and the 
thermometer. Metal discs of adjustable covers are used during testing 
to cover any holes which are not in use. 

G-1.2 Heating — Heating may be achieved by suitable gas burner or 
spirit lamp with copper chimney. In the latter case» the bath is supported 
on a tripod stand surrounded by a sheet of copper to regulate the supply 
of heat by adjusting the burner or lamp flame. 

G-1.3 Thermometer — having a range of temperature of 40'' C 
and 100'' C and graduated to read to an accuracy of 0'2^C. 

^oxB — Standardise the heat test thermometer against a standard reference 
thermometer every three months and indicate the corrections to be applied. 

0-1.4 Test Tabes— 135 to 140 mm in length, made of glass 
conforming to Type 1 of IS : 2303- 1963* and without lip. Each test 
tube shall have a weight 100 to 11*5 g capacity 20 to 22 ml when 
filled to a height of 127 mm. 

G-1.4.1 Each test tube shall have 3 marks etched on it at 75, 95 and 
125 mm from the bottom as shown in Fig. 8A. The lowest mark 
indicates the depth to which the tube shall be inserted in the bath, the 
middle one indicates the level of the lower moistened part of the test 
paper and the top line, the level of the lower side of the rubber stopper 
which is used for the iube. 

Note — Wash the test tubes thoroughly with hot water before each test. Rinse 
with water and acetone. Dry in an oven and cool to room temperature. 

G*1.5 Rubber Rings — Rubber rings shall be placed round the test 
tubes to check the ^escape of water from the bath and to provide 
additional support for the tube. 

G-1.6 Venaimted Light-Tight Cap — Ventilated light-tig]|t caps, as 
shown in Fig. 8B shall be provided to shield the portion of th^ test tube 
above the lid of the bath from exposure to direct light inuring the 
major part of the test* 

G*1.7 Gauge — Suitable to measure distance between two linies. 

G-1.8 Glasia Rod — Terminating in a platinum wire hook for suspending 
the test paper in the test tube. The rod and the platinum wire shall 
conform to the dimensions given in Fig. 8C. 



G->1.9 Stop-Watch — Reading minutes and seconds. 



*M«thod of grading gliu for alkalinity. 

27 



n • 11491 - lies 



-sei 



I 






S6 



00 

i 

ft* 



28 



IS I 11491 - 1985 




^7 HOLESrlBmm OIA,EQUAUt* 
SPACED, 6 FOR TEST TUBE 
AND I FOR THERMOMETER 
WITH UPSTAND 



3 CENTERING STUDS ALLOW 
16 mm BLAY BETWEEN STUDS 
AND MOUTH OF BATH 



ENLARGED PLAN 
OF COPPER LID. 



GLASS ROD 




THERMOMETER 

LOOSE COPPER LiO 

HEAT TEST TUBE 

SPHERICAL COPPER 
WATER BATH 



COPPER SHEET SCREEN 



TRIPOD STAND ^OR WATER ftAtH 



Fio. 8 Assembly of Heat Test Apparatus 



29 



18 1 11491 « IMS 

O-1.10 R«bber Stopper — Rubber stoppers, of good commercial 
quality only should be used. All rubber stoppers shall be cleaned 
periodically by scouring in hot water with a piece of clean smooth 
pumice stone and rinsed finally with hot water and dried at about SO^'G. 

G-1.11 WdigUag Bottle — About 50«ml capacity. 

G»l»12 Dropping Bottle — About 30-ml capacity and made of clear 
glass aad provided with a dropping rod. 

&-1.13 Alnmfaiiiim Scoop — For handling the material. 
G-2. HEAT TEST PAPERS 

G«2.1 These papers are being imported. However, Chief Controllerate 
of Military Explosives, Kirkee» Pune9 4I1003 may be contacted in this 
regard. 

G-2.1.1 The papers shall be supplied in amber coloured glass tubes 
each containing 100 papers and every tube shall be marked with a 
number and the date of issue ( see G-2.1.3.1 )• 

G-2.1.2 When not in use, the tube shall be kept tightly corked and 
stored in a cool, dark place. Paper withdrawn from the tube and not 
used shall not be replaced but destroyed. The papers shall not be 
touched by hand but by forceps. 

G-2.1.S Test papers which have been stored for more than a year 
shall be discarded if they do not pass the test ( see G«2J«3»1). 

Cr"2*l«3*l Test for deterioration of heat test papers — Place a drop of 
dilute acetic acid by means of a glass rod on a strip of the paper. No 
discoloration shall take place. If the paper is unserviceable, a brown 
or bluish discoloration appears at once; any discoloration appearing 
lome time afterwards shall be disregarded. 

NoTB — Since the test papen are very seniitive to nitrotif fumes, add vapour 
and other reactive impurities in the atmosphere, the room where the test is 
conducted shall be free from such fumes; preferably the test room shall be 
exclusively used for this purpose. 

G-9* STANDARD TINT PAPER 

G-3.1 These papers are being imported. However, Chief Controllerate 
of Military Explosives, Kirkee, Pune 411003, may be contacted in this 
regard. 

6«3.1.1 Each paper shall be stored in a colourless glass tube enclosed 
in a cylindrical carton. The standard tint paper shaU never be removed 
from.te tube and when not in used shall be kept in the carton. 

30 



IS 1 11491 • lt»5 

G»S.1.2 Renewal of Stock — Two new standard tint papers, one 
for use and one in reserve shall be renewed annually* 

G^. REAGENT 

G»4.1 Glycoriae- Water Mixtvro — Mix equal volumes of glycerine 
and water. Take fresh mixture every 14 days and discard discoloured 
mixture. 

G-5. PROCEDURE 

G-5.1 Carry out the test in duplicate. 

G-5.2 Preparation of the Water*Bath — Place the assembled 
apparatus on a bench at right angles to a window facing north or away 
from direct sunlight, the background of the bath being free from yellow 
tint. Fill the water-bath upto 6 mm of the top with distilled water and 
insert the thermometer through the hole to a depth of 70 mm below the 
lid. Maintain the temperature of water bath at 77 ±, 0*2°C. 

G-5.3 When the correct temperature has been attained, weigh 
accurately on an aluminium scoop about 1*3 g of the dried sample 
( see 7.1.1 ) place in one of the test tubes, and gently press down until it 
occupies a height of not more than 30 mm in the tube. 

G*5.4 Immediately afttr the sample has been inserted in the tube, 
remove a test paper from the amber glass tube with forceps and 
place it on a perforated glass plate. Pierce the test paper with a clean 
needle in the centre, near the upper edge. Hold the paper in the forceps 
by the unperforated end in an inclined position with the ends hai^izontal. 
Withdraw a suitable amount of glycerine*water mixture on the glass rod 
of the dropping bottle by dipping it to a depth of 25 to 30 mm. Hold the 
rod parallel with the upper edge ( perforated end ) of the te|t paper, 
slightly inclining both so that any excess of liquid flows away from the 
extermity of the rod. Apply the end of the rod, a little rapidly and 
evenly down the surface of the paper to a distance of about 4 ifim from 
the upper edge, the distance depending upon the amount of Qquid on 
the rod. // is essential that the liquid ie applied to the paper ik a single 
smoothly performed operation. Maintain the paper in its oblique positon 
until the excess liquid on the surface has been absorbed. 

G-5»4«l The amount of liquid applied shall be such that the dividing 
line between the wet and dry portions of the paper at the completion of the 
test tJ 9 to 12 mm from the upper edge and is parallel to it. A gauge 
shall be used for checking this distance. 

G^4.2 Pass the platinum wire hook of the glass rod, previously 
cleaned by passing it through a gas or spirit flame, through the 

31 



IS 1 11491 -1985 

perforation in the wetted paper and insert the rubber stopper into the 
test tube containing the sample under test, so that the paperhangs 
vertically in the tube. Place the tube in the test tube stand and allow it 
to remain for about one and a half minutes by which time it will be 

E>ssible to judge whether the paper has been wetted satisfactorily, 
iscard any paper not used within three minutes of wetting and any one 
which is clearly underwetted or overwetted. 

G-5»5 Press the rubber stopper carrying the glass rod and the test paper 
into the test tube so that the bottom of the stopper coincides with the 
top etch-line on the test tube and the centre etch-line on the test tube 
coincides exactly with the lower moistened part of the test paper. Fit 
the test tube with the rubber ring and insert into the bath so that the 
lower etch-line on the test tube coincides with the upper surface of the 
lid. Insert the tube in one of the holes in the lid of the bath so that the 
rubber ring rests on the lid. 

G-5.S.1 Place the test paper first near the top of the tube, but not 
touching the cork, until after the tube has been immersed for about 
five minutes. By this time, a ring of moisture will be deposited upon the 
sides of the test tube, slightly above the cover of the bath. When this 
appears, lower the glass rod until the lower margin of the moistened 

Sortion of the paper is on a level with the ring of moisture in the tube, 
tart a stop watch at the commencement of the test and cover the upper 
portion of the tube with the ventilated light-tight cap. 

0«S«€ SpMlftI FsreMvtioiis -> Shield the portion of the test tube above 
the lid of the bath at once from light by covering it with ventilated light- 
tight cap during the test. Raise the cap from time to time for 
observations of the test paper and remove towards the conclusion of the 
test. 

G«5tfi»l Take special care to prevent unnecessary exposure of the test 
paper to light especially after it has been wetted. Discard a test in 
which the test tube is not inserted into the bath within about three 
minutes of the wetting of the test paper. 

G«5«7 Completion of Test ^ Use reflected light for comparison. The 
test is completed when a faint brown tint, equal in intensity to the brown 
line drawn on the standard tint paper, makes its appearance at the line 
between the wet and dry portions of the test paper. 

0*5«7«1 The coloured lines produced in the test may differ slightly as 
regards width, regularity and definiteneu of outline and, occassionally, 
uniformity of colour. 

32 



IS t 114U - 1985 

G-*5.7»2 Goniider the test as completed when the shade and intensity 
of any part of the colour line is equal to that of the standard tint. Stop 
the stop-watch and note the time to the nearest half second. 

G-5.8 Test Rsealts — Perform the test in duplicate and record both 
the results together with the temperature of testing and date. Consider 
the lower value of the test results for the purpose of accepting the sample 
to pass the test. 

G«S«8«1 The material shall be taken to have satisfied the requirements 
of the test if the time taken by it for the appearance of the standard tint 
is not less than 10 minutes. 

NoTB 1 — It is cuitomary to carry out six tests at a time, this being the number 
of tube which the bath accommodates. 

NoTX 2 — If the distance from the top edge of the paper, of the coloured 
line or of the margin between the dry and the wetted portion of the test paper, when 
no coloured line has been obtained, is not between 9 and 12 mm, reject the test. 

NoTX 3 — In case the time recorded in duplicate tests varies by more than 
1 minute, repeat the test. 

G*5«9 Discarded Samplea— All discarded samples shall be placed in a 
pail of water, completed with lid. Tables and floors shall be kept free of 
the unused material, using the appropriate brush and a copper shovel. 
The contents of the pail shall be destroyed daily ( see M-5 ). 



APPENDIX H 

[ Table 1, Item (vii) ] 

DETERMINATION OF MATTER SOLUBLE IN jfHR 
ETHER-ALCOHOL 

H-1. REAGENTS 

H-Ll Ethyl Ether — Solvent grade ( see IS : 336-1973^ ). 

H-L2 Alcohol — Rectified spirit, grade 1 {see IS : 323-1959t). 

H.2. PROCEDURE 

H-2«l Transfer 4 g of the dried material ( see 7.1.1 ) to a graduated 
cylinder of 200-ml capacity containing 150 ml of ether-alcohol at 
15 ± 0*5^ C [ 2 parts of ethyl ether and 1 part of alcohol (»/r) ]. 



*$pccific»tioii for ether ( seewnd retnsion ). 
tSp«cification for rectified spirit {uvised). 

33 



H-2«2 Mix tli«f cbntenu of the cylinder by shaking and th«n' plac«^ fdr 
6 hours in a mechanical shaker consisting of a Wheel submerged in water 
and revolving at the rate of 16 rev/min. Allow the mixture to settle 
without further disturbance until the liquid is clear. During the process 
of seuling and standing maintain the mixture at 15*5 ± O'S^'O. 
VVitndraw a nieasUred quantity^ about 50 ml of the clear supernatant 
liqUidy and after evaporation of the solvent, dry the residue and wdgh, 
mix the residue with molten parafBn wax, gently ignite and allow td 
burn away. Moisten the ash with ammonium carbonate solution, dry 
and heat to constant mass at 105 to llO'C. The content of soluble 
organic matter is calculated from the mass of the dried residue after 
deduction of the mass of carbonated ash. 

H-3. CALCULATION 

ll-il Solubility in ether-alcohol, percent by mass « J^iii^^Ai^ 

where 

Ml sa mass in g of the residue minus ash, and 
M «» mass in g of the material taken for the test. 



APPENDIX J 

[ Table l.ItetH (viii) 1 
DETERMINATION OF ALKALINITY 

J-0. GENERAL 

J-0.1 Oatline of the Method -- The material is treated with 
hydrochloric acid and the equivalent acid neutralised by alkali is 
determined by titration with sdoium carbonate. 

J-I. REAOENTd 

J-Ll Hydrochloric Acid — Oi N approximately. 

J-l«2 Sodivm Carboiuito Solution -- 0*1 N approximately. 

J*2. PROCEDURE 

J4Lt Place 10 s of the dried material ( su 7«1 ) in a itop|>ered cylindier 
with 100 ml of hydrochloric acid, dilme with 100 ml of water and shake 

34 



IS : 11491 - 1985 

the cylinder at intervals of one hour. After the mixture has been 
allowed to settle^ titrate 100 ml of the clear liquid with sodium carbonate 
solution using methyl orange as indicator. 

J-3. CALCULATION 

J*3.1 Alkalinity ( as CaCOj ), percent by mass = 50 JV-. FJV 

where 

JV « normality of hydrochloric acid, 

V — volume in ml of sodium carbonate solution required for 
the test, and 

Ki ~ normality of sodium carbonate solution. 



APPENDIX K 

[ Table ],Item{\x)] 

TESft FOR PULPING FINENESS 

K*L APPARATUS 

K-1.1 Stoppered Graduated Meaaiirsng Cylinder — 250-m} capacity; 
having 200-ml mark between 190 and 220 mm from the zero n^ark. 

K-2. PROCEDURE 

K-2.1 Place about 8 g of the dried material ( see 7,1.1 ) in a stoppered 
250*ml cylinder. Add 30 ml of water, mix thoroughly by means of a 
glass rod and then make up the volume to 200 ml with water. Stopper 
the cylinder, shake by hand for 10 minutes and place in a vertical 
position on a bench free from vibration for one hour. Read the volume 
of the settled nitrocellulose. 

K*2.2 The material shall be taken as having satisfied the requirement 
of the test if the volume of the settled cellulose nitrate is not greater 
than that prescribed in Table 1. 

35 



IS 1 11491 - 1985 

A PPENDIX L 
[ Table I, Item X] 
DETERMINATION OF MAGNETIC FERRUGINOUS MATTER 
m». GENERAL 

L-0.1 Outline of the Method — The method is based on separating 
iron from the material using an electromagnetic separator and finally 
determining it colorimetrically. 

L-l. APPARATUS 

L.l*l EleGtromagnetic Separator — The apparatus consists of a bath 
and a cover made of copper. An eight blanded paddle wheel is fitted 
inside the bath and takes an ebonite pulley at the end of its shaft, for 
being connected to a motor by means of a belt. This is to maintain the 
circulation of the slurry in the bath. A bafHe is soldered along the entire 
length of the paddle wheel to the bottom of the bath across the path of 
the slurry. The electromagnet is made of mild steel ( carbon centent 
less than 0' I percent) and is capable of taking uniform and durable 
nickel plating. Each of the two brass reels is wound with about 
305 metres of double cotton covered copper wire in 22 layers of 1 16 turns' 
each. The general arrangement of the apparatus is shown in Fig. 9. 

L-1.2 Neseler Cylinders — 100-ml capacity ( See IS : 4161-1967* ). 

L-2. REAGENTS 

L-2.1 Concentrateil Hydrochloric Acid — See IS : 265-1976t. 

L-2.2 Concentrated Nitric Acid — See IS : 264-1976$. 

L-2.3 Amsnoniam Thiocyanate Solution — Approximately 5 percent 
(m/y). 

L-2.4 Standard Iron Solution — Dissolve 0*702 g of ferrous 
ammonium sulphate [ FeS04. ( NH4 )2 SO4. 6HaO ] in about 100 ml of 
water containing 10 ml of dilute sulphuric acid ( 10 percent {//ir ) and 
dilute to 1 000 ml. One millilitre of the solution is equivalent to 0*1 mg 
of iron ( as Fe ). 



^Specification for Nenler cylinders. 
fSpecification for hydrochloric acid {setond reoishn ). 
{Specification for nitric acid ( second rtiisUn }. 

36 



IS 1 11491 • IfSS 




37 



IS 1 11491 * 1§85 

L-3, PROCEDURE 

L-34 Estimate the moisture content of the wet nitrocellulose by drying 
about 5 g to a constant mass at 100'' C. 

L-3.1.1 Weigh accurately wet nitrocellulose equivalent to 100 g of the 
dry material and mix with I 300 ml of water and transfer the mixture to 
the bath of the electromagnetic separator. Switch on the electromagnet 
and the motor for rotating the paddle wheel so that the slurry flows in 
the direction of the electromagnets as shown in Fig. 9. Stop the paddle 
wheel after one hour and raise the electromagnet, above the bath, 
without switching it off. Wash the poles of the electromagnet gently 
with water, switch off the current and remove the ferruginous matter 
with moist ashless filter paper. Replace the electromagnet in the bath, 
rinse down any material sticking to the sides of the bath and repeat the 
operation for four further hourly periods. 

L-SJ.2 Collect all the filter papers used for removing ferruginous 
matter and incinerate them. Add 25 ml of concentrated hydrochloric 
acid and a few drops of nitric acid and dissolve the residue by boiling. 
Cool and transfer the solution to a 500-ml volumetric flask and make up 
the volume up to the mark. 

L-3.1.3 Transfer 50 ml of the solution obtained in L-3.1.2 to a Nessler 
cylinder, add 3 ml of ammonium thiocyanate solution and dilute up to 
the mark. Carry out a control test proceedings as with the incinerated 
residue in L-3J.2 using 5 ml of standard iron solution. 

L-3«2 The material shall be taken as having not exceeded the limits 
prescribed in Table 1 if the intensity of the colour obtained with the 
material is not greater than that obtained in the control test* 



APPENDIX M 

( Clauses 5. 1, A-1.2 and 0-59 ) 

PRECAUTIONS FOR STORAGE AND HANDLING 

M-l« DRYING IN STORAGE 

M<»1*1 Care should be taken that the nitrocellulose does not dry in 
storage as in this condition it is very dustry and may settle and 
accumulate in niches and other places, and thus become liable to 
ignition by sparks, friction, impact, flame or static electricity. Dry 

38 



18:11491-1985 

nitrocellulose is highly flammable. It burns with great speed producing 
intense heat with possibilities of explosion in confined space. 

M-1.2 The top layers of nitrocellulose in the containers, although these 
be securely closed, are liable to become dry on storage. It is 
recommended that the drums be opened periodically and a quantity of 
dampening medium added to them to maintain the contents suitably 
damp. 

M-1.3 As all dampening media have a tendency to settle on standing, 
containers shall be inverted at regular intervals, say fortnightly, during 
storage in order to maintain even distribution of the dampening medium. 
This precaution is particularly desirable when the entire contents of a 
contamer are not intended to be used in one mixing. 

M-2. STORAGE BUILDING 

M*2.1 Nitrocellulose shall be stored in wet condition in a suitable, 
separate well-ventilated building and at a distance of at least 10 metres 
from other buildings in which manufacturing processes are carried out. 

M*2.2 The storage building shall be constructed of fire-resisting material 
and used for no other purpose than for storing nitrocellulose. It shall 
be provided with at least two exists and adequate means of 
extinguishing fire. 

M-2.3 Provision of ventilators at roof and floor level and covered with 
two thickness of non-corroding metal wire gauge of 1 1 mesh per linear 
cm. 

M-2.4 All doors shall open outside. 

M-2.5 The storage building shall be kept locked and no utiauthorized 
person allowed to enter it. 

M-2.6 No open light or fire shall be premitted near the storage building. 
Matches and other means of producing spark or flame, and articles 
liable to cause fire or explosion shall be prohibited in the storage building 
as also in the building in which nitrocellulose is processed. 

M*2*7 Radiators shall be avoided* if possible. If their use is imperative, 
they shall be heated only by means of hot water and be in such a 
position that nitrocellulose containers may not be placed against them. 

M[*>2«8 Containers shall not be stored in tiers. 

39 



U 1 11491 • IMS 

M-2.9 The walls and roofs of storage and processing buildings shall be 
washed down periodically to remove dry nitrocellulose dust« 

M-S. EXPOSURE 

M-3.1 Nitrocellulose shall not be exposed to the direct rays of the sun. 

M«43.2 The material shall not be stored in a building into which direct 
rays of the sun enter. 

M^. OPENING CONTAINERS 

Ml«4»l Toola — The tools used for opening containers and handling 
nitrocellulose shall be of brass, bronze or of other non-sparking material. 

M-4.2 Containers shall be handled carefully to avoid sparks on contact 
with steel or concrete surfaces* 

M"4*S No undue force shall be used in opening containers. 

Bifp4,4 The weighing of nitrocellulose shall be isolated so that ignition 
dangers consequent on the formation of dry nitrocellulose dust may be 
kept away from other operative work. 

M«4»S The lids of nitrocellulose containers shall be replaced as soon as 
possible in order to prevent the evaporation of dampening medium. 

M-4.C The packages shall be marked or labelled to indicate hazardous 
nature of contents, their classification and maker or sender. 

M-5. DISPOSAL OF WASTE MATERIAL 

M-5.1 The amount of nitrocellulose in any manufacturing building 
shall be collected at one, deposited in a suitable receptacle, wetted with 
water and collected at the end of the day or in convenient periods for 
burning on a wood fire in an isolated and safe area. Such waste shall 
not be disposed of in a boiler fire. 

APPENDIX N 
(Clause 6.]) 
SAMPLING OF BLASTING SOLUBLE NITROCELLULOSE 

N«L GENERAL REQJUIREMENTS OF SAMPLING 

N-LO In drawing* preparing* storing and handling samples, the 
following precautions shall be observed. 

40 



IS 1 11491 . 1985 

N-l«l Ai the material is highly explosive, precautions described in 
Appendix M shall be strictly observed, when sampling operations are 
carried out. 

N-1.2 The sampling instrument shall be clean and dry when used. 

N«1.3 Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, the material 
being sampled, the sampling instrument and the containers for samples 
from adventitious contamination. 

N-1.4 To draw a representative sample, the contenrs of each container 
selected for sampling shall be mixed as thoroughly as possible by suitable 
means. 

N<*1.5 The sample shall be kept in suitable, clean, dry, airtight glass or 
other suitable containers on which the material has no action. 

N«l«6 The sample containers shall be of such a size that they are almost, 
but not completely, filled with the sample. 

N»l»7 Each sample container shall be sealed airtight after filling and 
marked with full details of sampling, the date of sampling, the year of 
manufacture and other important particulars of the consignment. 

N-l«8 Samples shall be stored in such a manner that the temperature of 
the material does not vary unduly from the normal temperature. 

N-2. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

N*2.1 Lot — All the containers in a single consignment of the material 
drawn from a single batch of manufacture shall constitute M lot. If a 
consignment is declared to consist of different batches of nianufacture, 
the batches shall be marked separately, and the groups of containers in 
each batch shall constitute separate lots. 

N»2.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the lot to the requirements of 
the specification, samples shall be tested from each lot separately. 

N«2.3 The number of containers to be selected for this purpose shall 
depend on size of the lot and shall be in accordance with Table 2. 

N«2«3*l These containers shall be selected at random. In order to 
ensure the randomness of selection, procedures given in IS : 4905-1968^ 
may be followed. 



^Methods for random tampllng. 

41 



18 1 114»1 - 1M5 



No. or CoiTTAiNna 
nr THS Lot 




(1) 


Up 


to 15 


16 


„ 25 


26 


» 50 


51 


„ 100 


101 


„300 


301 


,,500 


501 aad above 



TABLE 2 NUMBER OF GONTAINEBS TO BE SEUiOTED 

( Clausi N.2.3 ) 

Saxpls Sizb 

(2) 

2 

3 

5 

" 8 

13 

20 

32 

N-3. TEST SAMPLES AND REFEREE SAMPLE 

N"*3«l Draw with an appropriate sampling instrument portions of 
material from two well separated points at least 30 cm beneath the 
surface of the material from each of the containers selected according 
to N-2,3, about 1 kg of material. 

N*3*2 Out of these portions equal quantity of material shall be taken 
and thoroughly mixed to form a composite sample of the quantity 
sufficient to make triplicate determinations for each of the characteristics 
tested on the composite sample. The composite sample shall be divided 
into three equal parts, one for purchaser^ another for the supplier and 
third to be used as referee sample. 

N-3.3 The remaining portion of the material from each of the containers 
shall be divided into three equal parts, each forming an individual sample. 
One set of the individual samples shall be marked for the purchaser, 
another for the supplier and the third to be used as referee sample. 

N<*3*4 All individual and composite samples shall be transferred to 
thoroughly dried bottles which are sealed airtight with cork stoppers 
which are waxed or covered with foil or a sheet of polyethylene. These 
shall be labelled with all the particulars of sampling given in N-L7. 

N-3.5 The referee samples consisting of composite sample and a set of 
individual samples shall bear the seals of the purchaser and the supplier. 
They shall be kept at a place agreed b.etween the purchaser and the 
supplier^ to be used in case of a dispute between the two. 

42 



IS : 11491 • 1985 
N-4. NtTMBER OF TESTS 

N-4.1 Nitrogen content and solubility in ether*alcohol shall be tested on 
each of the individual samples. 

N«4»2 The remaining characteristics given in 3 shall be tested on the 
composite sample. 

N-5. CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

N-5.1 Individual Sample — The lot shall be considered to have 
satisfied the requirements given in N-4.1, if all the test results on each of 
the individual samples satisfy the corresponding requirements given in 
the specification. 

N-5.2 Composite Samplea — The lot shall be deemed to have met the 
requirements tested on the composite sample if all the test results meet 
the corresponding requirements given in the specification. 

N-5.3 The lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of 
this specification if conditions in N-5.1 and N-5.2 are satisfied. 



43 



DrriRNAtlONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (81 UNITS) 



ftuMUmto 








Qj7AinrxTT 


UjflT 


Stmbox. 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mm 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


tocond 


s 




Blectrk ciirreiit 


ampere 


A 




Tliennodyiiainie 


kelvtn 


K 




temperature 








Liiminout inteniity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of lubttaace 


mole 


mol 












QpkvmTr 


Ukxt 


Symbol 




Flane lagte 


radian 


rad 




Solid tttffle 


tteradian 


sr 




DerivoaUaiu 








QUAMTXTT 


UWT 


Symbol 


Dbfinitioit 


Force 


newton 


N 


IN - I kg.m/s» 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J - I N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W - I J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


I Wb - 1 V.S 


Flux deniity 


tetla 


T 


IT - 1 Wb/m« 


Frequency 


herti 


Hs 


1 Hz - 1 c/i (s-i) 


Blectric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


IS « 1 A/V 


JEUectromotive force 


volt 


V 


IV - 1 W/A 


Pretiure, itreit, 


pascal 


Pa 


I Pa « 1 N/m« 



INDIAN 

STANDARDS 

INSTITUTION 

Maniftk Bliav«n» » Bahadur Shmb Zular fHlarg, N£W OBLHi H0002 
T*i«phon*t: nt 01 31t 331 13 75 T^ita^ramss ManAktanstfin 

( Common to all Offices > 

Regho^i Officer. T9l0jfihom 

*W»Bterfl : Manakaiaya, £9 MtDC, Marol^ Aildhari (Eatt), 6 32 5)2 95 

BOMBAY 400D93 

r£a*ttfn 1 1/14 C.IT ScH»m« M\\ M. VJ,P. Roa4, Manlktola. 31 24 99 

CALCUTTA 700054 
Noirtharn : SCO 445-446, Sector 3$-C. 

CHANDIGARH 160036 



Sauth*ro . CJT. Campvis, MADRAS 006113 



f 2 18 4S 
I «1641 

f 41 24 42 
{ 41 25 10 
t 41 «9 n 



BfMnch 0fft<^99i 

Tusbpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marij, Khanpur, AHM ADA8AD 380001 I ! f^ 1? 

( 2 93 49 

*F« Block. Unity BIdg, Neifaalmhar«}a Squaro, BANGALORE 560002 22 48 05 

GaiiQotrt Compiox* 5lh Floor, Bhadohada Road, T* T, Nagar, o 67 16 

BHOPAt 462003 

PM No. 82/83, Leivl» Road. BHUBAWeSHW AR 751002 S 66 27 
53/5, Ward No. 29» R, 0. Barua Road, 5th Byalana, GUWAHAT1 781008 — 

M-56C L. N. Gupta Marg (NampaHy Station RoadJ. HYDERABAD 600001 22 10 83 

R14 Yudhlatar Marg, C Schema, JAIPUR 30^005 / ? !!! ^^ 

I 6 98 32 

1X7/418 3 Sarvodaya Mapar. KANPUR 208005 f ?! ^ !* 

I 21 82 39 

PaiUpdtra )iidu<itr)ai Batata, PATN A 800013 6 23 05 

Hantax Bldg (2ad Floor), Rfy Station Road, TRIVAN^RUM 695001 52 ^7 

tnspeciion Office (WHh Sala Point): 

InatltiiUon of tnginw^ru (India) 8uUdln9, 1332 Shiva)! Nagiar, PUN£ 411005 6 ^4 35 



*6tdi$^ Office irt Bombay }a at Novally C^afDt?ara« Crat^t Ro«d. 39 65 28 ' 

Aombay 400007 

tSalat Omca In Cdlcytta ta nt 5 Cbowrlf^^aa Api»f oacb» P. O. t? 68 00 

Prln^ap Btf^ot, Cufctrtta 70007? 



