Waa HTA IS 16620 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


Ren ums & ma fr ae Haea 
ae miraa Toa — Afa afear 


Jig Back Movement Monocable 
Ropeways with Fixed Grips — 
Code of Practice 


ICS 45.100.77.140.65 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM AR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF Fo, 9 FGM WAL At, ae fereit-110002 
aie cet >% MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2017 Price Group 6 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, 
MED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Continuous 
Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, had been 
approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This standard proposes to cover Fixed Grip Jig Back Mono Cable Ropeways for which no applicable standard is 
available. 


An aerial ropeway is a special form of transportation system where passengers/materials are carried on a tensioned 
wire rope supported above the ground. Aerial ropeways are particularly useful in regions where the facility in 
surmounting natural barriers gives them a great advantage over railways or roads, both of which may need the 
heavy civil engineering work to secure easy gradient. They are inexpensive to maintain, pollution free, environment 
friendly, does not affect aesthetics, their power demand is modest and, they are not seriously affected by adverse 
climatic conditions. 


Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions of the statutory regulations wherever they are in 
force. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16620 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


JIG BACK MOVEMENT MONOCABLE 
ROPEWAYS WITH FIXED GRIPS — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the design and construction 
of reversible movement monocable aerial ropeways 
with fixed grips intended for the transportation of 
passengers and goods in separate cabins. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in the text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to make agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to those given in IS 7649 shall 


apply. 


3.1 Jig Back Ropeway — This is a bi-directional 
system having a single carrying-cum-haulage rope 
towhich one or a group of cabins are attached on 
diametrically opposite sides. Movement of rope after 
every cycle changes resulting in inducing a to-and-fro 
(reversible) movement of the system. 


3.2 Line — Route alignment of the ropeway between 
two terminals. 


3.3 Inspecting Authority — Competent authority 
recognized by the statutory regulations to inspect the 
aerial ropeways installation and determine its 
acceptability or otherwise, on the basis of this standard 
and compliance to prevailing statutory rules and 
regulations. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Guidelines for Design and Construction 


4.1.1 Each part of the ropeway equipment shall be 
designed and constructed in conformity with this 
standard. The quality of the materials to be used for its 
construction shall be as per the design. 


4.1.2 On the request of the supervising authorities or 


the purchaser, a certificate of a recognized (NABL/ 
Statutory accredited) testing laboratory shall be 
supplied by the constructor as regards to the 
characteristics of material used and essential to the 
safety of the installation. 


4.2 Route and Profile of the Line 


4.2.1 As arule, the axis of the line in its plan position 
shall be straight. However, horizontal deflections of 
the path of the travel may be permitted as regards 
supporting trestles provided that the minimum load on 
the roller train satisfies the requirements of 4.5.1 but 
with a minimum load of 2 kN, and that the angle of 
deflection does not exceed 0.5° per trestle. 


4.2.2 The profile of the terrain chosen for constructing 
the installation and that of the line shall allow in the 
event of rescue of passengers, their safe descent by 
approved rescue system to ground as well as easy access 
to the nearest station. 


4.2.3 The maximum slope of the loaded rope (that is, 
the load is uniformly distributed along the rope itself) 
shall not exceed 100 percent. 


4.2.4 The vehicles must be capable of passing over the 
trestles even in presence of inward and outward 
oscillation of 12° with minimum 0.5 m clearance 
without contact with tower structure. 


4.2.5 In order to ensure the free movement of 
passengers and personnel in the station, the side 
clearance between the space occupied by a vehicle 
and fixed obstacles belonging to the installation shall 
not be less than 0.40 m measured towards the interior 
of the line. Such clearance shall be 0.5 m measured 
towards the outside of the line. In case there are no 
guides for vehicles, such clearance shall be 
maintained even when the vehicle is inclined 
transversally at 12°. 


4.2.6 Along the line the distance between the two paths 
of travel of the carrying-hauling rope shall be such as 
to ensure a clearance of at least 1m between vehicles 
swung by 12° towards one another. Such clearance shall 
be required for spans having a length of not more than 
200 m. For longer spans; the clearance shall be 


IS 16620 : 2017 


increased by 0.20 m for each additional 100 m or 
fraction thereof. 


4.2.7 A minimum clearance of 0.30 m between the space 
occupied by a loaded vehicle swung longitudinally by 
15° and obstacles lying on the vertical longitudinal 
plane shall be ensured either along the line or in the 
stations. 


4.2.8 The maximum height of the lowest portion of the 
vehicle from the ground, measured in the most 
unfavourable conditions, shall not be more than 8 m. 
However, if the height above ground is more than 
25 m and such length is less than 20 percent of total 
ropeway, installation of vehicle will be allowed if a 
suitable designed and approved rescue cable pathway 
is provided below the vehicle where the vertical 
distance from cable path to underside of the chair is 
kept within 25 m or a independent rescue arrangement 
may be provided. 


4.2.9 The minimum vertical clearance between the 
space occupied by a vehicle and the terrain lying below 
with obstacles existing over it, such as trees, rocks, snow 
drifts, etc, referred to the lowest outline of the vehicle 
shape and determined taking into account the most 
unfavourable conditions or assuming a conventional 
increase of 20 percent of the amount of static sag due 
to possible swing on account of braking and starting 
shall not be less than 2.5 m. Such limit however, may 
be reduced to 1.50 m in case of places inaccessible or 
forbidden to public and such places shall be cordoned 
off by fencing. 


4.2.9.1 As regards with other communication paths or 
with aerial conductors, a minimum clearance shall exist 
in order to take into account requirements of 4.7. 


4.3 Maximum Speed and Minimum Spacing 
Between Vehicles/Group of Vehicles 


4.3.1 The maximum speed of the vehicle/group of 
vehicles while entering the station shall not be more 
than 1.5 m/s. 


4.3.2 The maximum speed of the vehicles along the 
line may reach 5 m/s provided that the acceleration or 
deceleration is not more than 0.3 m/s?. 


4.3.3 It is preferred that the vehicle does not enter drive/ 
return sheave. In case it is unavoidable, then the grip 
and hanger to be designed suitable for sheave profile. 


4.4 Capacity and Type of Vehicles 


4.4.1 The calculation of the various components shall 
be done, taking into account the weight of 80 kg per 
passenger. 


4.4.2 Vehicles may be of the following types: 


a) Chairs with maximum eight seats; and 


b) Closed/semi-closed cabins with maximum ten 
seats. 


4.4.3 The area at disposal of each standing passenger 
shall be at least 0.22 m°. For standing passengers 
minimum height inside the cabin shall be 2 m. Semi 
enclosed cabins shall be protected upto 1.1 m above 
the floor of the cabin. 


4.4.4 Passengers’ facilities/amenities at terminal station 
shall be provided, as agreed to between the owner and 
the manufacturer. 


4.5 Rope Guiding 


4.5.1 The load exerted by the carrying-hauling rope on 
each supporting roller shall be not less than 350 N. 
However, the total load on each supporting roller train 
shall not be less than the value in kgf equal to the length 
in metres of the spans adjoining the trestle under 
consideration. This minimum load shall be respected 
under even the most unfavourable load conditions of 
the line and considering also effects due to starting and 
braking. 


4.5.1.1 In case a trestle of the supporting type has its 
top under the straight line which links the top of the 
adjoining trestles, the load exerted by the rope shall 
satisfy not only the minimum values for each roller and 
roller train mentioned in the previous paragraph but 
shall be of such amount to ensure that in the most 
unfavourable load conditions and considering also the 
effects due to starting and braking, the rope does not 
come off the rollers even when there is an increase of 
tension equal to 30 percent. 


4.5.2 The roller train shall be provided with a device, 
which should the rope come off the roller, would cause 
the interruption of the safety and signalling circuit with 
the consequent immediate stopping of the motion of 
the entire system. 


4.5.2.1 The roller train shall also be provided with 
guiding devices, which may prevent the rope from 
coming off towards the interior of the line. Such devices 
shall be preferably installed near the rollers situated at 
the end of the roller train. 


4.5.3 The maximum load exerted by the carrying 
hauling rope on the rollers shall not be more than 
200 kgf for each roller having the groove without soft 
material (such as rubber, neoprene rubber or aluminum) 
lining. If the groove has lining, the allowable load may 
be higher (for instance, as regards rubber of good 
quality, such load may reach the value of 4d x D, 
expressed in kgf when d is the diameter of the rope and 
D the diameter of the roller, are expressed in cm). The 
angle of deflection of the rope on each roller shall not 


be more than 2°30! for rollers without lining and 4°30' 
for rollers having soft material (such as rubber, 
neoprene rubber or aluminum) lining. 


4.5.3.1 All rollers shall be mounted on rolling bearings. 
Rollers, with grooves lined with soft material (such as 
rubber, neoprene rubber or aluminum), shall preferably 
be used wherever possible. 


4.6 Rescue of Passengers Along the Line 


4.6.1 When designing an installation, suitable means 
for rescue shall be provided (ladders, Capstan, etc) to 
facilitate the rescue of passengers who might remain 
trapped along the line on account of unforeseen 
stopping of the installation in a reasonably short time 
and in the easiest and safest manner. 


4.6.2 The chosen rescue equipment shall be such that 
the rescue operation can be carried out in a perfect 
manner even at the most critical points of the route 
without passenger help/assistance (over water spread, 
rugged terrain, high elevation above ground, etc). 


4.7 Crossings 


4.7.1 The crossing of routes, railways, waterways or 
other ropeways shall be avoided as far as possible. 
Where it is not possible, the clearances shall be 
determined in such a manner that there is no danger for 
any vehicle using the various ways enumerated. 


4.7.2 The crossings and paralleling with railways, 
highways, ropeways or overhead electrical lines shall 
be so done that no mutual discomfort results either in 
course of normal operation or rescue operation or 
during installation operations. Wherever the local 
conditions are favourable and the characteristics of the 
electrical line permit it, the overhead electrical lines 
shall be replaced by underground cables at crossing. 


4.7.3 Long paralleling with electrical overhead lines 
or contact lines shall be avoided as far as possible. The 
distance of separation shall be determined in such a 
way that the safety of both the installations is assured. 
Any phenomenon of induction shall not in any way, 
affect the continuity or integrity of the telephonic or 
safety systems on either of the installations. 


4.8 Dangerous Areas 


4.8.1 In the proximity of airports or in areas where 
aeroplanes fly at low altitude or land frequently, the 
route of the ropeways shall be adequately marked, 
taking into account any restriction imposed by the 
authority having jurisdiction over the airports. 


4.8.2 The areas exposed to the dangers of natural forces 
(avalanches, landslides, falling rocks, storms, 
earthquakes, etc) shall be avoided as far as possible. 


IS 16620 : 2017 


4.8.3 If the dangers indicated in 4.8.2 exist necessary 
protective devices shall be provided. 


4.9 Wind Action 


4.9.1 The wind forces and their effects (static and 
dynamic) should be taken into account when designing 
ropeways. The provisions mentioned in IS 875 (Part 3) 
and in IS 802 (Part 1) shall be followed. 


4.9.2 Under normal conditions, it is necessary to take 
into account the wind action considering the following 
values of wind pressure (p): 


a) For installation not in service (empty vehicles 
exposed to wind): p = 1.2 kPa 


b) For installation in service: p = 0.3 kPa 


4.9.3 In areas subjected to storms and where the wind 
velocity exceeds frequently 150 km/h, it is necessary 
to assume the pressure of the wind as the maximum 
value ascertained in the area under consideration. 


4.9.4 In the calculation of wind action on the cables, 
the surface area to be considered shall be the diametric 
surface of the cable multiplied by the factor (C,,): 


C,, = 1.1 for snow bound areas; and 
C, = 0.7 for areas not affected by snow. 


4.9.5 The uplift caused by breeze/wind on wire rope 
and carrier considered along with the conditions 
specified in 4.5.1 shall be fully met. 


5 WIRE ROPES 


5.1 General 


5.1.1 As far as possible, all wire ropes shall be in single 
piece and of ordinary/langs lay construction. Welded 
joints in the wire shall be spaced at least 6 times the 
pitch of the wire and their number in 500 m length shall 
not exceed the number of wires in the wire rope. 


5.1.2 In order to facilitate periodic in service checks 
the carrying-hauling rope should preferably be checked 
by a suitable non-destructive means like magneto- 
inductive test, to ensure that the requirement given in 
5.8 is fully met. 


5.1.3 The lubricants incorporated in the wire rope 
during manufacture or use, shall not exert any corrosive 
action on the material of the rope. The lubrication of 
the wire rope shall be done in conformity with a good 
established practice and according to particular 
requirements. 


5.1.4 Care shall be taken to avoid any twisting or 
kinking of the rope while un-reeling the rope during 
installation. 


IS 16620 : 2017 


5.2 Carrying-Hauling Wire Rope 


5.2.1 The wire rope conforming to IS 10891 (Part 1) 
shall be of stranded construction with a fiber core. The 
fiber core shall conform to IS 1804. 


5.2.2 The minimum breaking strength of the wire rope 
at the time of putting into service shall be not less than 
five times the maximum axial tension met with in 
service, calculated for the most unfavorable conditions 
which may occur by the combination of the following 
factors: 


a) Counterweight; 

b) Components of the ropeway and that of the 
loaded vehicles considered conventionally as 
uniformly distributed along the rope; 

c) The frictional resistance in the tensioning 
device; 

d) Resistance to motion exerted by the line rollers 
(in the case of rollers having their grooves 
lined with soft material such as rubber, 
neoprene rubber or aluminum), this value can 
be assumed to be 2.5 percent of the load on 
the rollers; and 

e) Adequate amount of tension to limit the sag 
in the wire rope caused by its self weight and 
load supported by it. 


5.3 Tensioning or Regulating Ropes 


5.3.1 The tensioning or regulating ropes shall be of 
round strand, ordinary lay type. Ropes of the Lang’s 
lay type may be used only when the rotation of either 
the counterweights or the coupling to the carrying- 
hauling rope is prevented. 


5.3.2 The nominal breaking strength of the tensioning 
or regulating ropes shall be at least 5.5 times the 
maximum axial load in the rope during operation. 


5.4 Telephonic and Signal Cables 


5.4.1 The telephonic and signal cables shall be of the 
stranded type and protected against corrosion. 


5.4.2 The nominal breaking strength of the cables shall 
be not less than 3.3 times the maximum axial load met 
with in service. 


5.4.3 Care shall be taken to ensure that the telephonic 
and signal cables do not come into contact either with 
the vehicles or with the carrying-hauling rope even 
under the worst conditions of weather. Therefore, if 
these cables are connected with line trestles, the height 
of the support shall be so chosen as to avoid any 
interference between the cables and vehicles or 
carrying-hauling ropes which can affect the safety and 
regularity of operation. 


5.5 Loads and Pulley Diameter 
5.5.1 Direct Loads 


In case of a vehicle provided with single grip the 
weights supported by the grip of the vehicle to the 
carrying-hauling rope should not exceed one-twentieth 
of the minimum tension of the rope calculated for the 
most unfavourable conditions of load but with the 
installation under normal conditions of operation. When 
there are several grips for each vehicle; it shall be 
ensured that the total weight of the vehicle carrying its 
full complement of passengers shall not exceed one- 
fifteenth of the minimum tension of the carrying-hauling 
ropes. 


5.5.1.1 As regards transverse loads transmitted by the 
line rollers on the carrying-hauling rope, the 
requirements of 4.5.3 shall be fully met. 


5.5.2 Sheaves 


5.5.2.1 To take into account the fatigue loads imposed 
on the carrying-hauling rope the diameter of the driving 
or return sheaves shall not be less than 80 times that of 
the wire rope and 800 times that of the outer wires of 
the wire rope. The sheave grooves shall be lined with 
soft materials such as rubber, neoprene rubber or 
aluminum. 


5.5.2.2 The deflection sheaves of the tensioning or 
regulating ropes of the stranded type shall have a 
diameter of not less than 40 times that of the tensioning 
rope and 600 times that of the diameter of the outer 
wires. Such sheaves shall be lined either with leather, 
wood or any other soft material. 


5.5.2.3 The sheaves on which the tensioning or 
regulating ropes are normally stationary during 
operation and the drums on which the regulating ropes 
are wound shall have a diameter of not less than 20 
times that of the rope. 


5.6 Splices and Rope Termination 


5.6.1 All splices shall be made by experienced 
personnel. The length ofa splice shall be not less than 
1 200 times the rope diameter. The distance between 
two continuous splices shall be not less than 3 000 times 
the diameter of the rope. 


5.6.1.1 Only one spliced joint along a closed loop formed 
by the carrying-hauling rope is desirable. However if 
the length of the ropeway exceeds 1 km, two splice joints 
may be permitted, but even after repair of the rope after 
an accident, the total number of splice joints in the closed 
loop of the rope shall not exceed four. 


5.6.2 Rope socketing shall be done with the utmost care. 
Only organizations who have experience of making of 
rope sockets shall be entrusted with this operation. 


5.7 Testing and Acceptance of Ropes 


Ropes used shall conform to the relevant Indian 
Standards. 


5.8 Replacement of Ropes 


Generally a rope should be withdrawn from service 
when it is considered that: 


a) The loss of strength in the rope due to wear or 
corrosion or both is approaching one-sixth of 
the original strength; 

b) The loss of strength in the rope due to fatigue, 
surface embrittlement or cracked and broken 
wires of any kind is approaching one-tenth of 
the original strength; 

c) The outer wires have lost about one-third of 
their depth as a result of any kind of 
deterioration; 

d) The outer wires are becoming loose and 
displaced for any reason; 

e) The rope has become kinked, distorted or 
damaged and the damaged piece cannot be 
removed; 

f) Examination of the rope leaves any doubt as 
to its safety for any reason what-so-ever; and 


g) Number of wires rupture in the rope exceed 
the limit specified in 8.1.6 of IS 3973. 


6 STATIONS 


6.1 General 


6.1.1 According to the climate of the area where the 
ropeways are situated, suitable shelters for passengers 
and personnel shall be provided, as agreed by the buyer 
and the manufacturer. Such shelters shall conform to 
local statutory regulations. 


6.1.2 The station machinery, such as mechanical parts 
of the driving gear, electrical equipment, ropes and 
vehicles shall not be a source of danger to the 
passengers and ropeway personnel. The passenger 
entrance shall not cross the path of the travel of the 
vehicles without ensuring proper safety to avoid any 
possible accident to the passengers. 


6.1.3 The whole of the driving gear and of the return or 
deflection devices shall be protected against bad 
weather. Moreover, care shall be taken to prevent the 
entrance to the machine room of unauthorized persons 
to avoid any possible accident to them. 


6.1.4 Ropeway operator shall be located where operator 
shall have best possible view of the route. Controls and 
communicating devices shall be within their reach 
without them having to leave their position. 


IS 16620 : 2017 


6.1.4.1 The control panel shall be provided with the 
following: 


a) Speed indicator; 

b) Indicator showing the distance from any one 
of the terminal station; and 

c) Fault indicator. 


6.1.4.2 A speed control device which automatically 
stops the vehicle when the speed of vehicle approaching 
the station has not been suitably reduced shall be 
provided. 


6.1.5 Fire hazard shall be reduced as far as possible. 
Fire extinguishers as per local area regulations 
guaranteed to function effectively shall be kept ready 
in case of need and installed in places which are readily 
accessible. 


6.2 Driving and Braking 


6.2.1 The driving gear shall be provided with an 
emergency motor fed by auxiliary power or Internal 
Combustion engine which can ensure a rescue operation 
as needed even when there is something wrong with 
the main motor or even in case of power failure. 
However, installations having length less than 200 m 
a winching device may be provided. 


6.2.2 The speed of travel shall be maintained constant 
irrespective of any load conditions. In practice, the 
variation of the speed in the most unfavourable 
conditions shall not exceed 4 percent in case of an 
electrical motor and 5 percent in case of non-electrical 
drive. 


6.2.2.1 In case the main motor is of electrical type and 
the installation is self-acting, dissipating device shall 
be provided to absorb the excess energy. 


6.2.2.2 Starting under the most unfavourable conditions 
of load shall be guaranteed irrespective of type of drive 
used. 


6.2.2.3 When the prime mover is ‘not in action’ the 
transportation of passengers is forbidden unless 
alternative full capacity prime mover can drive the 
ropeways. However, evacuation shall be done with 
emergency drive at a reduced speed. 


6.2.3 Working of the main, motor shall be stopped 
automatically when any brake is on or if any safety 
device operates. 


6.2.4 Rope Adhesion on the Driving Sheave 


6.2.4.1 The friction coefficients (u) between the rope 
and the surface of the groove of the driving sheave are 
as follows: 


a) Grooves with leather lining; u=0.15 


IS 16620 : 2017 


b) Grooves with rubber lining or w= 0.25 
with similar material having a 
high coefficient; and 

c) Grooves with aluminum liners u = 0.20 


6.2.4.2 For grooves with a special material lining a 
higher coefficient may be permitted according to 
experience. 


6.2.4.3 The contact angle of the rope on the driving 
sheaves shall be such as to ensure that in the most 
unfavourable combination of circumstance, the required 
power is transmitted to the rope. 


6.2.5 As far as possible, belts shall not be used for power 
transmission. However, in the case of small powers (less 
than 10 HP) use of V-belts shall be permitted provided 
at least four belts are used simultaneously for 
transmitting the power. 


6.2.6 Two different friction brakes with independent 
source of power shall be used in case of electric motor 
drive to cause both the normal stopping and emergency 
one. One of these brakes is called ‘service brake’ fitted 
on gearbox input shaft and the other is ‘emergency 
brake’, fitted on drive sheave. Each of such brakes shall 
be able to ensure the safe stopping of the installation’s 
motion under most unfavourable conditions of loading. 
In any case, the nominal average deceleration shall not 
exceed 0.5 m/s?. 


6.2.6.1 In order to avoid any sudden braking with 
consequent violent swinging of the vehicles, it is 
recommended that the braking effort should be 
automatically proportional to the load conditions of the 
line or in a gradual manner. 


6.2.6.2 The ‘emergency brake’ shall act directly on 
the driving sheave; springs shall induce its braking 
effort and its operation shall be carried out in a manner 
that its regular working can be automatically and 
constantly checked. This brake shall act automatically 
if the speed of the carrying-hauling rope exceeds the 
permitted value by 15 percent. It shall also be capable 
of being released manually. Emergency brake for 
ropeways on plain terrain may be deleted, if, the 
ropeways stops on its own without the application of 
an external brake. 


6.2.6.3 The ‘service brake’, besides ensuring the 
holding of the driving gear when the installation is 
stopped, shall work when the feeding power fails or in 
case of overload of the ropeway. Moreover, it shall also 
work automatically when the remote control stops are 
activated or when any safety device is operated 
(see 6.2.3). 


6.2.6.4 The factor of safety of all parts forming the 
brakes shall not be less than 5. 


6.3 Rope Tensioning and Anchorage Devices 


6.3.1 The carrying-hauling rope should be kept under 
tension at one end, as constant as possible, using any 
of the following means: 


a) Hydraulic tensioning devices, and 
b) Counter weight. 


In the case of hydraulic device, pre-stretched carrying- 
hauling rope shall preferably be used. 


6.3.2 The spaces in which the counterweights travel 
(in pit or construction above the ground) shall be 
protected from water, snow, and ice and from any other 
material. It shall be ensured that the above elements do 
not accumulate inside these spaces. These spaces shall 
be provided with guard-rails in order to prevent the 
entrance of unauthorized persons. 


6.3.3 The mobility of the tensioning devices shall be 
ensured at all times. 


6.3.4 The travel of the counterweight shall be 
determined taking into account the maximum variation 
which may be due to the sag of each span, the 
surrounding temperature of the zone where the 
installation lies (minimum variation to be considered 
is 60°) and the elastic stretch of the rope. 


6.3.5 All foundations shall be in accordance with 
IS 4091. For the structural safety against sliding, 
overturning and for the footings at different levels 
provisions laid down in IS 1904 shall apply. The depth 
of footings and other provisions shall conform to the 
provisions laid down in the relevant Indian Standards 
depending on the type of foundation [see IS 1904, 
IS 1080, IS 2950, IS 11089, IS 9456, IS 2911 (Part 1/ 
Sec 1), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 2), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 3), 
IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 4), IS 2911 (Part 3)]. 


6.3.6 For the structural safety against sliding, 
overturning and for the footings at different levels 
provisions laid down in IS 1904 shall apply. 


6.3.7 Where several tensioning ropes are laid in parallel, 
all the necessary precautions shall be carried out in 
order to ensure uniform distribution of the tension 
among such ropes. 


6.3.8 The foundations of either tensioning devices in 
these of the anchorage shall have a factor of safety of 
1.5 in respect of shifting and over turning. Such factor 
of safety is to be calculated on the basis of a 
conventional assumption that these foundations are free, 
that is, there is no lateral movement of the earth. 


6.4 Other Requirements 


6.4.1 As regards free movement of the vehicles in 
stations, provisions of 4.2.5 shall be applicable. 


6.4.2 Push buttons and emergency stops of the system 
shall be installed at visible and approachable location 
of the terminal stations. 


6.4.3 The sheaves on which the carrying-hauling rope 
is supported shall be made of high quality cast iron, 
malleable cast iron or steel. They shall be mounted on 
rolling bearings and shall be furnished with suitable 
devices, which can enable the rope to recover its normal 
position in case of derailment. 


6.4.4 In stations, devices, which are integral part of the 
installation meant for fixation of the tackle, which 
enables the easy handling of wire ropes and the 
mechanical and electrical elements of the station, shall 
be provided. These devices shall be in a condition 
capable of being used at any time. 


6.4.5 All suitable equipment for the inspection of power 
elements shall be provided in at least one of the stations. 


7 TRESTLES 


7.1 Loads 


In designing trestles, the following loads shall be 
considered: 


a) The weight of the trestle and the pressure 
exerted by the ropes, 

b) The whole of the stresses due to friction which 
occur during the motion of the carrying- 
hauling rope. These stresses can be determined 
with a sufficient margin of safety as 2.5 percent 
of the load on the rollers, 

c) Weight of vehicles travelling with maximum 
load (considered conventionally static), 


d) Load due to wind and load of snow or ice (for 
wind action on the ropes, see 4.9.3); and 

e) Load imposed by communication cable, if 
provided. 


7.1.1 The wind forces and their effects (static and 
dynamic) should be taken into account when designing 
ropeways. The provisions mentioned in IS 875 
(Part 3), IS 802 (Part 1) shall be followed. Further, 
loads due to snow in accordance with IS 875 (Part 4) 
shall also be considered while designing ropeways. The 
ropeway design shall also consider seismic loads in 
accordance with IS 1893. In addition, other special 
loads in accordance with IS 875 (Part 5) shall also be 
considered while designing ropeway. 


7.1.2 The metal parts of the trestle shall have a safety 
factor (defined as the ratio of the ultimate strength of 
the metal to stress in the metal) under the most 
unfavourable conditions of not less than 3.0 when the 
installation is in service. 


IS 16620 : 2017 


7.1.3 The trestle shall be analyzed and designed for 
various load combinations as per IS 802. The trestle 
foundation shall be either a shallow foundation or deep 
foundation or founded on rock anchors. These 
foundations shall be in accordance with 6.3.5. 


7.1.4 For the structural safety against sliding, 
overturning and for the footings at different levels, 
provisions laid down in IS 1904 shall apply. 


7.1.5 The elastic deformation of the trestles, in 
particular those due to torsion which happens during 
normal conditions of operation, shall not be such as to 
endanger the safety of the guides and the stability of 
the ropes. The maximum angle of deformation due to 
torsion shall be limited in such a manner that the ends 
of the roller trains for supporting the carrying-hauling 
rope are not displaced by more than 20 percent of the 
wire rope diameter. 


7.2 Construction 


7.2.1 The number of trestles, their position, their height 
and their construction are determined by the 
requirements of the route and the layout. Wooden 
trestles or trestles which are guyed, shall not be used. 


7.2.2 In case the trestles have metallic framework, the 
thickness of the open profile shall be not less than 5 
mm, while in the case of closed profile, it shall be not 
less than 2.5 mm. The interior of the latter shall be 
adequately protected against corrosion. 


7.2.3 The anchorage of the trestles on the concrete 
foundations or on the rock shall be carefully made. The 
anchor bolts of concrete foundations shall be just above 
the ground. 


8 VEHICLES 


8.1 Factor of Safety 


For all the components constituting the vehicle, the 
safety factor (ratio of the ultimate strength and stress 
in metal) shall be at least 5 under the static conditions. 
This factor of safety may be increased suitably to take 
into account the dynamic conditions to assure the 
desired degree of safety. 


8.2 Construction 


8.2.1 The vehicles shall be provided with a safety device 
which prevents the falling overboard of passengers and 
which conforms to the requirements of 4.4.2. In the 
case of chair lifts having footrests, they shall be of the 
retractable type, which can be actuated, with the 
combined motion of the safety bar. 


8.2.2 The hangers shall be of sufficient length as to 
guarantee conformity to the requirements of 4.2.4 


IS 16620 : 2017 


to 4.2.6 and also ensure that roller guides, etc are always 
outside the reach of the hand of the passengers. 


8.2.3 The tubes used in the hangers shall have no 
longitudinal welds and preferably seamless. Their 
interior shall be protected against corrosion. 


8.3 Grips 


8.3.1 The form of grips used and the profile of the 
grooves of the line sheaves (over and under) shall adapt 
to one another, and have flanges of adequate depth to 
prevent the haul rope from leaving the sheaves taking 
into account specially the maximum lateral swing 
permitted for the vehicles. The deflection of the rope 
caused by passing of the grips on the groove of the 
sheaves shall not be more than 9°. 


8.3.2 The devices for attaching the vehicle to the 
carrying-hauling rope shall have a resistance with 
regard to its tendency to slide along the rope itself of 
not less than twice the component of the loaded vehicle 
weighed along the axis of the rope and considering 
maximum slope. Such minimum resistance shall be 
automatically ensured even if the diameter of the wire 
rope is reduced by 3 percent. 


8.3.3 The distance between the sides of the jaws shall 
be such as to ensure an efficient gripping action of the 
grip on the rope even in the supposition that the 
diameter of the rope is conventionally reduced by one- 
tenth of the nominal diameter. 

8.4 Numbering 


8.4.1 In order to distinguish the vehicles on the line, 
they shall be successively numbered. 


8.4.2 At a prominent position in the cabin, a nameplate 
indicating maximum number of passengers and load 
shall be displayed. 


8.5 Lighting Equipment 
Each vehicle shall be provided with relief lights. 


9 COMMUNICATIONS, SAFETY CIRCUIT AND 
EARTHING OF METALLIC PARTS 


9.1 Communications 


9.1.1 The stations shall be linked to each other by 
telephone. At least one of the stations shall be linked 
up with the public network, wherever the latter exists. 


9.1.2 Public address system shall be provided to 
communicate with passengers in cabin. 


9.2 Safety Circuit 
9.2.1 All the safety devices along the length of line and 


in the stations shall be incorporated in the continuous 
circuit energized permanently so that when any one 
device fails or the signal line fails, the system 
automatically comes to a halt. 


9.3 Earthing 


9.3.1 All the metallic portions of the installation with 
an exception of auxiliary ropes signal ropes, ballast 
and haulage ropes shall be directly earthed. 


9.3.2 The entire ropeways system shall be provided 
with suitable protection against lightning. 


10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


a) The cabins must be provided with door lock, 
which cannot be opened by the passengers. 

b) Two separate brakes shall be provided in the 
drive of ropeway system. One brake is 
provided on drive sheave. This will act as 
emergency brake. A second brake is provided 
on high speed shaft which will act as service 
brake. The brakes must come in operation 
automatically when: 

1) Normal Stop/Emergency Stop push 
button is pressed, 

2) The ropeway speed exceeds by 5 percent 
of the set speed, 

3) The tripping of drive motor due to 
actuation of line and station security 
devices; and 

4) Incase of power failure. 


c) Automatic working of the emergency brake 
is not required when the installation is not of 
the self-acting type even in the case of a 
breakage of any element of the transmission. 


d) Arrangement should be made so that the 
brakes can be released during emergency 
running of the system. 

e) Standby prime mover is required to run 
ropeway at slow speed, to rescue passengers 
from line in case of failure of main motor or 
power failure or DG set failure. 


f) Line safety devices must be installed on each 
trestle and must immediately stop the ropeway 
in the unlikely event of rope derailment. 


g) Rope catcher must be provided with the fully 
articulated sheave mount beam at incoming 
and outgoing side on line trestles and stations 
to arrest/support the hauling rope in case of 
de-ropement; 

h) Emergency push buttons must be provided at 
all stations to stop the ropeway. 


IS No. 


802 (Part 1): 
2015 


(Sec 1): 1995 
(Sec 2) : 1992 
875 


(Part 3) : 1987 

(Part 4) : 1987 

(Part 5) : 1987 
1030 : 1998 


1080 : 1985 


1804 : 2004 
1893 : 1984 


1904 : 1986 


2062 : 2011 


2911 (Part 1) 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Code of practice for use of structural 
steel in overhead transmission line 
towers: Part 1 Materials, loads and 
permissible stresses, 

Materials and loads 

Permissible stress 

Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for buildings 
and structures: 

Wind loads 

Snow loads 

Special loads and load combinations 
Carbon steel castings for general 
engineering purposes 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of shallow foundations 
in soils (other than raft, ring and 
shell) 

Steel wire ropes — Fiber main cores 
— Specification 

Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundations in soils: 
General requirements 

Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 1 Concrete piles, 


IS No. 


(Sec 1) : 2010 
(Sec 2) : 2010 
(Sec 3) : 2010 
(Sec 4) : 2010 

2911 (Part 3): 
1980 


2950 (Part 1) : 
1981 


3973 : 1984 


4091 : 1979 


7649 : 1975 


9456 : 1980 


10891 
(Part 1) : 2001 
(Part 2) : 1986 
11089 : 1984 


14329 : 1995 


IS 16620 : 2017 


Title 


Driven cast in-situ concrete piles 
Bored cast in-situ piles 

Driven precast concrete piles 

Bored precast concrete piles 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 3 Under-reamed piles 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of raft foundations: 
Part 1 Design 

Code of practice for the selection, 
installation and maintenance of wire 
ropes 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundation for 
transmission towers and poles 
Glossary of terms used in connection 
with aerial ropeways and cableways 
Code of practice for design and 
construction of conical and 
hyperbolic paraboloidal types of shell 
foundations 

Steel wire ropes for aerial ropeways: 
Haulage ropes 

Track ropes 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of ring foundation 
Malleable iron castings 


IS 16620 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related 
Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 06 


Organization 


RITES Limited, Gurgaon 
Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research (CIMFR), Dhanbad 


Conveyor Ropeway Services Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Damodar Ropeways and Infra Ltd, Kolkata 
Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour Institute, 
(DGFASLI), Mumbai 

Elecon Engineering Co Ltd, Vallabh Vidyanagar 

Indian Association of Amusement Parks & Industry, New Delhi 

Mcnally Bharat Engineering Co Ltd, Kolkata 

MECON Limited, Ranchi 

Ministry of Shipping New Delhi 

National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, Hyderabad 

National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India (P) Ltd, New Delhi 


Polo amusement Park Ltd, Gurgaon 
Projects and Development India Ltd, Dhanbad 
Rail India Technical and Economic Services Ltd, (RITES), Gurgaon 


Ropeway and Resorts Pvt. Ltd, Kolkata 
Steel Authority of India Ltd (IPSS SECT), New Delhi 


USHA BRECO Limited, Ghaziabad 


In personal capacity (145/44, South Sinthi Road, Kolkata-700050) 


In personal capacity (F-7B, DDA MIG Flats, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi-110006) 


Representative(s) 


Sarı Rasiv MILIND (Chairman) 


Suri DEBASIS BASAK 
SHRI GIRENDRA M. Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHEKHAR CHAKRAVARTY 
Sarı KAMAL Kumar Bose (Alternate) 


SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


Suri D. B. Naik 
Suri VuAY Kumar K. (Alternate) 


Suri U. K. Das 
Sarı H. Cuattopapuyay ( Alternate) 


Suri C. S. SHAH 
Suri K. S. Kopia (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
Sarı BALWANT CHAWLA ( Alternate) 


SHRI SHYAMAL Kumar Das 
SHRI ASHOKE Kumar Bose (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GHosH 
SHRI JAIPAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI B. POIYAAMOZHI 
Suri D. J. Basu (Alternate) 


Suri B. CHANDRA 
Sarı R. M. R. Kramnatu (Alternate) 


Suri O. P. KALIA 
Sarı B. K. Buatracuarya (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE Kumar Guosu (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH CHAWLA 
SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


SHRI A. BHADRA 
Sarı N. C. Srivastava (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. KNRA 


Suri S. K. Bose 
Suri R. K. Anann (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL 
Suri Manos PANwar (Alternate) 


Suri C. K. KARMAKAR 


SHRI S. C. GANDHI 


BIS Directorate General Suri A. Renca Rasan, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI A. K. MOHINDROO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


10 


IS 16620 : 2017 


Panel 1 on Aerial Ropeways 


Organization Representative(s) 
RITES Limited, Gurgaon Suri A. BHADRA (Convener) 
CIMFR, Dhanbad Dr D. Basak 
Conveyor & Ropeway Services Pvt Ltd, Kolkata Suri K. K. Bose 
DGMS, Kolkata Suri D. B. Naik 
Damodar Ropeways and Infra Ltd, Kolkata SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (1317). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


