**************** 






w^z 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 12864-1 (1989) : Packaging of Thermosf lasks for Export - 
Code of Practice, Part 1: Complete Flask [TED 24: Transport 
Packages] 



> y*i jifc^^y/ 1 /ua5a>>^sg=a is^gnm^g; 



2^U l»>%55^^>^!^ 



^^cvvv^w 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
'Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



VZS\: 



, 10- 



nvs 1 ^"?^ 



«* 



;i#* 



T ^ 



^ 



.^ 






Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 



gi^p^g 



**************** 



BLANK PAGE 




**n±rr 




u*> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12864 ( Parti ) : 1989 

Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

PACKAGING OF THERMOSFLASKS FOR 
EXPORT - CODE OF PRACTICE 

PART 1 COMPLETE FLASK 



UDC 621798 : 641 '546-26 : 00676 



g> BIS 1990 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1990 Price Group 1 



Packaging Codes Sectional Committee, LMD 26 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 6 December 
1989, after the draft finalized by the Packaging Codes Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

This code ( Part i ) lays down guidelines for packaging of thermosfiasks for export. The require- 
ments for packaging of replacement glass ( refills ) are being covered in Part 2 of this code. 

In laying down this code, only the basic material requirements have been identified. Performance 
criteria for bulk package have not been stipulated considering the fully containerised handling and 
transportation. It is hoped that the adoption of the recommended practice would result in attain- 
ing uniformity, simplicity and economy in shipment of these products. 



IS 12864 ( Part 1 ): 1989 



Indian Standard 



PACKAGING OF THERMOSFLASKS FOR 
EXPORT — CODE OF PRACTICE 



rani i uuivirLtlt l-LASK 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) covers the require- 
ments of packaging of thermosflasks for con- 
tainerised export shipment by sea when the 
loading is done in intermodal containers at the 
manufacturer's end under personal supervision 
and destuffed at the importers' warehouse. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standard is a necessary 
adjunct to this standard: 



IS No, 

1260 
( Part 2 ) : 1979 



Title 

Pictorial marking for hand- 
ling and labelling of goods: 
Part 2 General goods 
( second revision 1 



3 MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 Unit Pack 

The thermosflasks shall first be placed in a plas- 
tic ( such as, LDPE/PP/HMHDPE ) bottom 
sealed tubular bag with extra length which is 
tucked in after placing the flask inside. It is 
followed by keeping it in a corrugated board 
earton of apnropriate dimensions. The design 
of the unit carton shall be as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller. The ring and flap type 
carton is the most common design for the pur- 
pose. Sometimes it may be necessary to pack 
the replacement glass ( refills ) of corresponding 
thermosflasks in such cartons for shipment along 
with other unit cartons of thermosflasks in the 
same bulk package. In such cases additional 
inside fitments of appropriate design in corruga- 
ted fjbreboard shall be used to arrest the move- 
ment of refills' packs inside the unit cartons. 
The cartons may be printed or unprinted. The 
essential material requirements for the unit pack 
( plastic bag ) and unit carton are given below: 

Unit Pack 

Material : Any suitable non/recycled plas- 

tic material, such as, LDPE/ 
PP/HMHDPE, etc 

Thickness : LDPE— 120 gauge (Mini- 
mum ) PP/HMHDPE — 80 

gauge ( Minimum ) 

Dimensions : Dimensions of the bag should 
be sufficient so as to contain 
the thermosflask and also have 
sufficient extra length which 
may be folded over and tuck- 
ed in after putting in the flask 



Construction 



Unit Pack 

The bag should be of tubular 
construction with a heat seal- 
ed width of 5 mm at the 
bottom 



Material of 
construction 

Bursting 
strength ( Min ) 

Type of paper : 

Dimensions : 



Three ply 
board 

500 kPa 



corrugated fibre 



Kraft 

Suitable so as to contain the 
thermosflask snugly inside the 
pack 

Ring and flap type or as agreed 
to between the buyer and the 
seller 

Either by stapling or by glu- 
ing 

As agreed to between the 
buyer and the seller 



Style 

Manufacturer's 
joint 

Printing : 

3.2 Bolk Package 

The bulk pack shall be a corrugated fibreboard 
box of appropriate dimensions to contain a 
suitable number of unit cartons. The outer 
dimensions of bulk pack shall be modular to the 
internal dimensions of intermodal containers in 
order to achieve maximum capacity utilisation. 
The essential requirements for the different 
ranges of weight of bulk box are given in 
Table 1. 

3.3 Reinforcement 

The bulk pack shall be reinforced with two non- 
metallic straps of 12 mm width along the girth 
direction of the box- The straps shall be clipped 
or heat sealed under tension. 



4 PACKAGING SEQUENCE 

4.1 The packaging sequence 
below: 



shall be as given 



a) Individual thermosflask to be put in plastic 
bag and the extra length of the bag folded 
over; 

b) Thermosflask packed in a plastic bag is 
then put inside the unit carton which 
should be suitably closed and taped; 



1 



IS 12864 ( Part 1 ) : 1989 



Table 1 Requirements for Bulk Packaging 

( Clause 3.2 ) 







Range of Bulk Box 




Up to and Including 
15 kg Net 


Above 15 kg and Above 20 kg and 
Up to 20 kg Net Up to 30 kg Net 


Materia] of 
construction 


Corrugated fibre 
board 


Corrugated fibre Corrugated fibre 
board board 


Number of 
plies 


Three 


Three Five 


Type of flute 


B { Narrow ) 


B ( Narrow ) B A ( Narrow/Broad ) 


Type of paper 




Kraft ► 


Direction of 
flute 


, 








Style of box 










Bursting strength 
( Min ) 


700 kPa 


1 000 kPa 1 200 kPa 


Dimensions 


a) Depending upon the type and number of units to be packed and method of place- 
ment. 

b) Preferably modular to the internal dimensions of intermodal container. 


Manufacturer's 
joints 










Adhesive used 


Preferably starch based 


or any other suitable neutral adhesive. 


Number of 
pieces/box 


*~ 






Gummed paper 
tape 


Grammage of base paper — 80 g/m a 
Adhesive coating — 30 g/m* 
Burst factor ( Min ) — 20 



Non-metallic 


Material 


HDPEorPP 


strap 


Width 


— 12 mm 




Breaking load ( Min ) 


— 900 N 




Elongation a: 






break ( Max ) 


— 15 percent 



c) The bulk CFB box of appropriate dimen- 
sions to contain suitable number of unit 
boxes is then erected by closing the bottom 
flaps either with the help of gummed paper 
tape or pressure sensitive taps applied in 
'C manner or by gluing the flaps; 

d) The unit cartons to be placed inside the 
erected bulk box in a suitable arrange- 
ment; 



e) The bulk CFB box is then closed with the 
help of gummed paper tape or pressure 
sensitive tape applied in 'C manner or by 
gluing the flaps together followed by re- 
inforcing it with two non-metallic straps 
along the girth; and 

f) The bulk box shall be legibly marked. The 
pictorial marking shall conform to IS 1260 
( Part 2 ) : 1979. 



Standard Mark 



The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian 
Standards, Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time Jo time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS 
giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. LMD 26 ( 0852 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams rJManaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephono 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



f 331 01 31 
1 331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 CT.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Blanches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 



Pr.oted at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



