**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  11520  (1985) :  Method  for  metallographic  sample 
preparation  of  hardmetals  [MTD  25:  Powder  Metallurgical 
Materials  and  Products] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


15:11520-1985 

( Reaffirmed  1997) 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 
METALLOGRAPHIC  SAMPLE 
PREPARATION  OF  HARD  METALS 


UDG     66^'0]8  25;  62010 


©Copyright  1986 

INDIAN    STANDARDS     INSTITUTE  ON 

MANAK      JJHAVAN,      B      BAHADUR.      SHAH     ZAfAR      MARG 

NKW  pELin  JJOOOQ 

Gr  1  Af^  L^6 


IS:  11520- 1985 


Indian  Standard 


METHOD  FOR 

METALLOGRAPHIC  SAMPLE 

PREPARATION  OF  HARDMETALS 


Powder  Metallurgical  Materials  and  Products  Sectional  Committee, 

SMDG  30 


Representing 
Bhabha  Atomic  Research  Centre,  Bombay 


Ministry  of  Defence  (R&D),  New  Delhi 

Ministry  of  Defence  {  DGOF  ) 
Indian  Oxygen  Ltd,  Calcutta 


Chairman 
Dr  R.  Vijayaraghavan 

Members 

Shri  V.  G.  Date  (  Alternate  to 
Dr  R.  Vijayaraghavan  ) 
Shri  S.  L.  N.  Aoharyulu 

Shri  N.  Maitra  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  Banerjee 
Shri  S.  K.  Basu 

Shri  R.  Banerjee  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  R.  D.  Bhargava  Assotex  Engineering  Industries  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  Anoop  Saxena  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  G.  Bhatt  Flexicons  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  B.  G.  Bhatt  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  T.  George  Powder  Metallurgy  Association  of  India,  Hyderabad 

Shri  Anup  Chandra  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  R.  Gufta  India  Hard  Metals  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  K.  C.  Mittal  (  Alternate  ) 


Shri  A.  K.  Hazra 

Shri  R.  N.  Paul  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  B.  M.  Kataria 
Shri  K.  Kt^.savan 
Dr  p.  R.  Krishnamurthy 
Shri  G.  K,  Rajhans 

Shri  K.  Ramesh  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  Ramasubramanian 

Shri  Y.  H.  Raut  (  Alternate ) 


Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Mahindra  Sintered  Products  Ltd,  Pune 
The  Metal  Powder  Co  Ltd,  Thirumangalam 
Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Ltd,  Hyderabad 
Mishra  Dhatu  Nigam  Ltd,  Hyderabad 


Directorate    General 
New  Delhi 


of  Technical    Development, 


(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1986 

INPIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  11520  -  1985 

( Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Repuesentative  Larsen  &  Toubro  Ltd,  Bombay 

Representative  Small  Scale  Metal  Powder  Manufacturing  Association , 

Bombay 
Db  N.  R.  Sanjana  Sandvik  Asia  Ltd,  Pune 

Dr  R.  M.  Pardeshi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Akil  R.  Shah  Khosia  Metal  Powders  Pvt  Ltd,  Pune 

Shri  B.  H.  Shetty  {Alternate ) 
Shri  M.J.  Shahani  National  Metallurgical  Laboratory,  Jamshedpur 

Shri  J.  P.  Tiwari  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Srinivasak  Widia  (  India  )  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Shri  K.  Sadanand  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Srinivasax  Central     Electric     Chemical      Research     Institute 

(  CSIR  ),  Karaikudi 

Shri  P.  V.  Vasudevabao  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  Raohavendban,  Director  General,  ISl  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 

Director  (  Struc  &  Met ) 

Secretary 

Shbi  Jag  MOHAN  Singh 
Deputy  Director  (  Metals  ),  ISI 


IS  :  11520  -  1985 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 
METALLOGRAPHIC  SAMPLE 
PREPARATION  OF  HARDMETALS 

0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  29  November  1985,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Powder 
Metallurgical  Materials  and  Products  Sectional  Committee  had  been 
approved  by  the  Structural  and  Metals  Division  Council. 

0.2  With  the  increasing  use  of  hardmetals,  a  need  has  been  felt  for  having 
standards  on  the  metallographic  examination.  This  standard  is  one  of 
the  series  on  this  subject.  It  is  hoped  that  the  formulation  of  this 
standard  will  be  of  considerable  use  to  the  industry. 

0.3  In  the  preparation  of  this  standard,  assistance  has  been  derived  from 
ASTM  B  665-79  Metallographic  sample  preparation  of  cemented 
carbides,  issued  by  American  Society  of  Testing  and  Materials. 

0.4  In  reporting  the  result  of  a  test  made  in  accordance  with  this 
standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded  off, 
it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960*. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  prescribes  a  method  for  preparing  hardmetal  samples 
for  metallographic  examination. 

2.  SELECTION  OF  SPECIMEN 

2*1  Hardmetals  are  very  often  in  the  form  of  relatively  small  pieces; 
it  is  possible  to  select  and  mount  the  entire  piece  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  permit  examination  of  the  entire  cross  section.  When  pieces  are 
too  large  for  this,  however,  they  should  be  sectioned,  using  a  diamond 
cut  off  wheel,  to  allow  viewing  as  much  of  a  representative  cross  section 
as  possible.  For  micrograph  the  area  selected  should  represent,  as  nearly 
as  possible,  the  entire  cross  section. 

♦Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised ). 


IS:  11520-  1985 

3.  PREPARATION  OF  SPECIMEN 

3.1  There  are  several  methods  for  preparing  hardmetal  surfaces  for 
metallographic  examination.  Basically,  they  all  employ  diamond  wheels 
for  grinding  and  diamond  paste  or  diamond  powder  for  lapping.  The 
grinding  practices  differ  to  a  minor  degree,  with  respect  to  the  grit  size 
of  diamond.  In  all  practices,  however,  the  final  polish  is  produced  by 
extremely  fine  diamond  powder  or  diamond  paste  lapping  and  in  all 
practices  care  must  be  exercised  to  retain  the  microstructure  in  its  true 
form  and  to  avoid  pull-out  of  the  softer  matrix  material  (  usually 
cobalt  ). 

3.1.1  Mounting  —  Where  possible,  specimens  should  be  mounted  in  a 
plastic  material  such  as  phenol-formaldehyde  or  poly-methyl  methacrylate 
to  facilitate  polishing  without  rounding  the  edges.  Large  specimens  may 
be  polished  without  mounting.  When  specimens  are  too  large  they  may 
be  sectioned  using  a  diamond  cut-off  wheel  or  they  may  be  fractured 
(  appropriate  safety  precautions  should  be  taken  while  fracturing 
specimens  ).  The  area  selected  for  examination  should  represent,  as 
nearly  as  possible,  the  entire  cross  section. 

3.1.2  Rough  Grinding  —  The  surface  to  be  examined  may  be  ground 
flat  on  a  surface  grinder  with  a  resin-bonded  diamond  wheel  (  100  to 
220  grit  )  operated  at  25  to  28  m/s.  After  the  surface  is  flat,  several 
clean-up  passes  are  required;  the  maximum  depth  of  cut  is  13  ^m  per 
pass  and  cupious  amounts  of  coolant  are  used. 

3.1.3  Polishing  —  Polishing  is  done  in  three  steps  using  diamond 
powder  or  paste  on  a  synthetic  short-napped  cloth  (  the  reverse  side  of 
photographic  paper  ).  When  automatic  polishing  equipment  is  used,  a 
resin-bonded  diamond  disk  may  be  substituted  in  the  roughing  lap.  For 
manual  polishing,  speeds  of  500  to  600  rpm  are  used,  automatic  polishing 
generally  requires  speeds  of  100  to  200  rpm. 

3*1.3.1  Roughing  lap  —  This  lap  employs  diamond  powder  of  size  15 
to  25  ftm  dispersed  in  light  spindle  oil  or  an  equivalent  diamond  paste. 

3.1.3.2  Second  lap  —  This  lap  employs  diamond  powder  of  size  4  to 
8  ftm  or  an  equivalent  diamond  paste. 

3.1.3.3  Finishing  lap  —  This  lap  employs  diamond  powder  of  size  less 
than  2  f*m  or  an  equivalent  diamond  paste. 

Note  — •  Best  results  are  obtained  by  applying  considerable  pressure  to  the  specimen 
in  all  lapping  operations.  Lack  of  adequate  pressure  will  result  in  pulling  out  the 
softer  matrix  material  (usually  cobalt).  It  is  also  essential  that  the  specimen  and 
operators  hands  be  thoroughly  cleaned  between  all  the  grinding  or  polishing  steps. 


