Wala HTAR IS 18182 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Uae arate morei cat utara oh 
wina — Amdy 


Management of Assets of Drinking 
Water Supply System — Guidelines 


ICS 13.060.20, 91.140.60 


© BIS 2023 


eA HAR Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 TER MTE AHL AM, Ag ferett - 110002 
w MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 12 


Drinking Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Service Sectional Committee, SSD 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Drinking 
Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Service Sector Division Council. 


The assets of drinking water supply system such as waterworks, building structure, mechanical installations, 
treatment facilities/processes (filters, sedimentation etc), piped installation,  electrical/electronic 
installation/equipment, storage tanks etc, collectively form the physical infrastructure of drinking water supply 
system and are the consequence of the accumulated capital investments and operational expenditures on 
maintenance and rehabilitation. Many times, the replacement value of these past investments amount to heavy 
expenditure depending on the size of the community being served. 


This standard is formulated within the overall concept of management of assets and focuses on the details of 
managing the physical assets at the operational level rather than the organizational (corporate management, 
structural or process) level. This standard is intended to provide guidance on the assets typically owned or operated 
by drinking water utility engaged in collection, treatment, pumping, storage and distribution of drinking water and 
are expected to meet customer needs and expectations over longer periods. 


This standard provides the guidelines to collect and process reliable inventory, historical process, failure and 
operational data about technical assets of drinking water supply system. A reliable database that supports analysis 
of failures and of operational data (including a description of the condition of facilities or units) is of particular 
significance when establishing a risk-based investigation to determine priorities for maintenance and 
rehabilitation. The data provided should be used for systematic management of assets and benchmarking purposes. 


While preparing the standard, assistance has been taken from the following: 


a) ISO 24516-2 : 2016 ‘Guidelines for the management of assets of water supply and wastewater systems 
— Part 2: Waterworks; and 

b) Operation and Maintenance of Water Supply Systems published by Central Public Health and 
Environmental Engineering Organization (CPHEEO), Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
New Delhi. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex C. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


MANAGEMENT OF ASSETS OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY 
SYSTEM — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides the guideline on technical 
aspects, tools and good practices for the 
management of assets of drinking water supply 
system to maintain value from all existing assets. 


NOTES 


1 This standard is applicable for all the components of 
drinking water supply system such as waterworks, treatment 
facilities, pumping stations, dosing equipment, metering, 
pipe and fittings, distribution system and storage reservoirs 
etc. 

2 Depending on the size and structure of a drinking water 
supply system, the utility can decide to what extent it applies 
the guidance in this standard. 

3 The procedures described in this standard can be applied 
in any drinking water supply system, but detailed 
application should take account of the age, location and type 
of the system, the materials used in its construction, together 
with functional and climatic factors. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard listed below contains provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated was valid. The 
standard is subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of the standard listed below: 


IS No. Title 
IS 10500 Drinking water — Specification 
2012 (second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND SYMBOLS 
3.1 Terminology 


For the purposes of this standard, the following 
terms and definitions shall apply. 


3.1.1 Asset — Any entity that has potential or actual 
value to a drinking water utility. 


NOTES 


1 Assets are used in a drinking water utility for the provision 
of the service. 

2 Value can be tangible or intangible, financial or non- 
financial, and includes consideration of risks and liabilities. It 
can be positive or negative at different stages of the asset life. 
3 Physical assets usually refer to equipment, inventory and 
properties for examples land, buildings, pipes, valves, wells, 
tanks, treatment plants, equipment, water meter, hardware 
etc. Intangible assets are the non-physical assets such as 


leases, brands, digital assets, use rights, licenses, intellectual 
property rights, water rights, software, databases, reputation 
or agreements. 

4 Contrary to consumables, assets can be depreciated in 
accounting systems. 


3.1.2 Asset System — Set of assets that interact or 
are interrelated. 


NOTE — A grouping of assets referred to as an asset system 
could also be considered as an asset. 


3.1.3 Drinking Water Supply System — System 
providing the functions of abstraction, 
transportation, treatment, storage, distribution and 
supply of drinking water. 


3.1.4 Distribution System — System providing the 
function of distribution of drinking water to the end 
users. 


NOTE — It can include pipes, valves, hydrants, washouts, 
pumping stations, storage reservoirs, metering and ancillary 
infrastructure, and components. 


3.1.5 Emergency Operation Plan — Document 
specifying the procedures and associated resources to 
be applied by whom and where during a particular 
type of emergency. 


3.1.6 Failure — Local inadmissible impairment of 
the operability of an asset of a drinking water supply 
system at a certain point in time. 


3.1.7 Failure Data — Data describing the 
characteristics of the failure caused at a certain point 
in time on a certain asset of a drinking water supply 
system. 


3.1.8 Failure Rate — Ratio of the number of failures 
of a given category to a given unit of measure. 


NOTE — The entity to define failure rate for different 
category of assets could be different such as: 


a) for pipelines it is expressed as failure per kilometer 
within a year; 

b) for pumps it is number of times pump fails per year; 

c) for connections and valves in relation to drinking 
water distribution networks, expressed as failure 
per thousand per year; and 

d) for treatment plants, pumping stations and similar 
facilities, expressed instances per year. 


3.1.9 Geographic Information System (GIS) — A 
computer system for capturing, storing, checking, and 
displaying data related to positions on Earth’s surface. 


3.1.10 Inspection — Determination of conformity to 


IS 18182 : 2023 


specified requirements by observation/investigation 
and judgement accompanied by visual control, 
handling, measurement, testing or gauging. 


3.1.11 Investigation — Gathering of all necessary 
information and process for decision-makers. 


NOTE — This includes both qualitative and quantitative 
information. 


3.1.12 Level of Service — Parameter, or group of 
parameters, which reflect social, political, 
environmental and economic outcomes regarding 
the service to end users that the drinking water utility 
delivers. 


NOTES 


1 The service to users can include any of the following 
parameters: health, safety, user satisfaction, quality, 
quantity, capacity, reliability, responsiveness, 
environmental acceptability, cost and availability. 

2 A defined level of service can include any combination of 
the aforementioned parameters deemed important by the 
asset owner, users or relevant stakeholders. 


3.1.13 Life Cycle Cost — Total cost of an asset as a 
whole or its parts throughout its life cycle. 


NOTES 


1 Total cost can include planning, design, construction, 
acquisition, operation, maintenance, rehabilitation and 
disposal costs. 

2 Total cost excludes any residual value obtained during 
disposal. 


3.1.14 Maintenance — Combination of all 
technical, administrative and managerial actions 
during the life cycle of an asset intended to retain it 
in, or restore it to, a state in which it can perform the 
required function. 


3.1.15 Management of Assets — Processes during 
the life cycle of an asset necessary to derive value 
from existing assets while ensuring an agreed level 
of service and function of the system. 


NOTE — Processes include: 


a) all necessary activities for planning, design, 
procurement, construction/installation, 
commissioning, operation, maintenance, 
rehabilitation and disposal of assets of drinking 
water systems as a functional activity, including 
their review; 

b) setting objectives and functional and performance 
requirements; 

c) establishing strategic plans, tactical plans and 
operational plans; and 

d) undertaking investigations, including establishing 
necessary databases, to assess the actual condition 
of assets during the lifecycle of the asset system. 


3.1.16 Non-Revenue Water — It is the difference 
between the volumes of water supplied and billed 
authorized use. 


NOTE — Non-revenue water includes not only the direct 
and apparent water loss, but also the unbilled authorized 
use. 


3.1.17 Operation(s) — Activities undertaken to 
maintain the normal functioning of the system. 


3.1.18 Operational Plan — Documented collection 
of procedures and information that is developed, 
compiled and maintained in readiness for the 
conduct of operations. 


3.1.19 Performance Indicator — Process parameters 
with set and prescribed goals of water utility to 
achieve accuracy. 


NOTE — Performance indicators are means to measure the 
efficiency and effectiveness of process. 


3.1.20 Rehabilitation — Measures for restoring or 
upgrading the performance of existing asset, 
including renovation, repair and replacement. 


3.1.21 Rehabilitation Rate — Percentage of entire 
inventory which is rehabilitated or to be 
rehabilitated on an annual basis. 


3.1.22 Service — Output of drinking water utility in 
terms of an activity or set of activities necessarily 
performed between the drinking water utility and the 
end users. 


NOTES 


1 The dominant elements of a service are generally 
intangible. 

2 Service involves activities and processes within the 
drinking water utility, at the interface with the user, to 
establish user requirements as well as upon delivery of the 
service and can involve a continuing relationship. 

3 Provision of a service can involves, for example: 

a) an activity performed on a user-supplied intangible 
product like processing new connection requests; 

b) delivery of an intangible product like the delivery of 
information in the context of knowledge 
transmission; and 

c) the creation of ambience for the user in reception 
offices. 

4 A service is generally experienced by the user and can be 
monitored by one or more stakeholders. 


3.1.23 Service Life — Period of time after 
installation during which an asset or an asset system 
meets the expected technical and functional 
requirements. 


3.1.24 Strategic Plan — Document identifying 
goals and objectives to be pursued by an 
organization over a long- term period in support of 
its mission and being consistent with its values. 


3.1.25 Tactical Plan — Document identifying 
objectives to be pursued by an organization over the 
medium term, based on priorities derived from 


influencing factors/indicators on performance, costs, 
risk and failure probability and scale of failure. 


3.2 Symbols 


For the purpose of this Indian Standard, the 
following symbols shall be used: 


X  — Applicable 
O — Optional 


4 UNDERSTANDING THE 
WATER UTILITY 


4.1 Objectives 


DRINKING 


4.1.1 At minimum, the drinking water utility should 
consider the following objectives: 


a) Protection of public health; 

b) Meeting users’ reasonable needs and 
expectations; 

c) Occupational health and safety; 

d) Providing services in usual and emergency 
situations; 

e) Promoting the sustainability of the drinking 
water utility; 

f) Promoting sustainable development of the 
community; and 

g) Protection of the environment. 


4.1.2 The drinking water utility while undertaking 
management of asset, should aim to manage their 
facilities systematically and efficiently to sustain 
their function, through establishment of clear 
objectives, based on assessment and forecasting of 
the condition of all existing facilities. 


4.1.3 During the selection of objective for the 
management of assets, the drinking water utility 
should consider the compliance with agreed 
sustainable levels of service, while also meeting 
economic performance objectives such as attaining 
the least possible overall life cycle cost. 


NOTE — Refer Annex A for further information on 
objectives of management of assets for drinking water 
supply systems. 


4.2 Functional Requirements 


4.2.1 To achieve the objectives, the drinking water 
utility should establish functional requirements for 
the activities undertaken by the utility which can 
include intake of water from source 
(catchments, wells and rivers), transmitting 


IS 18182 : 2023 


(pumping as necessary), storing prior to treatment, 
treatment upto a specified level, storage of treated 
water, continuous supply to distribution network 


(pumping/gravity). 


4.2.2 Functional requirements should be considered 
in respect of the whole system to ensure that 
additions or modifications to the system 
sustainability do not result in failure to meet the 
target. 


4.2.3 Functional requirements should be established 
to ensure that the drinking water supply system do 
not cause unacceptable environmental nuisance, risk 
to public health or personnel working therein. 


NOTE — Each functional requirement can relate to more 
than one objective. An indication of the relevance of each 
of the functional requirements in achieving the objectives is 
shown in Table 1. 


4.3 Performance Requirements 


4.3.1The drinking water utility should determine 
measurable performance requirements to evaluate 
the hydraulic, process engineering, structural and 
operational performance of the drinking water 
supply systems and to allow development of design 
standards. 


4.3.2 Performance indicators should act as an 
essential tool in understanding actual and desired 
performance of infrastructure of drinking water 
utility, and in parallel, enable indicator-supported 
infrastructure planning and decision making. 
Properly implemented, indicators provide 
information on the condition of the assets and the 
level of their contribution to the achievement of the 
utility’s objectives. 


4.3.3 For each functional requirement, there can be 
legal requirements, public expectations and financial 
constraints which can influence the performance 
requirements. For each aspect of performance, 
different levels can be required, for example: 


a) trigger levels which justify early upgrading 
action according to priority; and 

b) target levels to aim for in upgrading, which 
should be equal to the requirements for new 
construction, but which sometimes can 
only be achievable or necessary in the 
longer term. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


Table 1 Relationship Between Objectives and Functional Requirements 
(Clause 4.2) 
(Informative) 


SI Functional 
No. Requirements 


Objectives 


Protection Meeting Occupational Providing Promoting Promoting Protection 


of Public Users’ Health and Services the Sustainable of the 
Health and Reasonable Safety Under Sustainability Development Environment 
Safety Needs and Usual and of the of the 
Expectations Emergency Drinking Community 
Situations Water 
Utility 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Ensuring that XXX XXX XX XX XX XX XX 
the quality of 
drinking water 
meets the 
acceptable limit 
of IS 10500 
ii) Continuity of XXX XXX — XXX XXX XXX X 
service 
iii) Ensuring XXX XXX X XX XX — X 
adequate 
pressure 
iv) Maintainability XX X XXX XX XX XX XX 
v) Providing XXX XXX X XXX XXX — XXX 
service under 
emergency 
situations 
vi) Sustainability of — XX — XX XXX aa X 
products and 
materials 
vii) Sustainable use — X — XX XXX — XX 
of energy 
viii) Long design life x XX X XX XXX — XXX 
of assets 
ix) Minimizing of XX X X X XXX = XXX 
leakages 
x) Minimizing of XX X X X XXX — XXX 
Failure 
xi) Prevention of XX X X X X — X 
noise 
xii) Not XX X XX X XX — X 
endangering 
adjacent 
structures and 
environment 


NOTE — The number of X indicates the relevance of the requirement in achieving the objectives. 


4.3.4 Performance requirements should be reviewed 
periodically and updated, if necessary. The 
performance requirements for the system should be 
updated after major extension, maintenance, or 
rehabilitation. In principle, the performance 
requirements for a rehabilitated system should be the 
same as those for a new drinking water supply 
system. 


4.3.5 Performance indicator should be defining at 
strategic, tactic and operation levels. They should 
make clear how actions at the operational level 
contribute to achieve strategic level objectives. 


NOTES 


1 Strategic level performance indicators are often called 
outcomes. Whereas operational and tactical level 
performance indicators are called ‘inputs’ and ‘outputs’ 
respectively. 

2 Examples of performance indicator includes conformity 
of drinking water quality, meeting future water supply 
demand and achieving service level benchmark, meeting 
peak consumption, optimal use of chemicals, energy and 
manpower resources etc. 


4.4 General Aspects 


4.4.1 In management of assets, a distinction should 
be drawn between two principal focal points: 


a) The wider drinking water utility or 
responsible body in question; and 

b) The drinking water supply system to be 
managed. 


4.4.2 The focal point of drinking water utility or 
responsible body can include, for example, strategic 
financial, reputational and non-operational assets as 
part of ensuring the drinking water utility's overall 
objectives are met. 


4.4.3 The focal point of drinking water supply 
system should include the following: 


a) attention to stakeholder requirements, 
needs and expectations; 

b) sustainability of the asset system and the 
provided service; 

c) safe water quality; 

d) the management of risk; and 

e) financial stability of the utility. 


4.5 Principal Aspects 
4.5.1 Principal Aspects — Drinking Water Utility 


Minimizing life cycle costs while continuously 
providing the levels of service should be established 
by the drinking water utility to meet 
customer/stakeholder expectations by adopting 
effective management of assets. The management of 


IS 18182 : 2023 


the assets of drinking water utility includes key 
activities such as: 


a) the determination of the current and long- 
term objectives; 

b) planning and implementing activities to 
achieve objectives; 

c) the prediction of future water demand as an 
additional basis for rehabilitation; 

d) the means of measuring the performance of 
the drinking water utility in meeting these 
objectives; 

e) knowledge of the layout of the entire water 
supply system together with knowledge on 
costs (planning, constructing, operation, 
maintenance etc); 

f) knowledge on availability and need of 
resources; 

g) the selection of appropriate materials and 
components; 

h) the choice of installation technology and 
corresponding contractors; 

j) quality control of materials used and of 
installation; 

k) maintenance of assets and asset systems 
including routine and incident-related 
inspection and investigation, 

m) monitoring of operating conditions; 

n) education and training of the personnel to 
achieve relevant competences; 

p) maintaining an up-to-date system 
inventory; 

q) monitoring and documenting data; 

r) assessing system condition; 

s) planning, maintain or rehabilitating the 
system; 

t) optimizing depreciation and reinvestment; 

u) identifying and managing risks; and 

v) ensuring the system is utilized/operated as 
intended, and the environment in which the 
assets are functioning. 


4.5.2 Principal Aspects — Drinking Water Supply 
Systems 


4.5.2.1 The services provided by drinking water 
utility to its users should include following two 
aspects: 


a) Continuous supply of safe drinking water 
meeting the acceptable limit of IS 10500; 
and 

b) Supporting the fire brigades with water for 
firefighting if possible (depending on local 
regulations). 


4.5.2.2 In general, drinking water supply system 


IS 18182 : 2023 


generally comprises five components: 


a) Water source; 

b) Intake and transport; 

c) Treatment if necessary, and if appropriate, 
disposal of residues; 

d) Storage, transport and distribution; and 

e) Monitoring of water quality at all critical 
point of drinking water supply system. 


4.5.2.3 The management of assets of drinking water 
supply systems should cover the complete asset 
system and the interrelationship of all assets such as 
waterworks, pumping stations, treatment facilities 
and distribution network including the resulting 
water quality. 


4.5.2.4 The management of assets should consider 
changes in needs and expectations/requirements of 
users and other stakeholders as well as 
environmental effects such as climate conditions, 
consumption of resources, population migrations, 
and demography. 


4.5.3 Integrating the Principal Aspects 


Management of assets within the drinking water 
supply system should be integrated to the asset 
management principles of drinking water utility, as 
described in this standard. 


4.6 Risks Aspects 


4.6.1Risk should be considered necessary at 
strategic, tactic and operation levels with the 
following principles: 


a) Risk identification (in this case, principally 
by hazard analysis); 

b) Risk allocation; and 

c) Risk management. 


4.6.2 Appropriate treatment of risk arising within 
the context of drinking water utility should be 
considered by the introduction, or modification, of 
existing risk control. 


4.6.3 Selection of the most appropriate risk control 
should result from a process of assessing 
organizational hazards (arising from  asset’s 
positioning or failure). Appropriate 
countermeasures can then be introduced in a 
prioritize manner. Such measures can include 
operation and maintenance activities as well as 
rehabilitation. 


4.6.4 The drinking water utility should define its 
utility-specific risk analysis approach and criteria for 
risk evaluation, based on their objectives, and 
external and internal contexts. Risk criteria should 


be determined in terms of the same dimensions as 
the parameters used in the risk analysis. The order of 
priority for inspection/survey plans should be 
determined by risk evaluation (which considers the 
significance of each risk relative to all the risks 
under consideration). Typically, this comparison is 
conducted by comparing individual risks ‘scores’ 
(the product ofa risk’s impact and likelihood ratings 
against the risk criteria), using a risk matrix to 
present the results. 


4.6.5 The prioritization of measures to treat 
(prevent/reduce) the impact and/or likelihood of 
individual risks’ occurrence should be carried out by 
comparing the effectiveness of individual treatment 
measures and their related costs, practicability and 
acceptability to stakeholders. The outcome of this 
evaluation process can feed into a wider decision- 
making process utilizing cost-benefit-analysis 
techniques (see 7.3). 


4.6.6 Drinking water supply system related asset 
risks can be categorized into the following two 
groups: 


a) Non-influenceable risks, such as natural 
disasters (earthquakes, storms, floods, etc) 
or economic situations; 

b) Influenceable risks, such as events arising 
from accidental damage, asset 
deterioration, mis-operation of assets, or 
malicious interference with assets. 


4.6.7 During the Assessment of impact, the asset 
data such as sizing, material, operating pressure or 
function; proximity to other significant assets, 
infrastructure or areas; access constraints, social 
influence and repair or rehabilitation cost should be 
considered. 


4.6.8 During the assessment of likelihood impact of 
failure, the following asset data such as 
abnormalities of hygiene, exceedance of parametric 
values, maintenance, telemetry, employees' 
feedback, details of past incidents, stakeholders’ 
complaints, security, social behaviour and 
environmental influences should be considered. 


4.7 Life Cycle Aspect 


Life cycle cost should be minimized by keeping the 
system in an operating condition as stated in the 
objectives. This can be achieved by: 


a) optimized maintenance planning; 

b) investigation/inspection of assets at regular 
intervals; 

c) water loss assessments; 


d) use of suitable construction methods and 
durable materials; 

e) cooperation with other services or 
contractors; 

f) energy management; 

g) optimized stand-by service; 

h) proper control of operational processes; 

j) efficient deployment of staff and 
accomplishment of tasks (by qualified 
and/or certified contractors, if necessary, 
while retaining core competences in the 
utility); 

k) participation in benchmarking projects; and 

m) demand based materials management and 
control (procurement and stock keeping). 


NOTE — To rehabilitate facilities, the priority of the project 
should be determined in the framework of budget while 
aiming to minimize the life cycle cost of each asset. 


4.8 Structuring the Process for Management of 
Assets 


4.8.1 Integrated management of assets in drinking 
water supply system is the process of achieving an 
understanding of existing and proposed drinking 
water supply systems and of using this information 
to develop strategies to ensure that the hydraulic, 
structural and operational performance meets the 
specified performance requirements taking into 
account future conditions and economic efficiency. 


4.8.2 The integrated drinking water supply systems 
management process should have four principal 
activities: 


a) An appropriate level of investigation of all 
aspects of the performance of the drinking 
water supply systems; 

b) Assessment of the performance by 
comparison with the performance 
requirements including identification of the 
reasons for the performance failures; 


Investigation 
(see 5) 


Assessment 
(see 6) 


Planning 
(see 8) 


Implementation 
(see 8 and 10) 


IS 18182 : 2023 


c) Developing the plan of measures to be 
taken; and 
d) Implementation of the plan. 


The need for further investigation can become 
apparent either during the performance assessment 
or the development of the plan. 


4.8.3 For large drinking water supply systems an 
outline integrated drinking water management plan 
may first be developed following an outline 
investigation of the whole system. More detailed 
plans may then be developed for each sub- 
distribution section within the context of the 
strategic outline plan. 


4.8.4 The integrated drinking water supply systems 
management plan is further developed during the 
implementation phase by subsequent investigation, 
assessment and planning to develop work programs 
and individual projects to implement the plan. The 
boundary conditions should also be considered. 


4.8.5 The information should be updated regularly 
for the future management of the drinking water 
supply systems. 


NOTE : Refer Fig.l for the process flow of integrated 
drinking water supply system management. 


4.9 Strategies for the Management of Assets 


4.9.1 While selecting the strategies for the 
management of asset the drinking water utility 
should consider the following: 


a) objectives, functions and performance 
requirements; 

b) risks involved in not achieving these 
objectives and performance requirements; 

c) design period of drinking water supply 
systems; and 

d) identification of fundamental prerequisites 
for economically efficient maintenance. 


Objectives and performance 
requirements (see 4 and 
Annex A) 


FIG. 1 INTEGRATED DRINKING WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT PROCESS 


IS 18182 : 2023 


4.9.2 An appropriate level of care should be 
exercised during planning on the strategic level due 
to the very high levels of investment in the drinking 
water supply system and the technical and financial 
implications of subsequent adjustments. 


4.9.3 Drinking water infrastructure assets should be 
managed and maintained according to the condition- 
based or inspection strategy or the incident based or 
failure strategy. To increase the likelihood of 
achieving the objectives and requirements, the 
drinking water infrastructure assets should be 
managed and maintained according to the condition- 
based or inspection strategy. 


4.9.4 The condition-based or inspection strategy 
considers the development of the condition of the 
asset system and single assets and pursues a long- 
term approach. It warrants the efficient and 
economical use of restoration funds although it may 
not reduce overall rehabilitation and life cycle costs 
over a defined long-term planning period but can 
spread these costs out over a longer term and can 
avoid social costs. Costs depend on actual 
maintenance requirements. 


4.9.5 A proactive inspection should enable more 
efficiencies, though reactive and proactive 
maintenance need to be appropriately balanced for a 
particular drinking water utility. A greater level of 
proactivity and subsequent ability to be more 
strategic and prioritized in rehabilitation should help 
a drinking water utility to be more capable of 
attaining its level of service, as measured by 
performance indicators. 


4.9.6 Organizational constraints, continuance of 
existing practices or acceptance of the consequences 
of low- impact risks can lead to use of an incident- 
based or failure strategy, which incurs lower 
maintenance costs in the short term but can lead to 
disproportionally high costs in the long term. 
Probable consequences can include inadequate 
operating safety margins, increased failure rates, 
flooding, and premature loss of the existing structure 
and value of the infrastructure assets. The risk of 
failures and inadequacies can be extremely high. An 
incident-based or failure strategy can usually only be 
successful if the risk linked to the asset is low and 
will not be affected by an increased downtime or 
deficiencies in the water quality. 


NOTE — Refer Fig.2 for strategies for management of 
assets. 


4.10 Periods of Planning 
4.10.1 General 


4.10.1.1 The sustainable rehabilitation process for 
the management of assets should be based on the 
planning period under review, subdivided into the 
following three interdependent sub processes: 


a) Strategic planning — long-term 
rehabilitation about 20 to 30 years; 


b) Tactical planning — medium-term 
rehabilitation about 8 to 10 years; and 
c) Operational planning — short-term 


rehabilitation upto 5 years. 


NOTE — The duration of the planning stages depends on 
local circumstances and the nature of the assets. 


Strategic Plan Tactical Plan Operational Plan 


Increasing intensity of work and degree of details 


FIG. 2 LOGICAL STEPS FOR THE [IMPLEMENTATION 
AND EVALUATION OF REHABILITATION TARGETS 


4.10.1.2 Asset types should be considered in the 
‘strategic planning’ step. In the ‘tactical planning’ 
step, the required projects should be determined and 
prioritize for a medium-term period based on an 
asset evaluation. The technologies and material 
should be preselected. In the ‘operational planning’ 
step, the actual execution of the rehabilitation 
measures in terms of process, material and 
construction method is then examined and fixed in 
consideration of possible alternative measures. 


4.10.1.3 The sub-processes cannot be considered as 
independent and their results about rehabilitation 
strategy, tactics and operational planning should be 
harmonized not only with one another, but also with 
the strategic network structure and capacity 
planning. 


4.10.2 Strategic Level Activities 


The development of the rehabilitation strategy for a 
long term period should focus the scope of 
rehabilitation measures and the rehabilitation 
budgets required to achieve and to maintain 
sufficient service quality and facility condition 
levels. It should be based on an asset type approach 
but not individual asset. In the first step of planning 
decision making support should require the 
identification of measurable strategic objectives and 


the necessary evolution and measurement of the 
objectives. Common activities related to 
determining strategic objectives should include the 
following strategic activities: 


a) Establishing acceptable/required levels of 
service, public safety, public health 
protection, environmental protection and 
user satisfaction; 

b) Expressing levels in the form of system 
performance indicators; 

c) Linking system performance indicators to 
asset performance indicator; 

d) Establishing adequate billing rates and a 
water price suitable in time to ensure 
sustainable revenue; 

e) Quantifying sustainable and predictable 
infrastructure funding requirements; 

f) Assessing capacity against future demands; 

g) Establishing effective risk control measures 
and necessary levels of resilience 
redundancy within the entire drinking 
water system; and 

h) Controlling costs. 


4.10.3 Tactical Level Activities 


To avoid overloading of the information 
management process, the process of reviewing 
indicators to determine only productive and useful 
coherent information should consider as a major 
activity at the tactical level. The information should 
be manageable and relevant. Activities on a tactical 
level should include the following: 


a) Analysing infrastructure asset life cycles; 

b) Establishing operational information to be 
collected at the operational level; 

c) Establishing a system for managing 
information; 

d) Analysing reported information; 

e) Analysing the value and performance of the 
assets; 

f) Analysing of (specific) cost of planning, 
installation, operation, maintenance and 
rehabilitation; 

g) Prioritizing infrastructure spending from 
available funds; 

h) Maintaining an accurate asset data 
collection system; 

j) Assessing the risks of asset failure or 
inability to meet the intended function; 

k) Ensuring that the required maintenance is 
performed; 

m) Controlling costs; and 

n) Preselection of process and rehabilitation 
technology and materials. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


4.10.4 Operational Level Activities 


Activities on an operational level should include the 
following: 


a) Collecting, monitoring and reporting asset 
operational information and condition; 

b) Controlling costs; 

c) Planning preventive 
schedules; and 

d) Implementation of rehabilitation projects. 


maintenance 


5 INVESTIGATION 
5.1 General 


Investigation should be carried out to assess the 
condition and the performance of the drinking water 
supply systems and their components. This may 
include: 


a) identification of damaged, defective or 
incorrectly sized assets representing a 
potential hazard for utility services 
(volume, pressure, quality, no continual 
supply); 

b) recoding of data about age, period of 
operation, maintenance intervals and 
history of disorder supporting the condition 
investigation and assessment; 

c) the structure of the database should build 
on an asset labelling system, which assigns 
a unique identification to each important 
asset; 

d) in addition to the assessment of the 
condition of assets, an investigation of the 
relevant processes should be done based on 
individual performance tests of functional 
groups, or on the whole drinking water 
system; and 

e) results should be documented accordingly 
and backed up conveniently in a database 
to facilitate subsequent evaluations. 


As the problems found in existing drinking water 
supply systems are frequently interrelated, the 
upgrading works should be designed to overcome a 
few problems at the same time, to the extent 
possible. The investigation and planning of 
rehabilitation work should be carried out on drinking 
water supply system so that all problems and their 
causes can be considered together. In large drinking 
water systems, it can be necessary to start by 
investigating appropriate parts of the system. 
NOTE — The procedures described in this standard can be 
applied in any drinking water system, but detailed 
application should take account of the age, location and type 
of the drinking water supply system and the materials used 


in its construction, together with functional and climatic 
factors. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


5.2 Purpose of Investigation 


The investigation should be carried out to assess the 
performance of the drinking water supply system 
and its components. This should include the 
investigation aimed at tactical planning and 
operational planning. 


The purpose of the investigation should influence 
the way in which it is carried out (choice of method, 
degree of detail, level of desired accuracy) and the 
way in which the results are assessed. 


NOTE — The assets of the drinking water supply systems 
included in the investigation should be those that are 
necessary to fulfil the purpose of the investigation. 


5.3 Determine the Scope of the Investigation 


5.3.1 As per the review of the current performance 
information, the need of inspection should be 
decided whether to carry out an investigation or the 
extent of the problems justifies an investigation of 
all the facilities of a drinking water supply system. 
The extent and detail of the subsequent investigation 
of the hydraulic, process, environmental, structural 
and operational aspects should be determined. 


5.3.2 Based on the technical expertise gained from 
these initial investigations the scope and format of 
future investigations should be defined. The 
investigations should be formalized as far as 
possible and conducted according to uniform criteria 
and evaluated to ensure the comparability of the 
results. 


5.4 Data Collection 
5.4.1 General 


The drinking water utility should consider what data 
are important to acquire promptly and what further 
data should be acquired opportunistically to make 
data collection process cost effective. The drinking 
water utility should consider the purpose for which 
the data are to be gathered and design data recording 
methods to suit those needs. 


Where there is insufficient information, the 
inventory should first be updated where required and 
any other information should then be collected 
during the hydraulic, process, environmental, 
structural and operational investigation. 


5.4.2 Data Requirements 


The quality of data should be assessed considering 
whether it is complete, compatible, consistent, 


10 


current credible, accurate, and at a suitable scale. 
5.4.3 Inventory Data 


The drinking water utility should collect inventory 
data providing the essential technical information on 
the drinking water supply system and its 
components. Some examples of inventory data and 
the relevant components of drinking water supply 
system are provided in Table 2. 


5.4.4 Failure Data 


The drinking water utility should collect the failure 
data that provide information on failures found in 
drinking water supply systems and link this to 
inventory data. At the minimum, the following data 
should be collected: 


a) Date of documentation, after final remedy; 

b) Date of failure occurrence, if known; 

c) Location (coordinates, address), point, type 
and cause (ageing, damage due to other 
construction, etc) of failure; 

d) Type of remedy (repair, 
replacement); 

e) Costs of eliminating failure; and 

f) Consequence of failure (road collapse, 
leakage volume, number of customers 
without service). 


renovation, 


For the determination and diagnosis of failures, 
uniform assessment criteria should be used and 
executed by well-trained personnel. 


5.4.5 Historical Data of the Assets 


The drinking water utility should acquire more 
information on the condition of drinking water 
supply systems as it provides valuable information 
on the prioritization of rehabilitation measures. The 
specifications and completion drawing of all assets 
should be retained by the managing authority for 
further assessment of assets during its life cycle. 
Data collection should be comprehensive, 
continuous and free from interpretation. Data 
registered should be uniform and based on 
previously and unambiguously defined default 
values. Free text should be avoided because it offers 
only limited evaluation possibilities. Where the 
inventory is incomplete, it should be updated so that 
a sufficient record of the network is available to 
carry out the investigation. Some examples of 
historical data and the relevant components of 
drinking water supply system are provided in 
Table 3. 


Table 2 Types of Inventory Data 


IS 18182 : 2023 


(Clause 5.4.3) 
(Informative) 
SI No. Inventory Data Attribute, Assets 
if applicable A 
Facilities, Mechanical Treatment Piped Electrical/ 
Buildings Installations Facilities/Processes Installation Electronic 
and (filters, Installation/ 
Structures sedimentation etc) Equipment 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Location x X X X X 
ii) Catchment area X X X X X 
iii) Description of the functional X X X O x 
specification of technical 
equipment and process 
technology 
iv) Type of asset (pump, filters, O X X (0) X 
dosing facilities, provision 
and type of disinfection) 
v) Manufacturer of the relevant O x X O x 
Equipment 
vi) Outdoor facilities such as X O O O O 
access roads, plantings, 
fences, exterior design 
vii) Drainages X = O = _ 
viii) As built documentation of X X X X 
structures, equipment, 
schematics, drawings 
ix) Structural calculations (static X O O O — 
and dynamic loadings) 
x) Building physics, structural X — O — — 
design 
xi) Environmental conditions X X O O — 
(soil conditions, 
contamination, groundwater, 
flood hazards, flood maps, 
power supply, sanitation, 
accessibility) 
xii) Year of installation X X X X X 
xiii) Year of rehabilitation X X X X X 
xiv) Type of rehabilitation x x X X X 
xv) Year of decommissioning X X X X X 
xvi) Installation/rehabilitation X X X X X 


cost 


NOTE — The list of inventory parameters can be modifying as per the requirements of drinking water utility. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


Table 3 Examples of Historical Data 


(Clause 5.4.5) 
(Informative) 
SI Inventory Data Attribute,Assets 
if applicable f 7 : r | 
No. Facilities, Mechanical Treatment Piped Electrical/ 
Buildings andInstallations Facilities/Processes Installation Electronic 
Structures (filters, Installation/ 
sedimentation etc) Equipment 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Performance of asset (pump, x x x x x 
motor, switch etc) 
ii) Documentation of operating x x x o x 
conditions 
iii) Maintenance and inspection x x x x x 
documentation 
iv) Tightness of the structure X O X — — 
v) Documentation of repair X X X X X 
vi) Water tightness of the x o o o _ 
structure 
vil) Proof of stability X — — — — 
viii) Energy efficiency — X O — X 
ix) Corrosion/abrasion/cracks X X X X X 
x) Environmental conditions 
(soil conditions, 
groundwater contamination, xX x O O = 


flood hazards, power supply, 
sanitation, accessibility) 


NOTE — The list of historical parameters can be modifying as per the requirements of drinking water utility. 


5.4.6 Operational Data 


Operational data such as hours of operation of an 
asset, changes in flow rate or pressure should be 
acquired, as it provides valuable information on the 
facilities and components and on the prioritization of 
rehabilitation measures. 


Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) systems can be designed to analyze the 
data (such as consumption patterns linked to the 
weather conditions, plots on pressures against flows, 
electrical energy consumption linked to consumer 
demands, record on system leaks, record on pump 
failures, areas with less chlorine residuals etc) and 
provide daily, weekly, monthly and or annual 
reports or schedules to monitoring the inventories on 
spare parts and plan requirement of spares. 
Responses for different scenarios such as seasonal 


12 


changes or any emergencies should be programmed 
into SCADA to easily retrieved and analysed the 
information. Some examples of operational data and 
the relevant components of drinking water supply 
system are provided in Table 4. 


NOTE — Manual on Operation and Maintenance of Water 
Supply Systems published by CPHEEO, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs on may be referred for further 
guidance on SCADA systems. 

5.5 Data Registering and Data Assignment 

5.5.1 Data Registering 

The data to be registered as defined in 5.4 should be, 


a) compiled, integrated, processed and safely 
stored and readily recoverable by the 
utility; and 


b) checked and updated periodically or 
appropriately as they form the basis for 
developing maintenance plans and 
strategies. 


Data collection can be performed using either 
mobile data collection devices or forms to be filled 
in manually (preferably box-ticking forms). It 
should be ensured that all data can be digitally 
aggregated in one place for a given drinking water 
supply system. 


5.5.2 Data Assignment 


All inventory, failure, historical, and operational 
data registered should be correctly assigned to the 
associated asset types such as electro-mechanical 
equipment, civil structures etc, and/or individual 
assets. Likewise, failure data (ageing, fatigue, 
damage caused by other processes or equipment, 
poor maintenance) should be assigned for 
maintenance/life cycle assessment. 


5.5.3 Georeferencing 


The inventory, failure, historical and operational 
data can be assigned to their associated objects 
through georeferencing for medium and short term 
rehabilitation planning to facilitate a rehabilitation 
strategy. The drinking water utility should avoid the 
practice of assigning data to particular asset system 
or material group instead of individual asset. 
Reference to individual assets as well as geo- 
referencing information should be preserved even 
when individual assets have ceased to form part of a 
currently existing network. 


5.5.4 Computerized Management Information 


System (CMIS) 


To make an effective CMIS, the drinking water 
utility should identify the potential sources of data in 
each functional area and create reports needed by all 
users irrespective of their proficiency in data 
processing. The reports for CMIS can be generated 
from following main/sub-systems of a drinking 
water utility: 


a) Financial (payroll, revenue management, 
general ledger, accounting, funds etc); 
b) Project management (engineering planning 


IS 18182 : 2023 


and design, construction, contracts and 
monitoring etc); 

c) Human resource (manpower planning and 
recruitment, personnel development and 
training etc); 

d) Material management 
inventory control); 

e) Operation and maintenance; and 

f) Marketing (customer information, demand 
forecasting, market planning etc). 


(purchasing, 


5.5.5 Review of Existing Information 


The collection and review of all available relevant 
information about the assets should be the basis of 
all other activities subsequently planned. A review 
should also be undertaken of the information 
required to manage the assets. This information 
should be assessed to determine what further 
information is required to carry out the investigation. 


5.6 Types of Investigation 
5.6.1 Hydraulic Investigation 


An investigation of hydraulics should be made based 
on inventory data from the creation of the asset 
system and updated on the actual status. The 
interaction between pumping stations, treatment 
plants, storage reservoirs and the distribution 
network should be considered. In some cases, 
especially for larger assets, a simulation model may 
be required to understand the hydraulic system or the 
treatment plant by: 


a) GIS based hydraulic model to understand 
the hydraulics of the system; and 

b) GIS based hydraulic modelling for the 
designing of water network in urban areas. 


The results of the hydraulic investigation can 
influence the operational and process management 
of the drinking water supply system and the 
interaction with other parts. These dependencies 
should be taken into consideration. Having 
identified possible causes of error it is often 
necessary to confirm these by site inspection and 
then adjust the model accordingly. Data should not 
be modified without justification based on an 
inspection of the drinking water supply system. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


Table 4 Examples of Operational Data 


(Clause 5.4.6) 
(Informative) 
Sl Inventory Data Assets 
No Attribute, if f l 
applicable Facilities, Mechanical Treatment Piped Electrical/ SCADA/ 
Buildings Installations Facilities/ Installation Electronic Software/ 
and Processes (filters, Installation/ IoT 
Structures sedimentation Equipment 
etc) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Hours of operation per o x x o _ x 
day 
ii) Total hours of operation o x x o o x 
annually 
iii) Volume, flow X X X O X 
vi) Pressure/water level X X X O O X 
v) Vibrations, sounds O X X — X — 
vi) Temperature of 
bearings/motors, — X O — O = 
pumps 
vii) Energy use of relevant o x x o x x 
equipment 
viii) Annual energy x x x o x xX 
consumption 
ix) Energy costs (specific) O X X — X — 
x) Chemical use of o o x x _ x 
relevant processes 
x1) Source water analysis X X X X X X 
xii) Water analysis at x o x o o x 
various treatment steps 
xiii) Drinking water analysis x x x x x x 


in distribution network 


5.6.2 Investigation of the Process Technique 


The entire process control system (including 
hardware and software) should be monitored 
regarding interfaces with other IoT systems or 
external communication links, and non-conformities 
investigated. It should establish the existence, or 
not, of a proper maintenance regime, a patch 
management process, a complete and current set of 
documentation and evidence of conformity with all 
IoT security requirements. The results of these 
studies and activities including subsequent change in 
the process control system should be documented. 


5.6.3 Structural Investigation 


The structural investigation should be undertaken 
when, during routine some deterioration on 
structural components of the relevant assets is found 
by visual inspection and/or the intended life of assets 
is about to end. The structural investigation can 
include either a complete survey of the structures of 
the drinking water supply system or a more selective 
approach investigations of wells, dams, storage 
reservoirs, filter basins and other buildings keeping 
in view of costs of rehabilitation versus investment 
in new facilities. Consideration should be given to 


the age and location of existing infrastructure, 
geotechnical data and the vulnerability of existing 
facilities. Where appropriate, other qualitative and 
quantitative investigation techniques may be used 
including laboratory analysis and field condition 
assessment to identify the integrity and remaining 
strength of a component. 


5.6.4 Operational Investigation 


5.6.4.1 For operational investigation, the drinking 
water utility should: 


a) identify and document existing operational 
procedures, inspection schedules and 
maintenance plans; 

b) review the frequency and location of 
recorded operational incidents such as loss 
of pressure, pumping station failures, 
process interruptions etc; 

c) determine the impact of operational 
problems on the hydraulic and structural 
performance from incident records; 

d) investigate the causes of significant 
recurrent operational incidents; and 

e) investigate and understand the causes and 
effects of operational problems. 


5.6.4.2 Operational investigations should be done to 
determine the following, but not limited to: 


a) location of assets; 

b) condition of assets; 

c) cause and location of failures; 

d) consumption of energy; 

e) quality of construction or repair of structure 
and technical equipment; and 

f) leakages. 


5.6.4.3 Control system technologies like 
performance measurement, vibration measurement, 
efficiency determination etc, may be used to 
evaluate more complex causes of failures through 
trend analysis, and to assess interactions among the 
asset types. It applies to the interactions between 
drinking water supply system and between asset 
types within, and across, these systems. Operational 
investigation techniques can include: 


a) diverse electronic sensors; 

b) closed circuit television (CCTV) inspection 
of wells and pipelines; 

c) flow and pressure measurement; 

d) sampling and analysis; and 

e) leakage control. 


5.6.4.4 Irrespective of the strategy and the methods 
used, water infrastructure assets should be 
monitored periodically, and their components and 


15 


IS 18182 : 2023 


operating equipment should be maintained and 
inspected regularly for their operating condition and 
functionality and in accordance with functional asset 
requirements. 


5.6.4.5 A routine inspection of the condition of the 
service quality and particularly the asset ageing 
related conditions and the maintenance should start 
when commissioning water infrastructure assets. 
The designer and/or the owner or operator should 
specify the nature and frequency for the 
maintenance and inspection of the asset system or 
single assets. If historical data based on routine 
inspection are not available, all other available data 
based on historical assessment should be used. 


5.6.4.6 A sufficient and reliable database on water 
infrastructure asset inventory and asset condition is 
indispensable for maintenance including strategy, 
planning and implementation. It is based on the 
qualified and quality assured collection, processing, 
evaluation and storage of asset-related data. All 
maintenance data, especially inspections, should 
therefore be recorded and documented. 


5.6.4.7 Measurable condition data give decision 
makers the ability to see more clearly the 
consequences of their decisions and to avoid the 
many pitfalls that result from making funding 
decisions with an incomplete understanding of their 
infrastructure assets and needs. Operational 
problems concern the various components of 
drinking water supply system. The techniques 
available to resolve them are described in Annex B. 


5.7 Inventory Update 


Inventories should be updated periodically to 
maintain records of the drinking water supply 
system to carry out further investigations. At a 
minimum, each asset should be assigned a unique 
identification number. Formulating a hierarchical 
structure in the data is also helpful for information 
retrieval, analysis and reporting needs. Asset data 
attributes should be captured for each asset together 
with their source (design documents, information 
system). Mapping the data workflows among their 
sources and recipients can enable better 
functionality, efficiency and quality. 


5.8 Review of Performance Information 


5.8.1 Performance problems such as pipe bursts, 
leakages, loss of pressure and deterioration of 
drinking water quality can be known through reports 
of incidents, previous investigations or user’s 
complaints. Records of past incidents and any other 
relevant information should be brought together, and 
a detailed review should be carried out to establish 


IS 18182 : 2023 


the scope of the investigations. Examples of such 
other information include: 


a) hydraulic performance analysis, 

b) performance of  mechanical/electrical 
equipment, and 

c) results of monitoring, performance and 
condition. 


5.8.2 Where large numbers of treatment steps or the 
entire drinking water supply systems need 
investigation, the existing information collected may 
also be used to assign priorities to the investigation 
of the perceived problems in each service area (for 
example, by comparing the cost of the investigation 
with the benefit that might be achieved). These can 
then be used to draw up a comprehensive program 
with the intention to investigate facilities with the 
most serious projected problems. 


5.9 Planning of Investigation 


Target facilities and the execution period for 
medium-term survey plans should be decided 
according to the priority order based on risk 
assessment. The short term and medium-term plans 
should be based on the total work amount mentioned 
in the long term survey plan. The following should 
be evaluated for design of the survey work: 


a) target facilities and 
inspection/survey; 

b) determination of survey type; 

c) survey method, item, standards; and 


d) estimated cost. 


period for 


5.10 Performance Testing 


5.10.1 The performance of the drinking water 
supply system should test and assessed during 
construction, at the completion of the construction 
stage and also during the operational life of the 
system on a new asset, a long time existing asset or 
a rehabilitated asset. The examples of tests and 
assessments are: 


a) leakage measurement; 

b) visual inspection; 

c) flow measurement; 

d) hydraulic performance; 

e) monitoring of equipment or process 
availability over the time in question; and 

f) Water quality measurement, under 
different flow conditions, at treatment plant 
and at various treatment steps. 


5.10.2 The effectiveness of maintenance should be 
assessed by comparing the performance of the 
system with its stated requirements. In addition, for 
reactive maintenance, target response times can be 
used as an assessment. 


16 


6 ASSESSMENT 
6.1 Principles 


Once the drinking water supply system has been 
inspected, the next stage is to examine the results to 
identify those areas requiring action. The 
performance of the system should be assessed 
against the performance requirements. The 
performance assessment should include the 
evaluation of risks of failure to achieve the 
performance requirements. 


NOTE — Refer Fig. 3 for the process flow of assessment. 


Results of Investigation 


Assessment of the condition and deficiencies 


Comparison with performance requirements 


Identification of deficiencies 


Identification of causes of performance 
deficiencies 


Planning 


FIG. 3 PROCESS OF ASSESSMENT 


6.2 Assessment of the Hydraulic and Drinking 
Water Quality Performance 


6.2.1 Based on the results of the investigation of the 
processes, the performance of the drinking water 
supply system should be assessed against the 
requirements for the maximum required power 
demand. This should consider peak hour, day and 
year requirements depending upon the design of the 
total supply (if necessary) and for the minimum 
necessary supply. The resilience for normal 
operation should be safeguarded by the necessary 
security and redundancy arrangements in 
accordance with risk management principles. 


6.2.2 The results of the hydraulic and water quality 
surveys and/or the verified flow simulation model 
and the treatment process simulation model should 
be used to assess the hydraulic and water quality 
performance of the drinking water supply system 
related to the performance requirements for peak 
flow and, if appropriate, for firefighting conditions. 


6.3 Assessment of Process Performance 


The treatment and pumping process performance of 
a drinking water supply system should be monitored 
by both manual and/or online methods for 
determining the quantity and quality of raw and 
treated water. Deviations from the required 
performance should be evaluated and, after taking 
future requirements into consideration, can serve as 
a basis for improvement measures. 


6.4 Assessment of the Structural Condition 


Criteria such as serviceability, stability, protection 
of the escape routes, structure against environmental 
influences, natural calamities, fire, sabotage and 
protection against unauthorized access should be 
assessed to check the structural condition of 
drinking water supply system. 


6.5 Assessment of Operational Performance 


The operational performance of the system as 
measured by the number of operational incidents or 
failures should be assessed. This should be recorded 
in a database. 


6.6 Compare with Performance Requirements 


6.6.1 The results of the assessment of the hydraulic, 
procedural, structural and operational performance 
should be brought together so that the overall 
performance of the system and its components can 
be compared to the performance requirements 
as per 4.3. 


6.6.2 Performance indicators are one method of 
comparing the overall performance of a drinking 
water supply system with performance requirements 
and for comparing different treatment plants. They 
can be used as basic benchmarking purposes. Any 
performance indicators used should be, 


a) clearly defined, concise and unambiguous; 
b) verifiable; and 
c) simple and easy to use. 


6.7 Identification of Unacceptable Impacts 


Details of those parts of the system where the 
hydraulic, procedural, structural or operational 
performance of drinking water supply systems its 
components does not meet the performance 
requirements should be recorded. 


6.8 Identify Causes of Performance Deficiencies 


Based upon the results of the hydraulic, procedural, 
structural and operational investigations, the causes 
of performance deficiencies should be determined. 
The relative impact of each cause should be assessed 
to develop appropriate solutions and to set the 
priority for action. 


17 


IS 18182 : 2023 


7 PLANNING 
7.1 General 


7.1.1 The integrated drinking water supply systems 
management plan can take one of two forms: 


a) The plan describes the approach to be taken. 
An outline plan is likely to take this form, 
further information may be included in 
detailed plans for parts of the distribution; 
and 

b) The plan outlines the proposed activities and 
measures and specifies the resources and 
timescales. 


7.1.2 Planning may be categorized into 
strategic/long term plan (20 years to 30 years), 
tactic/medium term plans (8 years to 10 years) and 
operational/short term plan (upto 5 years). 


NOTE — Refer Fig. 4 for the process of planning to fulfil 
the performance requirements. 


Results of Assessment (see 6) 


Develop Integrated Solutions 


Assess Feasibility of Solutions 


Select Optimal Solution 


Prepare Action Plan 


Implementation (see 8) 


Monitoring and Review 


FIG. 4 PROCESS OF PLANNING 


7.2 Develop Integrated Solutions 


Integrated solutions should be developed that fulfil 
the performance requirements, taking into account 
future conditions. 


NOTE — Refer Table 5 for solution type and group for 
rehabilitation. 


7.3 Assess Solutions 


Solutions should be assessed, and the optimal solution 
should be selected based on the factors such as safety 
in construction and operation, social disruption, 
sustainable use of resources, phasing of work, 
relationship to other infrastructure works, capacity 
and resources constraints, future maintenance 
liabilities, economic appraisal and whole life cost. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


7.3.1 Safety in Construction and Operation 


Efforts should be made to minimize risks to health 
and safety during construction and subsequent 
operation of the system. 


7.3.2 Social Disruption 


The disruption to local residents and other members 
of the public due to traffic delays, dust, noise and 
other social factors should be considered. 


7.3.3 Sustainable use of Resources 


The use of energy and other finite resources in the 
construction and operation of the system should be 
taken into account. The ability to recycle materials 
used in the rehabilitation works and any waste 
produced should be considered. 


7.3.4 Phasing of the Works 


The possibility of integrating the solution into a 
staged program of works should be considered. This 
should consider the priorities of the works and the 
benefits in terms of improved performance 
associated with each identified phase of the works 
and the cost savings associated with deferral of the 
later stages. 


7.3.5 Relationship to other Infrastructure Works 
The benefits of phasing the works with other 
infrastructure works should be considered. 


7.3.6 Capacity and Resource Constraints 


Resource constraints (personnel, supply chain and 
financial) in the selection and phasing of the options 
should be considered. 


7.3.7 Future Maintenance Liabilities 


The cost of future maintenance works and other 
operational costs of the system should be 
considered. 


7.3.8 Economic Appraisal 


The costs and benefits should be considered to 
determine whether the additional benefits of one 
solution over another such as increased asset life, are 
justified. 


7.3.9 Whole Life Cost 


The whole life cost of a solution is the present value 
of all the costs over the life of the solution including 
temporary works and diversion of other utility 
services. All design, construction, investigation, 
maintenance and operational costs should be taken 
into account as well as the indirect costs (cost of 
social disruption and shifting of other services 
during maintenance). When comparing different 
options, the whole life cost should be calculated over 
the same period for each option. 


7.4 Prepare Action Plan 


7.4.1 The selected integrated solution should be 
documented to give a single plan for the drinking 
water supply systems. The documentation should 
include: 


a) detailed objectives; 

b) legal requirements and permits, including 
any timescales for rehabilitation; 

c) performance criteria; 

d) priorities; 

e) proposed works 
phasing; 

f) application of GIS in project planning, 
designing and maintenance; 

g) relationship to other construction or planned 
development; and 


including costs and 


h) consequences for operations and 
maintenance. 
7.4.2 Four types of plans can be prepared: 
a) New development plan; 
b) Operations and maintenance plan; 
c) Rehabilitation plan; and 
d) Contingency and emergency plan. 
8 IMPLEMENTATION 
8.1 General 
The implementation plan should take into 


consideration the financial risk(s) situation to the 
drinking water utility and can be based on the 
principle of ‘plan-do-check-act’ (PDCA) approach. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


Create/ 
updated plan 


Review 
performance 


Carry out 
work 


Nfa 


Monitor 
performance 


FIG. 5 PROCESS FOR IMPLEMENTATION FOLLOWING THE PDCA APPROACH 


Table 5 Solution Types and Groups for Rehabilitation 


(Clause 7.2) 
(Informative) 
SI No. Type Group 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Hydraulic a) Maximize use of existing flow capacity. 
b) Adjust diameters and pipe wall friction to water demand and pressure. 
c) Increase the flow capacity by replacement of impellers of aged pumps. 
d) Target grid planning. 
ii) Structural a) Protect fabric of mains by provision of appropriate linings or internal coatings. 
b) Achieve long term preservation of structure such as renovation of water storage 
facilities. 
c) Rehabilitate pipeline. 
iii) Operational a) Undertake planned inspection and cleaning of facility. 
b) Optimize frequency of maintenance of equipment. 
c) Provide additional resilience in the event of future failure (provision of stand-by 
equipment or emergency storage). 
iv) Procedural a) Adjust capacities and ensure effective assurance of water quality. 
b) Optimize energy use, improve efficiency, reduce CO2 emission. 
c) Reallocate structures of drinking water system. 
d) Anticipate improvements necessary to meet future requirements. 
e) Optimize supply pressures, energy management, overall efficiency. 
f) Optimize the overall drinking water supply system including the influences of 
the catchment, upon the drinking water distribution network. 
g) Optimize planning for demographic and climate changes. 


8.2 Create/Update Plan 


8.2.2 The implementation plan should be updated as 


8.2.1 The objectives and functional requirements, as 
well as the technical processes to investigate, assess 
and create maintenance, rehabilitation and operation 
plans, should be established to keep or improve the 
performance of the asset system. Necessary works to 
extend, reduce or rehabilitate any component or the 
entire drinking water supply systems as specified in 
the rehabilitation plan or the operational plan should 
be undertaken. 


necessary. This includes updating to identify a path 
forward enabling the drinking water utility to further 
improve its practices for management of assets to 
better attain its desired level of service while 
minimizing costs and effectively managing risk. If 
the performance requirements change, then the 
whole planning process should be repeated so that 
the entire plan remains up to date. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


8.3 Carry Out Work 


Where it is necessary to extend, reduce or 
rehabilitate any component or the entire drinking 
water supply systems, these works should be 
designed. The management of asset should include: 


a) selection of appropriate technologies and 
materials; 

b) selection of a constructor(s) appropriately 
experienced in use of the technologies and 
materials; 

c) quality control of materials (specification 
and procurement); 

d) quality of installation and conformity with 
installation requirements; and 

e) evaluation of the process performance of 
each asset. 


8.4 Monitor Performance 


The drinking water utility should monitor the 
effectiveness of work undertaken and update the 
plan, including the records (inventory) and the GIS 
based hydraulic model or treatment process 
simulation model using performance indicator. 


8.5 Review Performance 


The performance requirements should be reviewed 
periodically. 


9 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 
9.1 General 


To keep condition of the drinking water supply 
systems in the required status and providing the 
assets a long service life the drinking water utility 
should effectively operate and maintain the drinking 
water supply systems. GIS based operation and 
maintenance may be adopted to ensure that: 


a) the entire system is operationally ready at all 
times and functions within the performance 


requirements; 
b) the operation of the system is safe, 
environmentally acceptable, and 


economically efficient; and 

c) as far as possible, the failure of one section 
of the drinking water supply systems does 
not adversely affect the performance of the 
other parts. 


NOTE — Refer Table 6 for the relation between major 
terms of management of assets. 


Table 6 Relation Between Major Terms of Management of Assets 
(Clause 9.1) 


(Informative) 
Sl Term Retain Original Restore Upgrade GIS Examples 
No. Performance Original Based 
(routine Performance Performance 
activities) 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Operation Yes No No Monitoring, regulation of flow, water quality, 
operation of pumps, valves, and treatment 
equipment, flushing filters. 

ii) Maintenance Yes Yes No Cleaning or flushing, filter, tanks, adjusting 
metering equipment, cleaning, local repair, 
replacement and/or lubrication of a pump or 
valve, replacement of electro-mechanical 
equipment or SCADA, repair of a pipe, pump 
or valve. 

ili) Rehabilitation No Yes Yes Relining of pipe; repair of a broken pipe, 


20 


pump or valve; replacement orenlarging of an 
asset. 


9.2 Operation 


Urgent interventions that are generally intended to 
be temporary are included in operations. The 
drinking water utility should ensure that the drinking 
water supply system perform continuously and 
efficiently in accordance with its functional 
requirements and operational plan(s). Operation 
includes: 


a) control of pumps, machine, and technical 
equipment; 

monitoring and intervention to ensure that 
the processes of abstraction, catchment, 
treatment, pumping, storing and 
transportation are adequately delivered; 

c) acting in accordance with contingency and 
emergency operation plans; 

monitoring water quality; 

e) control of non-revenue water (NRW); 

f) optimization of water distribution network; 
water audit and energy audit; 

assessment of residual life of assets; 

j) periodical inspection and documenting; 
making connections to existing mains and to 
users; 

check of building activities over or adjacent 
to water mains; 


b) 


IS 18182 : 2023 


n) monitoring and controlling flow, pressure 
for continuous water supply; and 
p) effective leakage management. 


9.3 Maintenance 


9.3.1 The drinking water utility should ensure that 
the drinking water supply system performs in 
accordance with its functional requirements and 
maintenance plan to ensure: 


a) local repair or replacement of damaged 
pumps, motors, pipes, valves or other assets 
in order to maintain their functioning and 


safeguards; 
cleaning, 


b) 


removal 


of sediments and 


disinfecting to restore hydraulic capacity 
and to ensure hygiene, water quality and 
performance restoration; and 
c) regular attention to accessories like valves, 
dosing, control and metering equipment. 


9.3.2 The drinking water utility should pursue a 
complementary balance of proactive maintenance 
with reactive maintenance to enable a more strategic 


approach that aims 


to achieve an optimal 


combination of cost and risk mitigation. 


NOTE — Refer Table 7 for maintenance strategy. 


Table 7 Overview of Maintenance Strategies 


(Clause 9.3) 
(Informative) 
SINo. Maintenance Brief Description Advantage Disadvantage 
Strategy 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Incident based a) No action, to determine a) The service life of the asset a) Unpredictable occurrence of 
the actual status of the asset is completely exploited. failure. 
system. b) Low costs for inspection b) Consequential failures are 
b) Only failure-basedrepair and documentation. possible, which leads to 
or replacement. uneconomical repair. 
c) An incident or failure-based 
strategy can usually only be 
successful if the risk linked to 
the asset is low and will not be 
affected by an increased 
downtime and redundancy is 
sufficient. 
ii) Preventive a) Few measures are taken a) Low unplanned failure a) High cost by low utilization 
for condition assessment. probability. of service life. 
b) The preservation of the b) Predictable b) High downtime caused by 
nominal condition of the decommissioning. repair. 


assets is performed by 
preventative replacement of 
wear and tear parts. 


21 


IS 18182 : 2023 


Table 7 (Concluded) 
SINo. Maintenance Brief Description Advantage Disadvantage 
Strategy 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
iii) Asset condition a) If the condition of the a)Low unplanned failure a)Higher costs for 
based asset is regularly identified probability. determination of condition. 
by inspection, then the wear b) Predictable decommissioning. b) Higher qualification of the 
and tear is defined as the limit ; ar taff 
deviation i c) Optimal utilization of the Stat. 
eviation in regard to the AE 
. service life. 
nominal performance. 
b) Risk-based maintenance 
is included. 
iv) Predictive Besides the determination of a) The availability of the a)High costs 
the condition, it is also complete asset system troubleshooting. 
intended to improve the asset increases. b) Very high qualification for the 


and to reduce the wear and 
tear. 


10 REHABILITATION 
10.1 General 


10.1.1 Rehabilitation should take into consideration all 
aspects of selection, installation, maintenance, repair, 
renovation, replacement and decommissioning to fulfil 
the objectives. 


10.1.2 Once a drinking water supply system is 
installed and operated, the highest expenditure in 
costs over the life cycle should be determined by 
consumption of resources which includes energy, 
dosing agents, disposal of residuals, and personnel 
expenses for operation and maintenance plus 
decisions on rehabilitation of these resource. 


10.1.3 The rehabilitation of assets or parts of the 
asset system should be adopted if the cost of 
maintenance and operation of the facilities increases 
beyond what is reasonable, or the quality of the 
source water or the legal requirements for drinking 
water change or in case of damage to the structure. 


10.1.4 A sustainable process for managing water 
assets can be subdivided into the following three 
logical steps that build upon each other to be able to 
identify and assess (including by way of 
comparison) the short, medium and long term 
impact of rehabilitation: 


a) 
b 


Determining a long term rehabilitation 
strategy; 

Drafting a medium term rehabilitation 
tactic; and 

Implementing operational rehabilitation 
measures required in the short term. 


wm 


c) 


b) Long term, the expenses for 


staff. 


maintenance decrease. 


22 


10.1.5 The strategy for rehabilitation should be 
determined by identifying the scope of rehabilitation 
works required and the pertinent budget based on a 
long term perspective to obtain and/or maintain 
adequate system condition and resulting levels of 
service. 


10.1.6 The key objectives of the rehabilitation of 
drinking water supply systems consist of: 


a) minimizing interruptions of service in any 
situation; 

b) retaining the necessary water quality 
(relevant water quality parameters); 

c) avoiding hazards to humans, third party 
assets and the environment; 

d) improving or maintaining the level of 
service; and 

e) achieving the lowest possible total 
expenditure. 


The extent to which achievement of each of these 
objectives can be influenced is indicated in Table 8. 


10.2 Strategic Plan for Rehabilitation of Assets 
(long term planning) 


10.2.1 General 


10.2.1.1 The development of the rehabilitation 
strategy for a long term period should focus the 
scope of rehabilitation measures, the rehabilitation 
budgets required to achieve and to maintain 
sufficient service quality and facility condition 
levels. 


10.2.1.2 The extent of the rehabilitation work 
required should be determined based on 
homogenous asset types exhibiting identical or 
similar condition developments/ageing behaviours, 
whose condition developments and/or service lives 
are expected to be statistically comparable. 


NOTES 

1 As an example, subdividing the drinking water supply 
system into the following major asset types: 

a) water catchment infrastructures, including wells 
and related technical equipment; 

b) intake assets; 

c) water source such as aquifers, impounding 
reservoirs, borehole, river, surface water; 

d) pumping stations; 

e) disinfection equipment; 

f) tanks and filters for various treatment steps; 

g) supply reservoirs and other structures; 

h) chemical dosing and monitoring equipment; 

j) control and automation systems; 

k) drinking water distribution network (trunk mains; 
primary, secondary and tertiary mains; and 
service pipes for house service connections); and 

m) other installations such as electrical and 
mechanical equipment. 

2 Depending on the available data and following an 
analysis of the existing system, the similar type assets 
within major asset types may further broken down, based 
on: 


a) data transmission and supervision systems; 

b) metering technology; emergency power systems; 

c) buildings, properties, fences, supervision systems, 
security systems; 

d) asset types of comparable location and installation 
conditions; and 

e) asset types of comparable modes of operation 
and/or conditions of use. 


10.2.1.3 Single unit in function groups should be 
combined and then undergo a joint rehabilitation of 
the whole functional unit largely to take advantage 
of a corresponding improvement potential. 


10.2.1.4 Certain areas or asset types exhibiting 
unusual or above-average water leakage or 
exceptional underperformance and quality problems 
or exceptional high cost and frequent disorder that 
have a major impact on the rehabilitation strategy 
should be broken down accordingly into asset sub- 
groups with advance differentiation. 


10.2.1.5 The rehabilitation strategy should be 
defined at a point in time that permits identifying and 
responding appropriately to the probable long-term 
need for rehabilitation. A period of review of 30 
years to 50 years should be taken, depending upon 
the materials, to completely cover the relevant 
condition developments of the asset system or types 
to be rehabilitated. Function, condition of 
installation and operation of each asset type should 
be considered in setting the review period. 


23 


IS 18182 : 2023 


10.2.1.6 The rehabilitation strategy varies between 
different asset types depending on maintenance 
strategy and risk assessment. Rehabilitation of small 
assets such as fittings and service pipes should be 
event oriented, whereas for large assets such as 
service mains, rehabilitation can be condition 
oriented. 


10.2.2 Approach for Strategic Plan 


Several rehabilitation approaches are possible for 
the formulation of the strategic plan depending on 
local conditions, technical advancement, eco- 
friendly cost effective and the risk attached to 
consequences. The statistical estimation can be used 
to understand rehabilitation needs if deterioration 
due to ageing was recognized during inspection. 
Possible approaches include: 

a) Asset value approach — A financial-based 
approach should be carried out to ensure that 
rehabilitation does not compromises the 

value of the drinking water supply systems 
below a specified threshold at the end of 
specified period; 

b) Asset-type approach — A part of the assets 
of a drinking water supply system should be 
selected with common characteristics, 
requirements and properties such as a 
treatment step, a well field or a monitoring 
system; 

c) Asset condition approach — All 
components of a drinking water supply 
system should be inspected and those that do 
not meet some specified threshold 
conditions are rehabilitated. If all 
components of a drinking water supply 
system cannot be inspected in a short period, 
a sampling survey and a screening method 
can be used; 

d) Functional-related approach — This 
should be built around the need for changes 
to improve the performance of the drinking 
water supply system including the need to 
reduce or eliminate constituents of the 
source water and takes the opportunity to do 
other rehabilitation work where this can be 
done more efficiently at the same time; 

e) Reactive approach — This should involve 
responding to failures and problems as they 
are identified; and 

f) Risk-based approach — The risks arising 
from or affecting water infrastructure assets 
should be well known to attain the 
rehabilitation objectives. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


The reactive rehabilitation approach should only be 
used where the risk of failure is considered, 
considering both the probability of failure and the 
consequences. The advantages and disadvantages of 
above listed strategic approaches are listed in 
Table 9. 


10.2.2 Determination of Rehabilitation Rate Based 
on Service Life 


The reciprocal of the technical service life or 
expected service lives or the residual service lives (if 
little or no rehabilitation measures have been taken 
so far) of the asset types concerned can be used as a 
first approximation for determining the required 
annual rehabilitation rate. This is true particularly 
for asset type that have grown homogenously over a 
long period of time, and for which no reliable data 
are available on age-related length distributions 
within the asset types. 


10.2.2.1 The service life of asset types can be 
estimated based on: 


a) empirical data and historical rehabilitation 
statistics of the utility; 

b) measurements in connection with investigations 
or assessment of condition; 

c) evaluation of statistics of failures or 
disorders; 

d) increasing amounts of maintenance; 

e) special investigations; and 

f) other sources, such as technical literature, 
exchanges of technical information. 


NOTES 


1 Information in the technical literature should be critically 
compared with empirical data from the drinking water 
utility’s direct experience. 


2 The estimation of the remaining service life for each asset 
type should be verified by failure analysis and compared 
with the age-related development of failures if available. 


3 Failures of assets already out of operation should also be 
included. 


10.2.2.2 Maintenance and rehabilitation of 
machinery or asset types should ensure correct 
functioning of assets to reach their technical service 
life. The maintenance strategy should be adapted 
specifically according to the requirements of safety 
efficiency. 


10.2.3 Determination of Rehabilitation Rate Based 
on Mathematical Distribution Function 


By employing mathematical distribution functions 
(Gaussian, Weibull, Herz distribution), the probable 
point of transition into the projected poor condition 


24 


(the end of the service life) can be calculated. This 
method ultimately provides a more meaningful 
picture of required, long-term annual rehabilitation 
rates. 


For this method, the drinking water utility should 
consider actual operating service lives of individual 
assets within an asset type which vary within certain 
boundaries, depending on the factors affecting the 
system’s condition. 


If a correspondingly detailed data collection and 
analysis are available, the preferred method should 
be Method 3, with a view to enhancing economic 
efficiency and planning safety. 


NOTES 


1 Failure data, common operation usage and age of relevant 
assets are required for methodologically correct analysis in 
a rehabilitation strategy context. 

2 Established trend or regression functions can be employed 
to describe the calculated age-related progression of 
failures, to determine the service life and to forecast failure 
rate development. If necessary, experts should be consulted 
for failure statistics analysis. 

3 Commercially available software products and the 
corresponding necessary data are available and may be 
employed to calculate service life margins and derive from 
this basis one or more of the above mentioned probability 
distributions. 


10.2.4 Budgeting 


10.2.4.1 The rehabilitation budget required to 
implement a rehabilitation strategy can be 
determined by the product of the annual 
rehabilitation rates and the respective asset lengths 
and numbers and the specific cost estimates while 
considering: 


a) cost estimates based on_utility-specific, 
long-term empirical data, as well as on any 
planned changes in materials and systems; 
and 

b) inclusion of results of possible strategic 
optimization activities in the rehabilitation 
budget calculation. 


10.2.4.2 Since a rehabilitation budget calculated in 
accordance with the method described above only 
covers the condition based rehabilitation of a 
drinking water supply system, expenditures on third 
party induced replacement (in the absence of an 
urgent need for rehabilitation) should be added to the 
rehabilitation strategy budget. 


10.2.4.3 Regular maintenance should be adopted to 
extend the service life of assets or asset system to 
reduces life cycle cost. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


Table 8 Rehabilitation Objectives 
(Clause 10.1.6) 


(Informative) 
SI No. Rehabilitation Objectives Strategic Plan Tactic Plan Operational Plan 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Minimising asset failures r Complete asset x x pen 
and service interruptions system 
Asset type x x = 
Asset — xX xX 
ii) Keeping required drinking water quality xX x x 
iii) Reducing water leakages or keeping them at low O x x 
levels 
iv) Resource reliability x x x 
v) Avoiding hazards to humans, third party assets and o x x 
the environment 
vi) Improving or maintaining p Pressure and quantity — x x 
level of service Water quality o x x 
Availability xX xX xX 
vii) Minimising the required total cost of maintenance x x x 


while keeping up the necessary service standard 
NOTE — To achieve the objectives linked to the rehabilitation measures, good knowledge of the risks affecting the water infrastructure assets 
should exist. For more details of likelihood and impact of failures or incidents (see 10.3). 


Table 9 Advantages and Disadvantages of Different Strategic Approaches 


SI No. Approach 
(1) (2) 
i) Asset-value a) 
b) 
ii) Asset-type-related a) 
b) 
c) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 


Asset condition based a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 


Functional related 


(Clause 10.2.2) 
(Informative) 


Advantages 
(3) 

the changes in asset value of the drinking 
water supply system can be made 
transparent. 
suitable for determining a fixed-rate 
budget. 
it is easy to get a clearer view of the work 
and the benefits. 
it is possible to carry out the work in a 
defined period. 
amount of work in one area can be 
financially efficient. 
status of structures, equipment and 
function are known by inspection 
reduction in need for reactive 
rehabilitation. 
very efficient way of rehabilitation by 
selecting only assets with high priority. 
the complete drinking water supply 
system is maintained to a defined 
standard. 


future oriented planning creates capacity, 


alleviating problems before they occur. 


Reactive 


can be cost effective where consequence of 


failure is low. 


Risk based 


optimal risk — cost ratio, bundling of works to 


optimize time and manpower costs. 


25 


Disadvantages 
(4) 
a) it is financially driven. 
b) It can’t be used solely but can be 
used in combination with other 
approaches. 


a 


wm 


a detailed cost estimate can only 
be made after detailed 
investigation of the area. 
influence of other asset type is not 
included in this approach. 


b 


ma 


a) problems with a lower priority 
remain in the drinking water 
supply system for a longer period. 
loss of efficiency by the possible 
need to carry out further works in 
the same parts of the drinking 


water supply system later. 


b) 


cannot be applied as sole approach. 


a) cannot prevent failures occurring. 
b) can only be safely based on a risk 
based approach. 


can lead to compromised water 
quality, breakdowns or service 
interruptions. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


10.2.4.4 Spreads the levels of the rehabilitation cost 
across the years to an extent balanced with strategic 
proactive capital improvements. 


10.2.4.5 The future plan for rehabilitation work for 
the assets or asset system should be estimated. 


10.3 Tactical Plan for Rehabilitation of Assets 
(mid-term planning) 


The tactical rehabilitation plan pursues the objective 
of implementing in the medium term, (8 years to 10 
years), and the amount of rehabilitation determined 
by the rehabilitation strategy for the individual asset 
types. The operational rehabilitation measures 
required for the task should be identified and 
prioritized. 


10.3.1 Risk Based Approach to Evaluate Priority 


The criteria for prioritization should be based on the 
risk emanating from an asset or affecting its 
function. This risk results from the probability of 
occurrence and the consequence of failure. Health 
risks are of particular importance for all 
stakeholders. The drinking water utility should 
consider the risk of: 


a) deficiencies in the level of service (quantity, 
pressure, drinking water quality); 

b) direct added costs; 

c) the resultant negative public perception of a 
failure; and 

d) its image. 


The probability and the extent to which drinking 
water quality is affected can be derived from 
customer complaints, operating experience and 
measured values. 


10.3.2 Risk Assessment 


The risk assessment process should require 
establishment of risk analysis criteria for a risk 
event's likelihood (probability) of failure or 
occurrence and its potential impact (extent of failure 
or disorder). The drinking water utility should define 
utility-specific risk-assessment criteria that support 
a risk evaluation approach capable of producing risk 
evaluation results for each facility. Risk assessment 
criteria can be subdivided into the following groups: 


a) The probability of failure occurrence based 
on: 


1) the failure rate development in a 
component (individual or in aggregate); 


2) the failure rate development in the asset 
type (failure and/or empirical data); 


26 


3) condition data of machinery and 


technical facilities (corrosion, 
cavitation, efficiency, connection type, 
coating); 

4) ambient data (bedding, soil 


corrosiveness, stray currents, traffic 
load, overbuilding); and 

5) knowledge about fluctuating level of 
service. 


b) The probability of occurrence of impairments 
based on operational experience, measured 
values and calculations, and customer 
complaints; and 

c) The extent of failure or disorder in relation to 
cost, hazards to persons, assets (tangible and 
intangible), and environment and drinking 
water utility’s image/public perception. 


10.3.3 Decision Making 


10.3.3.1 A risk assessment process should be 
defined and documented that contains the relevant 
criteria for the relative evaluation of the risks. 
Application of the process will produce data. The 
process should determine how the risk assessment 
should be applied to assets and asset types with both 
similar and dissimilar characteristics. 


10.3.3.2 Each criterion should be applied to asset 
types of equal technical characteristic. The final 
overall evaluation can be attained by comparing the 
individual evaluation results. As this step constitutes 
the most crucial procedure in the process, it should 
be prepared and coordinated with due care. The 
combination of the individual evaluations should 
correctly reflect the weighting of the criteria against 
each other within the same asset type and across 
similar asset types. Sorting the evaluation results and 
yielding the competing priority ranking of the 
rehabilitation measures should be planned for the 
medium term. 


10.3.3.3 When selecting evaluation criteria, care 
should be taken to ensure that information about 
each criterion is available for each component or 
else the evaluation results can be distorted. The 
source and reliability of the information should be 
evaluation process. The absence of information 
should not be a reason for excluding a risk from the 
evaluation process. 


10.3.3.4 The list of competing priorities emerging 
from the evaluation of risks should provide the 
following information about the individual assets or 
asset types as a minimum requirement: 


a) Unambiguous identification of a component 
(technical data); and 


b) Quantitative evaluation (how many points 
have been scored). 


10.3.3.5 The list of competing priorities should be 
compared with the pre-determined strategic 
rehabilitation objectives (attaining a certain level of 
rehabilitation). The list of competing priorities 
should be processed in accordance with the 
rehabilitation strategy. Any deviations from the list 
of competing priorities in the rehabilitation strategy 
should be evaluated and examined for their 
relevance to impacts on the rehabilitation strategy. 
NOTE — A decision on the competing priorities can be 


aided using a risk scoring classification system 
(see Annex B). 


10.3.4 Risk Control 


Subsequent to identified, described, identification, 
description and analysed each risk using a consistent 
set of risk analysis criteria, a drinking water utility 
should evaluate the relative significance of each risk 
compared with the others based on a consistent set 
of evaluation criteria. The evaluation results for the 
entire drinking water supply system or for individual 
components should determine the rehabilitation 
priority ranking of the assets concerned. Risk can be 
expressed by a variety of units. 


NOTES 


1 For rehabilitation strategy, the aspect of risk can be 
considered to a limited extent as the technical evaluation of 
rehabilitation strategy can only analyse and predict the asset 
type-related failure probability. 

2 If failures can be clearly attributed to individual asset 
types and not to individual components, these aspects, too, 
can be considered in the rehabilitation strategy. 

3 All requirements should be completely fulfilled and 
cannot be offset one against another as even low failure 
rates imply a poor quality of drinking water supply and 
high-water losses. 

4 In rehabilitation planning and execution of rehabilitation 
measures, all influencing risk factors can be evaluated by 
reference to the location of the individual assets. 

5 Fig. 6 illustrates the risk-assessment process leading to the 
evaluation of assets' priority for rehabilitation. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


10.4 Operational Plan — Implementation of 
Rehabilitation Measures (short term planning) 


10.4.1 Shorter periods of review require more 
intense work and higher degrees of detailing of the 
respective sub-processes, entailing a higher total 
expenditure in terms of both time and cost. 
Therefore, the drinking water utility should collect 
more precise details of the functioning of the assets. 


10.4.2 The short term rehabilitation measures should 
be designed and implemented considering 
prevailing local conditions. 


10.4.3 Alternative construction technologies should 
be considered when planning the construction 
measures. Simultaneously rehabilitate adjacent 
sections of roughly the same priority ranking to 
achieve economies in the rehabilitation program 
such as energy efficiency, reduction of chemical use 
or reduction of other operating costs. 


10.4.4 Construction measures such as dimensions, 
rehabilitation technology and the rehabilitation 
materials should be defined for the individual asset. 
This should also include quality assurance of 
materials and installation, as well as requirements 
for the executing contractors. 


NOTE — Guidance may also be taken from Operation and 
Maintenance of Water Supply Systems published by 
CPHEEO, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, for the 
preparation of operation and maintenance plan. 


11 DOCUMENTATION AND EFFICIENCY 
REVIEW 


11.1 All major results and decisions should be 
documented to be able to understand the individual 
process steps, from the original strategic approach to 
the final execution of the work. Care should be taken 
in this context to include previous experience with 
such measures and apply it to planning future work. 
The documentation should be safely filed, 
publicized and made accessible. 


Identification® Description 


Risk Assessment 


Estimation 


Evaluation? Strategy Rehabilitation 


Decision Risk Control 


>< >< > 


a: Identification of each risk individually; 


b: Evaluation of all risk relative to one another. 
FIG. 6 PROCESS OF RISK ASSESSMENT, DECISION MAKING AND RISK CONTROL 


IS 18182 : 2023 


11.2 To the extent necessary, the drinking water 
utility should ensure the annual appraisal of the 
following records: 


a) Operation of its processes; 

b) Workforce employed and needed, as per 
schedule; and 

c) Traceability of water/processes causing 
major/minor non-conformity. 


11.3 Awareness can be created among the drinking 
water utility about the importance of upkeeps of 
records. The foremost reason for such situation is the 
lack of reliable records, in the absence of which one 
may be forced to take decisions purely on guess 
work instead of taking decisions based on reliable 
records. 


11.4 Efficiency reviews should be carried out at 
regular intervals including all persons involved in 
the respective processes to be able to adapt the 
rehabilitation strategy and plan. The following 
questions should be addressed during efficiency 
review: 


a) Have the rehabilitation objectives been 
reached; 


b) Have the budget constraints been observed; 


28 


c) Were the rehabilitation techniques and 
materials adequate or were there better 
solutions; 

d) Is there a need to modify any evaluation 
criteria and/or standards; 

e) Was the cost per service or capital spent 
target achieved; 

f) Were the infrastructure asset condition 
indicators accurate and useful; 

g) Do the indicators need to be adjusted; and 

h) Were the rehabilitation works carried out 


without negative impact on the network 
users or the environment. 


In all cases, if the assessment is negative, then the 
question ‘Why not’, if applicable, should be 
answered. 


11.5 The efficiency review should be documented 
clearly and made accessible to the decision makers. 


11.6 The rehabilitation strategy in place should be 
reviewed periodically and modified, if necessary. 


11.7 The current rehabilitation plan should be 
reviewed based on the performance monitoring 
reports, and no less frequently than once per year, 
and modified if necessary. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.1) 
(Informative) 


FURTHER OBJECTIVES OF THE MANAGEMENT OF ASSETS OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY 
SYSTEM 


A-1 Reasons for the management of assets of 
drinking water supply systems include: 


a) drinking water supply systems are exposed 

to risk-carrying internal and external 

interferences impacting water quality and 

security of supply; 

continuous drinking water supply are 

designed to have long service lives; 

c) the absence of maintenance can endanger 

the reputation of and confidence in the 

drinking water utility by causing serious 

deviations from water quality and security 

of service standards, resulting in serious 

damage to third parties; 

the user has a right to demand a service that 

provide of safe drinking water; and 

e) service interruptions should be kept to a 
minimum. 


b 


wm 


d 


wm 


A-2 The management of assets of drinking water 
supply systems should consider the following 
operational and maintenance objectives: 


a) Minimizing environmental impairment; 
b) Causing no detrimental impact to public 
health; 


29 


c) Avoidance of water quality impairments; 

d) Reducing water losses or keeping them low; 

e) Stabilizing the pressure level; 

f) Keeping supply interruptions, especially 
those caused by equipment failure (number 
and duration per user), to a minimum; 


g) Correcting failures and defects within a 
reasonable period; 
h) Optimizing the service life of existing 


systems, while simultaneously maintaining 
service quality; 


j) Maintaining and improving user 
satisfaction; 
k) Optimizing maintenance costs, while 


maintaining the required level of service; 

m) Conserving the existing structure of and 
safeguarding of the quality of the drinking 
water supply system; 

n) Use chemical agents rationally; and 

p) Ensuring the environmental compatibility of 
all measures and activities. 


A-3 The overall objective of the management of 
assets should be to ensure that the drinking water 
utility complies with its service mandate while also 
maintaining a stable economic position. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 5.6.4.7, 10.3.3.5) 
(Informative) 


RISK BASED ASSESSMENT FOR REHABILITATION 


B-1 The provisions set forth in this guideline are 
intended to help attain operation and maintenance 
objectives and prevent any negative consequences 
caused by potential hazards to the security of supply 
(quantity, pressure and quality). 


B-2 IDENTIFICATION OF HAZARD 
Potential hazards can be caused by: 


a) incorrect dimensioning of equipment; 

b) inappropriate choice of materials and 
components; 

c) unsuitable or faulty design or construction 
method; 

d) incorrect repair or maintenance measures 
having contact with drinking water; 

e) poor 
activities; 


commissioning/decommissioning 


f) operating with critical flow conditions 
(flushing); 

g) poor disinfection or secondary disinfection 
in the pipeline network; 

h) inadequate rehabilitation practices; 

j) unsafe treatment concepts; 

k) unsafe distribution concepts; 

m) functional faults and failure of systems and 
components; 

n) unacceptable water pressures; 

p) poor system operational management and/or 
security controls; 

q) impairment caused by environmental 
factors; 

r) poor third-party construction work; 

s) insufficient numbers or qualification of 
staff; 

t) inadequate plant management; 

u) stagnant water; 

v) poor storage of components; 

w) infiltration or feeding of non-potable water; 

x) high water losses; and 

y) frequent failures. 


The hazards resulting from the issues listed above 
can form the basis for further risk assessment. 


30 


B-3 ESTIMATION OF LIKELIHOOD 


The likelihood of failure occurrence can be set by 
following methods according to the collected data: 


B-3.1 Asset Failure Likelihood Estimation by Age 


A preliminary estimation of asset types with a higher 
likelihood of failure can be made by an assessment 
of asset age. For example, by assigning the 
following weighting scores: 


a) 4— Elapsed years of 30 or more to less than 
50; 

b) 3 — Elapsed years of 15 or more to less than 
30; 

c) 2 — Elapsed years of 5 or more to less than 
15; and 

d) 1 — Elapsed years of less than 5. 


B-3.2 Operation and Maintenance Information 


To analyze the facilities and/or areas with high 
possibility of failure by interviewing personnel with 
operation and maintenance experience, consulting 
the operation and maintenance data (data concerning 
facility conditions obtained by inspection and 
repair), consulting data concerning users’ 
complaints, including low water quality, low 
pressure, service interruption, classified by area and 
facility that can be used to estimate likelihood. 


B-3.3 Local Environment 


Likelihood of failure should be estimated based on 
pre-determined characteristics consistently applied, 
for example: 
a) assets under peculiar local conditions and 
environment; 
b) pipe and pumps operated under an unusual 
pressure regime; 
c) areas where complaints and/or unusual cases 
including low water quality, chlorine taste, 
chemical and/or microbiological findings; 


and 

d) component conditions such as material, 
bearing temperature, vibrations, failure 
frequency. 


IS 18182 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Drinking Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Services Sectional Committee, SSD 14 


Organization 
Military Engineer Services, New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering 
Organization, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board, Chennai 

Delhi Jal Board, New Delhi 

Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indian Water Works Association, Mumbai 


Institute of Engineers India, New Delhi 


L&T-Sargent & Lundy Limited, Vadodara 


Maharashtra Jeevan Pradhikaran, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Bengaluru 


Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
SHRI SUNEEL KUMAR ARORA (Chairperson) 


SHRI VISHAL GANDHI 
SHRI DANISH MEENA (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 
SHRIMATI CHAITRA DEVOOR (Alternate I) 


SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL 


SHRI CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD (Alternate) 


DR SUMITA SINGHAL 


Ms N. MANIMEGALAI 
Ms G. MAGARAJOTHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SHARMA 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


Ms MONIKA BAHL 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI PARVEEN KUMAR GOEL 
MS ANTARA DAs (Alternate) 


PROF ARUN KUMAR 
PROF V. ARYA (Alternate) 


DR K. S. HARI PRASAD 
PROF ZULFEQUAR AHMAD (Alternate) 


DR PREETI CHATURVEDI BHARGAVA 
DR SATYAKAM PATNAIK (Alternate) 


SHRI KANWARJIT SINGH 
SHRI J. C. SINGHAL 
SHRI KARTHICK BELLIGUNDU 
SHRI AKASH KUMAR DINESHBHAI 


(Alternate) 


Ms MOHUA SALILKANTI BANERJEE 
Ms PALLAVI P. CHOUGULE (Alternate) 


SHRI PADMANABH MANIYAR 
DR DHARMENDRA KUMAR GUPTA 
Ms BHAWNA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR KUMAR 


31 


SHAH 


IS 18182 : 2023 


Organization 


National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute (NEERI), Nagpur 

National Institute of Disaster 

New Delhi 


Management, 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Public Health Engineering Department, Kolkata 


Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Private Limited, 
Noida 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, 
Gurugram 


In Personal Capacity (House No. 7, Northex, Model 
Town Extension, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (C/o ‘A’ Mess, Near Div Chowk, 
Durpin Dhara, Kalimpong) 


In Personal Capacity, (Flat No 103, H. No.3-3- 
108/Kr/103, SV Enclave, New Friends 
Colony - 2, Attapur, Hyderabad) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR PRANAV NAGARNAIK 
DR P. K. LABHASETWAR (Alternate) 


PROF CHANDAN GHOSH 
PROF AMR ALI KHAN (Alternate I) 
PROF AJINDER WALIA (Alternate II) 


DR MUKESH KUMAR SHARMA 
DR RAJESH SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANTA KOLEY 
SHRI SOUMITRA CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


MS ANUJA ANAND 
SHRI GIRISH CHANDRA MISHRA 
DR SONIA GROVER 

Ms NIYATI SETH (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRI K. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAT JAIN 


SHRI R. S. TYAGI 


CoOL A. K. CHAUBEY 


SHRI RAJESHWAR RAO BANDARI 
SHRI S. K. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 


AND HEAD (SERVICES SECTOR) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
KUMARI PRIYANKA SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(SERVICES SECTOR), BIS 


32 


IS 18182 : 2023 


Panel for drafting standard on Distribution Network and Vocabulary, SSD 14/Panel 3 


Organization 
Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering 


Organization, New Delhi 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Military Engineer Services, Bengaluru 
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 
The Institution of Engineers, New Delhi 


Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, 
Gurugram 


In Personal Capacity, (House No. 7, Northex, Model 
Town Extension, New Delhi) 


33 


Representative(s) 


DR RAMAKANT (Convener) 


DR PREETI CHATURVEDI BHARGAVA 


SHRI PADMANABH MANIYAR 


DR RAJESH SINGH 


SHRI J. C. SINGHAL 


SHRI RAJAT JAIN 


SHRIR. S. TYAGI 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD 14 (19365). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


