I8 : 1382 - 1881
( Reaffirmed 1998 )

hiiun Stan&d

F&"Repriat

AUGUST `1990

mc

666'1: owa

Indian Standard

_
.

--, * GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO GLASS AND GLASSWARE

( First Revision )
Glassware Sectional,Committee, CDC 10 chahan
DRS.KUMAR Centra~ra~Jig'&Ceramic Rcmrch Intihttc ( CSIR )

-

M#mbem DR K. P. SRIVAIITAVA (Memok to Dr S. Kumar ) Hindustan Safety Class Works Ltd, Calcutta SRRI P. N. AUARWAL SERI P. K. AQARWAL ( Altmotr ) Smu K. K. SARAN AGOARWAL Dcve~lownen~ommisoioner, Small Scale Industria, SXRI S. K. WADXWANBY ( Altemats) Alcmbic Glass Indurtria Ltd, Vadh C. G. AYIN Directorate General of Technical ~DweloP~t, SRRI N. G. BMAK Delhi Saru I. K. KAPUR( Afhrnatr) Victory Flask Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay `!hu V. R. BHIDB Wine Institute, Bombay DR K. H. DAVR SERI P. S. mAVAN ( Al&m&) Ministry of Railwaya D~JTY DIIUHXOR STANDARDI RDSO, p.Qg~ I- 11,
SERI

NM

Ministry of Defencc ( DGI ) Saiu NARENDRA SIN~H (Altmnala) J. G. G1a.wIndrutria Pvt, Pune SIXES S. K. GUPTA SZKRI A. B. KARANDXICAR (Al&ma& ) Hindustan Pilkiugton Glaaa Works Ltd, CMcu@ta SERIS. P. GUPTA Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta Smu C. K. MRHROTRA SARI0. P. DHAMIJA ( Afh~~tr ) National Building Orgauization, New Delhi DR A. V. R RAO SERI JOXAR SBN GUPTA ( Ahmufr )
DR S. P. Suwn DHA~AR~Y (-*)yrz) 8 Copyr&hI 1982 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Thir publication is protected under the Indim Copvri#ht Act (XIV of 1957) md reproduction in whole or in part by gnu means except with writtenpermission of the .pWbaa shall k deemed to be an infrinpemcnt of copyright uodor the mid Act. 1

IS::1382-1981 (Contiau8dj~~m pug8 1)
hfolnbws w* Hindustan Vacuum Glass Ltd, Faridabad SRI: R. SA~AX sslr s. c. SHAllUA( Alt#ma& ) Indo-As&i Glass Co Ltd, Calcutta Ssrr K. SlillilZU &RI S. B. PRAUD ( Ahtalr) Manufacturers Association, Indian Chemical SEm u . v. Sxnas Calcutta Hindustan National Glass & Industries Ltd, SRRI C. K. SOMANY Calcutta SEN R. K. GUPTA ( Alfmalr) Sang B. M. ROY ( Al&matr) Shree Vallabh Glass Works Ltd, Bombay Sssw C. K. TAICTAWALA Snas HEMANTC. PATEL ( Ahrnak ) Director Genaral, IS1 ( Ex-o&i0 M&n) DR HAN BHAOWAN, DlalcroR(CHeu) Sunfa~ SHRX ANJAN ICAR Deputy Director ( Chem), IS1

General Glass Subcommittee
SHRI K.

CDC 10 : 4

H. PAIllXR

Vazir Glass Works Ltd, Bombay

wmbars Snnx S. D. MARKSTZASI ( Allrrnatr to Shri K. H. Parikh ) Dcvclo~~cDntst~mmissioner, SHRI G. C. AOARWAL
SNRI C.

Small Scale Industries,

G. AWN

. SHRII. K. KAPUR( Alftrnott ) Ssmx V. R. BHIDB DZPUIYSUPERINTSNDENT SHRI R. N. Grr~,mr Snm N. C. Boss ( Altwo )

Snni N. G. BAIIAX

Alcmbic Glass Industries Ltd, Vadodara Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi Victory Flask Co Pvr Ltd. Bombay Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Rishikesh Ministry of Defencc ( DGI )

J. G. Glass Industries Ltd, Pune SHRI 0. S. JOHAR Ssxm 0. N. TANDON ( Ahrnalr ) DRJ. MLUURJI DR K. P. SRIVABTAVA ( Altern&)
Senr J, L. MUXWERJBX Snap R. C. PALHAN ( Al~urnatr) SHRZM. V. NADMRNI SURIS. B. PHADKZ ( Allrmafr)

Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute ( CSIR), Calcutta Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd, Pimpri ( Conriawd on PopI 57 )

2

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO GLASS AND GLASSWARE

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This standard was adopted by the India0 Standards' Institution on 30 December 1981, after the draft finalixed by the Glassware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1961, under the title Glossary of terms relating to glass industry'. However, the Committee responsible for the preparation of the standard decided to revise it taking into consideration that a number of new terms have come to be used in the glass industry and needed incorporation in the glossary to make it comprehensive. In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived'from the following publications: C 162-71 Standard definitions of terms relatiog to glass and glass products. American Society for Testing and Materials, USA. ISO/DIS/4791/1 Laboratory apparatus - Vacabulary for terminology relating to apparatus made essentially from glass, procelain or vitreous silica : Part I Names for items for apparatus. International Organixation for Standardization ( IS0 ). ISO/DP/7086/1 Glass and glass-ceiamicware intended to come into contact with food - Release of toxic materials - lead and cadmium : Part I Method of test. International Organization for Standardization (IS0 ).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the terms and definitions relating to glass, giassware and related products.

1.2 This standard does not cover terms related to glass containers their defects. 3

and

-xS:1382-1981 A Acid Poliahiog - The polishing of a glass surface by acid treatment. Air ReRs - Bubbles of irregular shape formed generally during the pressing or moulding operations in the manufacture of optical glass. Air Line-A greatly elongated, bubble of small cross-section, usually exceeding 25 mm in length, -occurring in tubing, rod or drawn flat glass. Alao" . Glass -A milky-white glass that difuses light without fiery

Alcove - A narrow channel to convey molten glass from refiner to forehearth, or to the revolving pot where it is gathered by the Owens machine. ARtall - The oxides of sodium or potassium; less frequently of lithium. AIkaRnity - A measure of the alkali extracted from specified conditions. the glass under

Amber Glass - Glass varying in colour between light yellowish-brown and deep reddish-brown. Amporde - A glass container designed to be Wed and sealed by fusion of the glass neck. Angular Cut -See W&of-!3qmre End'. AmmUng -A process to prevent or remove objectionable stresses in' glass~glassware by controlled heating at and/or cooling from a suitable temperature. AnneaRl Point - The temperature at which internal stresses disappear rapidly without deformation of the glass. It is also termed as upper annealing point. It corresponds to the equilibrium temperature at which the glass has a viscosity of 101s.' poises ( see also Wraio POW ).
Annealing Range -

The range of glass temperature in which stresses in glass articles can be relieved at a commercially desirable rate. For purposes of comparing glasses, the annealing range is assumed to correspond with the temperature between the annealing point ( AP) and the strain point ( StP ). Antimony ( Sb,O, ) - An industrial term for antimony trioxide used as a refining agent.
Arch -

A part of a furnace; a crown. An industrial term for arsenic trioxide used as a refmmg .4

Araenic(A,Os)agent-

B Back Wall - The uharging end wall of a glass-melting furnace. $~~kn~butiou
.

- Deviation from the intended distribution. of wall

Badging - Marking of glass,or glassware to indicate capacity or ownerships or for other purposes, for example; trade-mark; also termed `Labelling'. BafUe- The part of a blank mould which `sealsthe delivery or batae h&e.Badle Mark a) hiark or seam on glass container resulting from a mould. joint, between blank mould and batIIe plate. b):. A seam on the base corresponding to the joint of the batlIe plate. BatUeWall - A wall used to deflect gases or games in a furnace structure, Bait- The tool dipped into molten glass to start any drawing operation.. B8riwn crown hss -An quantity of barium oxide. optical crown glass containing a substantial

Barium Flint Glass - An optical flint glass containing a substantial quantity of barium oxide. Base - The bottom of a container. Basic Fibre - Unprocessed glass fibres directly from the forming equipment. p~ct~E;w materials, properly proportioned and mixed, for cl&w&
.

Bat& Charger - A mechanical device for introducing batch to the fum&. Batch Feeder - See `B&b Charger'. Batch House -The place where batoh materials are received, handled, weighed, and mixed for delivery to melting units. Batch Stems- Incompletely dissolved material from the glass making
batch.

Bead a) A small piece of glass rod or tubing fused round a wire. b) An enlarged, rounded edge of a glass article, or any raised section extended around the article. c) A small piece of glass,. solid. or hollow, of a given shape; for instance, beads used for jewellery. 5

IS :1382-1981
BedIng -

See `Bead' (b).

Bearer Areh - One of a series of arches that support the checkerwork in regenerator.
Belt Marks -

Marks made on the bottom of glass articles as they ride through the lehr on a chain belt slightly over-heated.

Be& - Floor of a pot furnace ( see also `Siege' ).
.

Bench Worker -A worker who forms glassware from tubing or rod by heating in a gas flame at a work bench, also called `Table Blower', `Blow Pipe Worker', `Lamp Woker' and `Glass Blower'. Bend - See `Bow'. Bending - The manipulation while hot of all or part of a flat glass to form curved shapes.
Bent Glass - Flat glass that has been shaped while hot into cylindrical or

other curved shapes.
Bent Neck - A neck which has been bent so that its axis no longer lies in the intended direction.

Bevelling - The process of edge finishing flat glass to a bevel angle. Bicheroux Process - An intermittent process of making plate glass in which the gIass is cast between rollers on to driven conveyor roller or a flat moving table. Birdcage - A thread of glass joining two points on opposite internal faces of an article. Black Glass - A dark coloured glass having little or no visible transmission. Black Spec - An almost insoluble grain of very dark coloured mineral coming from certain refractories or impurities in the raw materials. Blank a) A parison or preliminary shape from which a finished article is further formed; or mould for producing the same. b) Any article of glass on which subsequent forming or finishing is required. Blanks - Optical glass formed by pressing into the rough shape and_ size required in the finished, article, also called `Pressings'.
Blanket Feed - A method for charging batch designed to produce an even idstribution'of batch across the width of the furnace.

6

ls : 1382 - 1981 Blank Mould - The metal mould that first, shapes the glass in the manufacture of hollow ware. Blending Batch - Step-wise changes in batch composition to arrive at final change in finished glass.

Blib, Rlibe - An elongated bubble.' Blisters - Relatively large bubbles or gaseous inclusions. Bleach - An imperfection resulting from incompletely finding plate glass, caused by a low place in the plate which retains part of the original rough ,I surface. Blob - See `Hang Up'.
Blobby Line - Graduation line starting or ending in a thickend blob.

Block a) Refractory block any large piece of refractory. b) Hollow translucent glass units having various patterns moulded on their interior, exterior or on both surfaces. c) A lump of glass used for remelting for making generally bangles or beads.
Blocking

metal. The process of stirring and fining glass by immersion of a wooden b) block or other source of bubbles. 4 The process of reprocessing to remove surface imperfections. 4 The mounting of optical glass blanks in a shell for grinding and polishing operations. e) The process wherein a furnace is idled at reduced temperatures. f) The process of setting refractory blocks in a furnace. Block Mould - A one-piece mould. Block Reek, Rake -A, polishing operation.
Bloom a) A surface film resulting from attack .by the atmosphere or from W A surface film caused by slight chemical attack.

a) The process of shaping a gather of glass in a cavity of wood or

scratch imperfection caused by cullet lodged in the

the &position of smoke or other vapours ( see also `Smoked'). This film can be removed by Washing. 7

a) Application to optical glass lenses of a non-reflecting film to reduce light scattering and back reflection. _ b) Generally etching-of an inadequately protected surface. Blow-and-Blow Process - A process of forming hollow-ware in which both the preliminary and final shapes are formed by air pressure. BIower - One who forms glass by blowing ( see also `Gaffer ). Blow Head-Part of a forming machine serving to introduce air under pressure to blow any hollow glass as article. Blow Monld - The metal mould in which a blawn glass article is finally shaped. Blow-over - The thin-walled bubble formed above a blow mould in handshop operation to facilitate bursting off. Blow Pipe a) The iron pipe used by a glass maker for gathering and blowing by mouth, also called `Blowingtion'. b) The burner used for working glass at a bench. Blowing Iron - See `Blow Pipe (a)`. Blown Away,- Deficiency of glass in the neck of an internal bottle (see also 6Hollow Neck'). screw-neck

Biown Glassware - Glassware formed by air pressure produced by mouth or by a machine. Body- The attribute to molten glass, associated homogeneity, which is conductive to workability. with viscosity and

Body Mould- The part of a mould which forms the outer surface of a pressed glass article. Boil a) An imperfection consisting of a gaseous inclusion larger in size than seed; small bubbles. b) The commotion caused by gases escaping from the melting batch. Booat Melting - See `Electric Boosting'. Boostiog - An auxiliary method of heating in a glass furnace, for example, by passing an electric current through the molten glass, or by using an auxiliary burner. Boot - A suspended enclosure in the nose of a tank protecting a portion of the surface and serving as a gathering opening. 8

IS:m2-1981 Borate Glnss - A glass in which the essential ghw former i8 boric .Oxida ( B,Oa) instead of silica. Borax Glum - Vitreous anhydrous sodium tetraborate (N@,O& Bare- The internal diameter of a g&m tube or the neck of a glass container. BorosiliCate Crown Ghss -An optical crown gla88 containing 8ub8tantiti quantities of silica and boric oxide. Borosilicate GInss - 4 silicate glass having a sufficient amount of boric oxide ( B,O,) to influence its properties, in particular producing hi& chemical and thermal re8i8tance8. Jhumee - See `R&en w. Row - Accidental departum from straightness in rod or tubing. Bowl - See `SpouV. -

WrcrrotWdl a) The entire side wall of a furnace between the flux block and the crown, but not including the ends. b) Refractory wall between pillars of a pot furnace and in front of, or surrounding the front of a pot. Breezing - Buckwheat before setting of pots. anthracite coal or coarse sand spread on siege

Bridge - The structure formed by the end walls of the adjaant melter and refiner compartments of a tank and the covers spanning the gap between the bridge walls. Bridge Wall - That part of a glass melting furnace forming a bridge of or separation between melter and ret&r. Bridge ( WIllI ) Cover- Refractory bridge walls. Broken Lose -See `Broken Ring'. blocks spanning the space betw$en /

Briglit Pat& - A patch accidentally not ground on a ground surface. Broken Ring -+he `dotted' character of a graduation line caused by the scriber bouncing and removing insufficient wax resist before etching. Broken Seed - A bubble, near the surface of the glass, the wall of which ha8 been broken, most often during grinding. )IrobeLoCahZed 8urf'ace crack, often star-shaped, cau8ed by impact. 9

IS i 13fu- 1981 Brush Marks a) A series of fine vertical laps on the outside surface of a bottle. b) Fine parallel lines or laps running vertically on the external surface; similar in size and spacing to those left by a paint brush. Bubble a) Gaseous inclusion more than 0.5 mm. b) A gaseous inclusion in the glass; generally spherical in shape but may be deformed in many ways during feeding ( to the forming machine ) or fabrication. Buck - A dead plate. Bulb Blower - A worker who blows glass into a mould. Bulb Edge - The heavy rounded edge or bead of sheet-drawn glass. Buldged Finish a) A finish blown out so that the closure will not fit. b) The mouth of an article blown out so that the closure will not fit. Bulged Sides -Sides of an article bulged outwards. Bull's Eye a) A thick lens or round piece of glass. b) Irregularity in thickness in the form of a convex lens, often in the base. Burner a) See `Port'. b) A burner like Bunsen burner, blow pipe burner, fish tail burner, etc, used also for table blowing. A burner for oil or gas heating furnaces. c) Burner Block - Refractory block with one or more orifices through'which fuel is admitted to a furnace. Burn Off - The process of severing an unwanted portion of a glass article by fusing the glass. Burnt Lime - Calciaed limestone; CaO, MgO (dolomitic ), or CaO ( calcitic ), or a mixture of these. Burnt Mould - Discoloration
mould .

or dulling due to local overheating of the

Bursting Off - Breaking off a blown article from the end of the blow pipe.
Bursting Pressure -

The internal pressure at which a glass container breaks,
10

Is:13&2-1981
_

Bush - See 60rltlce'. Bushing - A liner in the orifice of any fee&r for molten glass; for example, the orifice ring of a gob feeder, or the unit through which molten glass IS drawn in making glass fibres. BIlttoU a) A portion of a piece of pressed ware so designed that it is possible to knock it off to make a hole. b) The portion at which a glass article is broken off from the pipe. c) A small mass of molten glass stuck either on to the glass article or the pipe for further manipulation. Bye-Hole - See `Observation Hole'. C Calibration -The ware. process of checking the accuracy of graduated glass-

Calibrator - A person who checks the accuracy appropriate instruments.

of glass articles with

Camel Back - A constriction in capillary tubing for thermometer (see also X%oke'). Cameo - Glass of more than one layer of different colours, the top layers being carved in relief. Campaign- The working life of a tank between major repairs which involve the cooling down of the tank to room temperature. Canal -The part of a tank leading from the relatively wide fining area to the machine. Cane - Solid glass rods.

Cap
a) Another name for crown. b) To cut off the ends of a glass cylinder. c) A type of bottle closure. Cap Se& - The ledge inside the mouth of a milk bottle. Carboy - Large narrow necket &ss container, usually a ballon shape but sometimes more of a cylindrical shape having a capacity of more than 20 litres. Carry-in - Manual lehr loading.
1.l

IS : 13a - 1981

*

Cased Glass - Glassware whose surface layer has different composition

from that of the main glass body.
Casehardened- A term sometimes used for tempered glass ( see `Tempered Ghss'). _ Caammt Wall See 6RmmM W8U (a)`. Cabs& Wall - See `Breast Wall (ay. Cas#img - A process of shaping glass by pouring hot glass into moulds or

onto tables or moulds.
Cat% Eye

a) An imperfection; an elongated bubble containing a piece of foreign matter. d) * crescent-shaped blister. Cat &rat& - An imperfection; surface irregularities on glassware resembling the marks of a cat's claws. Center&g-- The operation on lens elements wherein the element is optic&y lined.up with the axis, of rotation and the edges ground concentric with the optical axis.
Cbah Marks --Sre C!lmp Over -

`ReJt M8rW.

See `Revemd'.

Chmd - That part of a forehearth which carries the glass from the tank to the fiow spout and in which temperature adjustments are made.

chrge - The glassforming mixture for melting
Chttm - See. LRrokeu Ripg'. a) An imperfection; a surface crack in a glass article. b) A he, short surface crack caused by contact between hot glass and a cooler surface.
Check Marks See `Check'. .

Checker Rricks - Refractory pieces used for packing a regenerator, also

caRed Checker Tiles'.

Checker Tiles - See `Checker &i&s'. 12

Is : 1382- 1981

Checkers a) The refractory bricks, alternating with openings, in the chambers of a regenerztive furnace. b) The regenerator built in such a fashion. c) The refractory pieces used in such a fashion. Chemical Durability of a glass surface. It or storing, iti terms of or in terms of changes The lasting quality (both physical and chemical) is frequently evaluated, after prolonged weathermg chemical and physical changes in the glass surface, in the contents of a vessel.

Chemical Glass - A chemically durable glass suitable for use in making laboratory apparatus., Chicken Boost - See `Birdcage'. Chill Mark - A wrinkled surface condition on glassware resulting from uneven cooling in the forming process. Chip a) An imperfection due to breakage of a small fragment out of an otherwise regular surface. b) A small fragment of glass broken from the surface by mechanical action. Chipped Glass - A glass article with chipped surface produced intentially. Chipping - The process of removing thin extra glass prior to grinding. Choke a) An imperfection consisting of an insufficient opening in $$he finish and neck of a container. b) A contriction in the bore. Chunk Glass -Optical glass. glass obtained in breaking open a pot of transfer

Chunks - Random sizes of glass sheets that are smaller than standard sizes of stocksheets. Clear Glass - Transparent glass. Close Graduation-Scale in which the first short line is too close to its adjacent long line in a group (caused by faulty machine setting). Closed Pot - A pot ma& with a roof to protect the contents from flames and combustion gases in the furnace and with a mouth for removal of molten glass, also called `Covered Pot' or `Hooded Pot'.

13

Is :1m-1981 Cobalt ( Co0 ) - An industrial term for cobalt oxide. Colhum Sheet Process - A method of making sheet glass by bending the vertically drawn sheet over a driven roller which determines the rate (definition ) of draw. Colonriog Agent -Batch produced. constituent .used to give colour negligibly to the glass of

,Coloorless Glass - A glass which absorbs visible radiation.

small amount

Compact - To treat glass in a manner, such as by heat treatment to approach maximum density. Concave Bottom - Undue concavity of base. Conditioning Zone - Part of the feeder, away from the furnace wall, where the glass is conditioned at a required working temperature, also called `Normalizing Zone'. Conicity - Conical taper of an article which should be cylindrical. Constriction - See `Choke'. Container - General term applied to glass bottles and jars. Continuous Filament - See `Fibre'. Continuous Tank - A glass furnace in which the level of glass remains constant because the feeding of batch continuously replaces the glass withdrawn. Covex Bottom - Undue convexity of base. Cooling Down Period a) The time elapsing after a covered pot is opened before the glass is cool enough to work. b) ;;Gatebetween fining stage and the removal of the glass from the Cooling Rate - See Y3etting Rate'. __-Cord a) An attenuated glassy inclusion possessing optical and other properties differing from those of the surrounding glass. b). Very obvious and relatively thick thread of glass, sometime standing out from the surface. CorriWiollChemical attack of the surface. Covered Pot - See `Closed Pot'. 14

Is:1382-1981 Cracking Off - Breaking off a glass article from the mould, for example, by scratching and then heating. Crackled - Glassware, the surface of which has been intentionally cracked by water immersion and partially healed by reheating, before final shaping. Crack-Off-The process of severing a glass article by breaking, as by scratching and then by heating. Grizzle - An imperfection fractures. in the form of a multitude of fine surface

Creekes Glass - A glass having low transmission for ultraviolet light, and containing cerium and other rare earths. Cross-Fired Furnace - See `Side-Fired Famace'. Crowa - The part of a furnace forming the top or roof. Crown Flint Glass - An optical crown glass bordering on optical flint glass because of the addition of a substantial content of lead oxide and with somewhat higher dispersion than optical crown glass. Crown Glass a) A transparent glass made in disc form by blowing and spinning. Crown glass has a natural fire-finished surface but it is of varying thickness with a slight convexity and so gives a marked degree of distortion of vision and reflection. b) A type of optical glass not containing lead among its constituents and having low dispersion and usually low in refractive index. Crown Optical Glass -An optical glass with a low dispersion and low index of refraction, usually forming the converging element of an optical system (see also `Optical Crown Glass'). Crush - A lightly pitted area resulting in a dull grey appearance over the region. Crystal Glass - A colourless glass, highly `transparent, art or table ware. frequently used fcr

Cpllet a) A waste or broken glass, usually suitable as an addition to raw batch. b) Domestic cullet (factory cullet); cullet from within the plant. c) Foreign cullet; cullet from an outside source. d) I'Se portion of a glass article that will later be cut off and disca. led or remelted. Cutlet Cut - Synonymous witri 6Block Reek'. 15

IS:l382-l981
Curtaia Wall -See `BaHe Wall'.

Cat Glass-Glassware decorated by grinding figure or patterns on its surface with an abrasive wheel, followed by polishing, aiso called `Deep Cut'. Cat-Off Mark - See %earing Mark'. Cat Sizes - Any flat glass cut to specific dimensions. Catter

a) A worker who cuts flat glass to the required size.
b) A tool used in cutting glass. c) A workman engaged in grinding designs. on glass. CIltting

a) Scoring flat glass with a diamond or a steel wheel, and breaking
it along the scratch. b) Producing cut glass. Cycle - In open-pot practice, the time between the first filling of batch and the emptying of the pot. Cylinder Process - A process for' manufacture of window glass wherein molten glass is blown and drawn into the form of a cylinder, which is aubaequently split longitudinally, reheated in a flattening kiln, and flattened. D Damper - The contrivance which controls the flow of gases. Damer Process -A mechanical process for continuously. drawing glass cane or tubing from a rotating mandrel. Day Tank - A periodic melting unit, usually designed to be emptied by each day of hand-gathering. Dead Plate - In automatic production, .a stationery plate receiving a @ass article awaiting transfer. Dqbitease - A slotted, floating clay block through which glass issues in the Fourcault process.

Decolorizer - A substance or mixture of substances added to the batch for
counteracting the colouring effect of impurities. Its action is either phyaical (by imparting the colour complementary to that of the impurity), or chemical (for example, by oxidation). Decelorlxiag - The process of producing a colourlessappearance In glass. 16

IS:l382-1981 Decorated - Glass to which a process of decoration has been applied. Deeorating a) The firing of enamels on glassware. bj Applying designs to formed glassware by means of etching, sand blasting, cutting, engraving or similar methods. Deeorator - A craftsman who decorates glassware by silk screen, transfer, spraying colour, brush or pallette knife or by cutting, also called `Engraver'. Deep Cut - See `Cat Glass'. Deformation Point - The temperature observed during the measurement of expansivity by the interferometer method at which viscous flow exactly counteracts thermal expansion. The deformation point generally corresponds to a viscosity in the range from 10" to 101spoises. Deiivery a) The final act of any glass forming unit on a particular article, consisting of motion to remove the article from the mould. b) The irocess or equipment used for directing charges or gobs of glass to a forming machine. ri Demi-crystal Glass - See 6&stal Glass'.
Dense -

In optical glass, the sub-class of a higher index of refraction.

*'

Devitrikation - Crystallization in glass. Dice - Approximately brokeu.
Dimming -

cubical fragments formed when toughened glass is

Digs - Deep, short scratches. A whitish surface Urn being a further stage of bloom; it cannot be removed without damaging the surface. Furnace - A melting furnace having neither recuperator nor
:j

D&et-Fired regenerator,
Dirt -

A small particle of foreign matter embedded in the glass surface. scaly or rough appearance of a finish, sometimes with

Dirty Fllsb -A .black spots.

D&coloration-A fault in pulled jets where a whitish or blackish deposit becomes fused into the glass during prolonged heating while drawing.
aho 4R-vaIue' aad `Na-value').

Dispe@en -Variation

of refractive index with wave length of light (see 17

Is : 1381-1981 Distortion a) An optical effect due to variation of thickness of sheet glass. b) An optical effect due to uneven wall thickness, uneven surfaces or inhomogeneities in the glass. Distribution - The thickness of the walls of a glass article over its entire area. ~~;~~~ Glass - An ultraviolet
.

absorbing

glass used for

protecting

Dog Hole - See Throat'. Dog House - A small box like vertibule on a glass furnace into which the batch is fed or which facilitates the introduction and removal of floaters. Dolomite - A mineral having the empirical composition, 1 mole of calcium carbonate and 1 mole of magesium carbonate. Dope - Slang for mould lubricant. Dope Mark - A dark mark on the surface, being the residue of mould lubricants. Double-Cavity Mould - A mould possessing two cavities for simultaneous fabrication of two articles of glass. Double-Cavify Process - Any glass-forming process that uses two charges of glass and forms them simultaneously. Double-Gob Process - See `Double-Cavity Process'. Down Draw - Process of continuously from an orifice. Down Draw Process -A downwards. Drag Ladle-To water. Dragade -See drawing glass tubing downwards drawing glass turning

process of continuously

produce cullet by ladling glass from the melt into' the `Drag Ladle'.

Dragaded C&et - See `Quenched Gullet'. Draw - The quantity of glass delivered by a furnace in a given time of 24 hours, also called `Load', `Output' or `Pull'. Draw Bar - A submerged refactory block used to define the position of sheet glass during drawing. Draw Gang - Group of men employed to cut and handle glass as it comes from the lehr.
18

IS :1382-1981
Drawn Glass - Glass, usually in sheet form made by a continuously mechanical drawing operation. Drop Throat - See `Submarine Throat'. Droplets - See `Tear Drop'. Dropped Throat - A throat, the bottom of which is below the level of the melting end of the tank, also called Submerged Throat' or `Sunken Throat'. Dropping - Forming of glass by heating in a mould without the use of pressure. Dry Gage - See `Drag Ladle'. ,Dry Joint - A fragile seal caused by insufficient heating. Dummy - A mechanical device, operated by the blower's feet, for wetting, raising, opening and closing the paste mould in mouth-blowing operations. Durability - See cChemical Durability' and `Weathering'. E Edge-polished - Usually applied to flat glass, the edges of which have been polished after cutting. Edging - Grinding the edge of flat glass, to a desired shape or size (see also `Centering ). Eggshell - Excessive thinness of a blown bulb. Electric Boosting - An auxiliary method of adding heat to the glass in a gas or oil-fired tank by passing electric current through the molten glass. JZmboasing- Marking or decorating glassware by raised lettering or devices formed in the mould by blowing or pressing ( see also `Acid Embossing'). Enamel Back - A glass tubing or rod in which an interlayer of opal glass , is fused in. E&Fired Furnace - A furnace with fuel supplied from the end wall. End-Pod Furnace - A furnace with ports for fuel and air in the end wall. Engravedwheel.' Jhgraver a) A craftsman who engraves glass-forming moulds with lettering or other devices. b) See `Decorator'. -.__ 19 Glass upon which a pattern has been incised with abrasive

rs:1382-1981
.

Engraving-The abrasive means.

process of carving figures, letters, etc, upon glass by

Etch - To attack the surface of glass with hydrofluoric acid or other agent, generally for marking or decoration. Etehed a) Treated by etching. b) Weathered so that surface is roughened. Etching -Treating the surface of glass with hydrofluoric acid or some other chemical, generally for marking or decoration, also called `Acid Etching*. Eye - The opening in the bottom of a pot furnace through which the flame enters.
F

Fade a) Attack on the surface of glass causing an oily or whitish surface. b) Decrease in transparency or reflectivity, or colour intensity of glass. Feathers - An imperfection consisting of clusters of fine seeds caused by dirt or foreign material entering the glass at the time of casting or shaping.
lhder - A mechanical device for regularly producing and delivering gobs of glass to a forming unit.

Feeder Channel - Refractory channel between the working end of a furitace and the feeder. Feeder Conaeetion - The opening or surrounding blocks in a furnace well to receive the channel leading to the feeder. Feeder Gateorifice. A piece of refractory material lowered into the feeder

Feeder Nose - A refractory block of special shape containing the orifice forming the delivery end of the feeder. Feeder Opening - See `Feeder Connection'. Feeder Plunger - A reciprocating refractory plunger above a feeder orifice. Feeder Process - See `Gob Process'. Rbre - An individual filament made by attenuating molten glass. A continuous filament is a glass fibre of great or indefinite length. A staple fiber is a glass fibre of relatively short length ( generally less than 432 mm ). 20

Is:1382-1981 E"lgmed Glass - Flat glass having a pattern on one or both surfaces. Figared Rolled Glass - A translucent rolled glass having a pattern on one or both surfaces.
Fill -

The unit charge of batch into a tank or pot. level up to which a glass bottle has the nominal

Filling - See `Patching'. Filliag Point -The capacity. Fin a) An imperfection caused by entrance of glass into a seam between mould parts during forming. b) A thin projection on the surface or edge, often produced by penetration of glass into the mould joint. Fine Aaaesliagof refraction. Annealing to an extremely low stress and uniform index

Fiae Seed - A bubble of size less than @2 mm., Fining - The process by which the molten glass approaches freedom from undissolved gases. FiaiSik a) The part of a bottle for holding the cap or closure. b) Stage in melting process after glass appears free of seeds. FiGsher a) Person having charge of a furnace during the melting and fining of the glass. b) The workman who does the final work, such as polishing or putting the handle on foot on a piece of ware. Fire Cracks - Cracks in ware caused by local temperature shock. Eire Finish - To make glass surface smooth and glossy by heating usually in a flame, also called `Fire Polish'. Fire `Over - To allow a melting unit to idle at operating temperature. Fire Polish - Tc make glass smooth, rounded, or glossy by heating in a fire. Fired On - A term used to describe permanent application to the glass surface of enamels, transfers, metallic stains; etc, by heat treatment. First side - The surface of plate which is ground and polished first. 21

IS : 138111981

Flakes - Fragements of glass from an overblown bulb which become fused to an assembled apparatus. Flaking-Peeling of a skin from the surface, usually as a result of corrosion and sometimes leaving the glass iridescent. Flame-Proof Glass - See `Heat Resisting Glass'. Flamming - See `Striking'. Flanged Bottom - An imperfection; an offset bottom of a bottle. Flash - See `Fin'. Flashing a) Applying a thin layer of glass to the surface of a glass of a different colour in the forming stage. b) See `Striking'. Flat Drawn Process -A process in which a sheet of glass is drawn from bath of molten glass and is passed between coolers to control thickness.
Flat Glass - A general term covering sheet glass, float glass, and various

forms of rolled and plate glass. Flat Spot - A flat region on a surface which should be curved. Flatterer's Assistant - See `Pusher'. Flatware - Articles having internal depth not exceeding 25 mm, measured from the lowest point to the horizontal plane passing through the overflow point. Flies - Very small, often superficial cracks arising from internal strain. FM Glass a) A lead-containing glass. b) Term used by container industry for colourless glass. Flint Optical Glass - Au optical glass containing lead oxide and usually with a high dispersion and high index of refraction. Float Glass -A form of flat glass produced by reheating the continuous -ribbon of glass whilst it floats over a bath of molten metal.
Float Glass Process A process in which a ribbon of hot glass is floated upon a heated liquid of greater density than that of glass, to produce a transparent glass, the two surfaces of which are flat, parallel and fire polished so that they give clear, undistorted vision and reflection. Floater -Floating

clay shape to skim foreign materials or control their 22

passage in a furnace.

IS : 1382 - 1981 Floater Hole - An opening in a tank through which ffoaters are placed. Flow Hole - See `Throat'. Flow Line - See `Chill Mark'. Flow Process - See `Gob Process'. Flour Crown Glass - An optical crown glass containing a substantial quantity of fluorine and having a very low index of refraction and low dispersion. Flush - See `Fin'. Flux - A substance added to the batch to promote fusion. Flux Block-A melting. refractory furnace block used in contact with glass in

Flux Line - The level of the molten glass surface in a tank, also the boundary line between unmelted batch and clear glass in a tank. Flux Line Block - The top course of refractory walls of a tank. blocks, forming the side

Foam - A layer of bubbles on the surface of molten glass. Foam Glass - A light weight multi-cellular glass having a homogeneous mass of sealed cells. Foam Line - Line in tank dividing foam-covered areas from clear area. Fold - See `Lap'. produced from glass and glass-ceramic which are Foodware -Articles intended to be used for the preparation, cooking, serving and storage of food or drinks including packaging ware. Foot Blower - A device operated by foot for supplying air. Forehearth - A section of a furnace, in one of several forms, from which glass is taken for forming. Forming - The shaping of hot glass. Forming Hood - The &amber of the forming equipment, in which glass fibres are formed and collected. Forming Rolls - Rolls used in forming flat glass. Fonrcault Process - The method of making &eet glass by drawing glass vertically upward through a slotted debiteuse block. Free-Blown - See `Offhand Glass'. 23

xs:1382-1981
Frit - Calcined or partly fused materials which are subsequently melted to glassy stage. Fritting Zone - See C3oakiag Area'. Frosted Surface treated to-scatter light to simulate frost. Frosted Finish - A finish having areas of numerous checks, particularly on the lip, which thus appears frosted. Frosting - See `Blooming'. Fosed Silica - See `Quartz Glass'. Fusion a) ,Joining by heating. b) Remelting for bead making. c) See `Melting'. G Gable Wall - The charging end wall of a glass-melting furnace. Gaffer - Head workman, foreman, or blower of a glass hand shop. Gall - Layer of molten sulphates floating upon glass in a furnace, also called `Salt Water'.' Gaseoos Inclusions Elongated bubbles in sheet glass. Gate - A refractory slab lowered in the forehearth channel for shutting off the fEow of glass. Gather a) The mass of glass picked up on the blowing iron or fiunty. b) To collect glass from a pot or tank at the end of a blowing iron or punty. Gatherer-- A worker who collects molten glass on the end of a blow1 iron or punty preparatory to blowing, pressing or drawing. Georgian - See 6Wired Glass'. G&s - An inorganic, non-metallic material produced by the complete fusion of raw materials at high temperatures, into a homogeneous liquid which is then cooled .to a rigid condition essentially without crystallization.
It may NOTE - Glass is typicaliy hard and brittle, and has a conchoidrl fracture. Masses or bodies of glass may be colourless or coloured, and transparent to opaque. be made coloured, translucent, or opaque by the presence of dissolved, amorphous, or crystalline material.

24

When a speci6c kind of glass is indicated, such dacriptive terms as flint glass, barium glass, and window glass should be used following the basic definition, but the qualifying tam is to be used as understood by trader custom. I
a tumbler,

Objects made of glass are loosely and popularly r&rrcd to as glass; such as `glass' for a barometer, window, a magnifier, or a mirror.

Glass Blower a) A craftsman who blows hollow-ware on a blowing iron or a semiautomatic machine. b) See `Ben& Worker' and `Table Blower'. Glass Blowing - The shaping internally. of hot glass by air pressure ap$ied

Glass Ceramic - An inorganic, non-metallic material produced by the complete fusion of raw materials at high temperatures into a homogeneous liquid which is .then cooled to a rigid condition with a certain degree of crystallixation. It may be translucent or opaque. Glaaa Container - General term applied to glass bottles and jars. GIass Daat - See 5haU Glaas'. Glass Making Sand - See %ml'. Glam Shen(for Lamp) - A protective glass casing for preventing combustion of light emitting element of a lamp and for providing vacuum or gas filled space required for the above element. GIasa Wool - F%xcy mass of plain glass fibres, also called, `Wool'. GlaziedPot - A new pot, coated inside with a thin layer of glass to protect it from the attack of raw batch. Glery Hole- An opening exposing the hot interior of a furnace used to reheat the ware in hand-working. Gob a) A portion ofhot glass delivered by a feeder. b) A portion of hot glass .gathered on a punty or pipe. Gob Process - A process whereby g!ass is delivered to a forming unit in gob form. Graduated Glassware - Glassware that is marked graduations for volumetric measuring purposes. Gradmtioa - The
process

with one or more

of marking graduations on glassware.

Ground Glass - Glass roughened by grinding with abrasive materials. 22

Is :1382-1981

H Ha&e Marks -Fine ridges on the fracture surface of glass, pan&e1 to direction of propagation of the fracture. HairLine-See`Air W. Half-Crystal Glass - See `Crystal Glass'. zC!$ - Locahxed thick section at a point on the internal surfs
.

of

Hard Glass a) Commonly refers to a glass difficult to melt or fuse. b) A glass of relatively high viscosity at elevated temperatures. cl A glass of high softening point and low coetBcient of expansion. d) Erroneously used also to describe glass of high chemical resistance. Hardness - See 6Gverseal'.. Head Space - The u&led
tantial

space in a glass container fitted with a closure.

Heat Absorbii Glass- Glass having the property of absorbing a sub+ percentage of radiant energy in the near infrared of the spectrum.
term generally

Heat Proof Glass-A GlrsS'.

used d

describe `Hert

Bedsting

Heat Resistiag Glass- Glass able to withstand high thermal shock, gene&ly because of low expansion coefficient. Heat Treated (Glass) -Term `Tempered Glass'. sometimes used for tempered glass, see

Heavy Bottom a) Excessive thickness of the bottom of a glass bottle. b) Excessively thick part of an article. Heavy Cord - See `Cord'. Heavy Comer - See `Heavy Bottom'. Heavy Panel - See `Heavy Bottom'. Heavy Seed - A group of small bubbles, less than about O-2mm, clustered . together.
Heavy Shoulders - . See `Heavy Bottom.

26

313:X+82-%981
Heel Tap a) An imperfection in which the base or bottom of a bottle is very thick in one area and very thin in another. b) See Wugged Bottom'. High Ahuni~ Glass - Glass containing substantial ( more than 6 percent ) amount of aluminium oxide. H&h Spots- Local areas of a ground surface which stand proud and prevent perfect mating with a second ground surface. High Ransmi&on Glass - Glass which transmits an exceptionally high percentage of the visible light. Neck ---Deficiency of glass in the neck of bottle (see also (Blowu Away' ). Hollows (Stopcocks) - The gradual entry of the side arm bore into the ground barrel creating a pocket.
xa0n0w

Hollow-Ware-Articles having an internal depth greater than 25 mm measured from the lowest point to the horizontal plane passing through the overflow point.
NOTE-Hollow-ware may be termed large or small according to its capacity. A acity up to 2 likes ir termed aa sm8ll ad that with capacity above as large hollow-ware.

Hood - See `Potette'. ~oekek~raaa
.

- A line which turns up or down at one or both ends;

Hot Cheek -A crack less open than a check; dull in appearanoe because of the presence of a foreign matter. Hot End-The manufacturing operations concerned with hot glass, that
`is, mdting, forming, annealing.

Hot Me&l - The process of forming glassware in hot uncoated moulds. Het Spot -The zone of highest temperatnre within a glass melting furnace. I
Ice-Proof -

A term used to describe containers ( primarily tumblers ) able to withstand sudden temperature gradients from the room temperature to &at of ice. w Capadty of a GIaee Factory - The maximum possible production of finished glassware and is limited by the least capacity of any mamtfacturing operation in the factory. 27

Is:1382-1981

A form of decoration in which the depth of cutting is in&mediate between deep cutting and engraving. Interlayer - Term used to describe a plastic layer between the glass sheets, such as for making laminated safety glass, also called Werleaf'. Inte&af - See `Inklayer'. Iris@g - See %idescence'. Ir$dzfz - Interference colours caused by a slight chemical attack of
.

Intaglid-

J Jack Arch - A brick arch above the port arch extending into and supporting the main crown of the tank furnace. Jack Bricks a) Bricks used for making the jack arch, b) Bricks used for stopping round a newly set pot. have recesses or holes to take a brick fork. Jambload. Sidewall of port of furnace superstructure

These bricks

carrying port crown

Japanese Furnace - Direct coal fired pot furnace. Japanese Tank - Direct coal fired small tank furnace.
.

Joint Line a) See `Parting Line'. b) A !ine or seam on glassware formed at the joint of two mould parts, also called `Parting Line'. c) See `Mould Joint'. Jointing Yard - Place between the grinding and polishing operations in the continuous manufacture of plate glass, where the plaster joints are remade, sometimes called `Middle Yard'. K Kettle - A hemispherical vessel about one metre in diameter, into which molten glass is ladled. of pressed ware which has been so Knockout- A portion of a pidesigned that it may be knocked out to make a hole.
Knot

a) An imperfection consisting of an inhomogeneity in the form of ~_ vitreous lump. $) A nodular glassy inclusibn, often having an attenuated tail. 28

ls:l382-ml

Labelhg - See %adging'.

L

Ladle - A long-handled, cupshaped tool for ladling glass out of or from one pot to another. Also used for filling open pots. Liddem - See `Washboard'. Laminated Glass - A transparent sheet formed from interleaved, firmly adherent layers of glass and plastics material, the latter known as interlayer or interleaf; having glass layers outermost ( see also `Safety Glsgl' ). Lampblown - Glass articles made, usually from tubing or rod, with the aid of a gasflame. Lamp Worka -See %ench Wotka'. Forming glass articles from tubing and cane by heating

a) An imperfection; a fold in the surface of a glass article caused by incorrect flow during forming. b) A tool used for polishing glass. Laya - Person who has charge of laying the rough glass in plaster on the grinding and polishing tables. Laying Yard - kace where the rough glass is laid on grinding and polishing tables with plaster. Lerd Baium Crown Glass-See `CrownFlii Glam'.
.

Lesd Crown Glrss - Optical glass intermediate in lead content and diapersion between crown and flint; also called Crown `Flint Glass'. Lead Ghsa- Glass containing a substantial proportion ( PbO ) ( usually more than 15 percent ). of lead oxide

tided Gbm- Pieces of glass fIxed together with strip of lead of (I% or `U' section to form a window. Leaner - An article which leans instead of standing upright when stood on its base. Lehr - A long, tunnel-shaped oven for annealing glass by continuous passage. Lehr Loader - A device for properly placing and spacing glass articles on a continuous lehr belt. Ltms -

see `Bws'

Eye.

29

xs:l3!n-1981 LensF'ronted Tubii - Thermometer tubing formed so &at the apparent width of the column of mercury or spirit thermometric liquid is magnified; Light ---In optical glass, the subclass of a lower index of refraction. Light Bot@mt a) Deficient thickness of the bottom of a glass container. b) ~xckssively thin part of an &cl?. Light C.qrne!r --See `I+ght B&tom'. Lii Panel - See `Light Jhjtom'. Light $hpxlder - See `Light Bottom'. -Liti - Calcium oxide ( CaO ), or a mixture of calcium oxide ( CaO ) 4nd magnesium oxide ( MgO ). Lime Crkwn Glass-An
/ quaptity of calcium oxide.

optical crown

glass containing

8 substantial

Lie Gloss - A glass containing a sub$tantial proportion bf lime, usu.$lyy associated with soda and silica. -Lime Stone- Eiier (,&CO,. M&s),.). W-c&tic

limestone ( CaC03 ) or dolomitic limestone

Fine cords or strings, usually on the surface of sheet glass.

' Liquidns Temperature - The maximum temperature. at which equilibrium exists between the molten glass vd its primary crystalline phase. kd z,
kag

- See 6PW. Rii - Part of the finish of a container for securing a cJosure' in
.

Glass - A comparative term signifying a slow-setting glass.

Labricait

- A solution which, *hen applied to glass fibres. facilitates `their handling by reducing mutual abrasion ( see also `Mould iubricaut' ).

M M8iu Alrch - See `Ciown'. MN&e1 - Refradory tube used in the ,matitia&re of glass tubing or rod.

MYg=@e ' a) `Commer&l mangantse dioxide ( MnO, ). cb)U An industrial name for pyrolusite. 30

MPtk Block - Refractory block fitting in the gable wall, ok house. Marbles - Spherical balls of glass. Mlrver a) k$Aplate
.

the dog

on which a hand gather of glass is rolled, shaped, and

b) Also the process of doing same. Mat - A glass-fibre product of felt like nature. Match Mark - See Mosdd Joint'. Matt Finish - A kind of rought finish deliberately obtained for decorative Purposes. Meeha&al Boy-A foot operated device for manipulating the opening and closing the mould during blowing. Mdt - A specific quantity of glass made at one time. hldter a) The chamber of a tank furnace where the glass batch is melted. b) Person in charge of the furnace during the early stages of filling and melting of batch. Mdtiag - The thermal process by which the charge is completely converted into molten glass free from undissolved batch. Melting Area -The area of a furnace under tie. the bridgewall or floater. Usually the area up to

Melting End - The chamber of a tank furnace where glass is melted and r&led. Melting Temperature-The range of furnace temperature within which melting takes place at an economically desirable rate, and at which the resulting glass generally has a viscosity of JOl.6 to lo**6 poises. For purposes of comparing melting temperature of glasses, it is assumed that the glass at its melting temperature has a viscosity of lo* poises. Me* - See `Onion'. surface line of the metal or glass in a tank furnace or Metal - Molten glass in a melting unit. Metal Line-The pot.

Mg Point - See `Deformation Point'. Micro Glass - Very thin glass used for microscope cover slips. 31

a) A condition of pronounced opalescence in glass. b) A white surface layer caused by volatilization of certain cons& tuents or by devitrification during lamp working. Mille6ori - A form of decoration used, for example, in paper weights, in which sections of multi-coloured glass canes are set. in a clear glass matrix to form a design. Mirror-A general term covering a flat or curved specially treated glass having on one of its sides a thin coating of silver or other metal deposited by chemical or other suitable processes, to provide a retiecting surface. The coated surface may be provided wit4 protective coating(s). Mixing Room - See `Batch Howe'. Mail a) The glass remaining on a punty or blowing iron after' the gather has ,been cut off 01 after a piece of ware has been blown and severed. W The glass originally in contact with the blowing mechanism or head, which becomes cullet after the desired article is severed from it. MooWonc Glass - A type of opal glass resembling the mineral moonstone. Maeaic- Small glass pieces cemented together, usually on to a flat backing surface to form designs. MoPld - A form ( usually metal ) in which glass is shaped. Moulded Glass - Glass that is formed in a mould as distinct from cast, roll@, drawn, or oBlumd ware. flange or rim formed Mould Joint -Small along the joint of two parts of the mould. on the surface of the glass

Mould Lubricant-A substance applied on or into. moulds to reduce friction or prevent adhesion. Mould Mark a) A mark or seam on glassware resulting from a mould joint. b) A mark on the external sufaqe caused by an irregularity or roughness on the surface a'f the mould ( see `MooId Joint'). Monld Poll - A sharp line on the exterior surface caused by variation in the degree of adhesion to the mould. Mouth Blow@ - Shaping ,hot gla& by air pressure applied with the mouth. 32

M&l-Up-To seal a pot stopper or a joint in a furnace gas line, by the application of wet clay.

or in a producer

MutIle - An enclosure in a furnace protecting the ware from the flame and products of combustion. Margatroyd Belt - Portion of the sidewall of a bottle near the bottom.

N
II, nn Liae - Abbreviation for index of refraction, generally used with a subscript indicating the special line, for example, no - index of refraction for D or sodium line. Neck a) Part of a bottle between finish and shoulder. b) The structure connecting the melting and working chambers of a tank furnace. c) The structure connecting the uptake and port in a tank furnace. Neek Ring - A metal part used to form the finish of a hollow glass ware. Needle- The vertical, reciprocating, refractory part of a feeder which alterxtately forces the glass through the orifice and pulls it up after shearing, also called `Plunger'. Nentral Glass - A glass of high chemical durability. Normalizing - See `Conditioning Zone'. Nose 2 The working end or refining chamber of a tank. Noteh - A hole left by a chip. Na Value- Expressed by the Greek letter or by the English letter V'. Designates reciprocal dispersive power as follows: Nu-value-(nn-l)/(nF-no)
0 .

Observations Hole-A small opening in a furnace wall through which observations may be made, also called `Peep Hole', `Bye Hole' or `Sight Hole'. Obsidian - A highly siliceous natural glass. Offband Glass - Glass produced by the offhand process. Offband Pro-ass - The process of forming glassware by an expert, worhng without the alA of moulds. 33

IS : 1382 - 1981 Offset - An imperfection resulting from mould parts not properly matched, that is, a finish or base offset from body or neck. Offset Finish-A finish which is unsymmetrical about the centre axis of the neck of a bottle. Offset Finish ( Horizontally ) - A finish which is not correctly relative to the vertical axis of the neck. Offset Finish ( Vertically ) -A vertically relative to each other. Offset Punt -A bottle. centted

finish the havles of which are displaced

base which is unsymmetrical about the centre axis of a

Oil Mark -Small, very obvious mark looking like a feather; due to vapours produced by evaporation of oil. Onion -A term sometimes used for the bulblike mass of a glass at the origin of the drawn sheet in the Furcault process. Opacifier - A mineral or chemical compound added to the batch to produce opal glass. Opal Glass - Glass with fiery translucence. Loosely, any translucent glass. Open Pot - A pot open to the flames and gases of combustion. Open Seed-A seed which has burst or opened leaving a cavity in the finished surface. Ophthalmic Glass - Glass used in spectacles, generally having specified optical and physical properties and quality. Optic a) Having variations in wall thickness, producing refractive effects. b) A lens or prism in an optical instrument. Optical Blanks - Optical glass formed by pressing ihto the rough. shape and side required in the finished article, also called `Optical Pressings'. Optical Borate Flint - Optical flint glass consisting essentially of boric oxide ( B,OI, ) and lead oxide ( PbO ). Optical Crown Glass - An optical glass with a low dispersion and low index of refraction, usually forming the converging element of an*optical system. Any optical glass possessing a nu-value of at least 554; or any optical glass with a nu-value between 509 and 55.0 having a refractive index greater than 1.60. Optical Glass - Glass of high quality having closely specified optical properties, used in the manufacture of optical systems. 34

IS iJ382 - 1981

Optical Glass Numerical Designation - The numerical designation in common usage is based on the index of refraction for medium (nD ) and the nuvalue (v). The unity factor for the index is dropped (that is, l-496 becomes 496), and the decimal point for the nu-value is also dropped (nu = 6h4 becomes 644). Thus, the glass is specified 496/644 without reference to chemical composition. In some cases, it is permissible to precede the numerical designation by the abbreviated name indicative of composition. For instance, Borosilicate Crown (BE) 496/644 may be used. For example, Dense Barium Crown may be crown 6101574 or DBC 6 101574, or just 610/574 meaning nn c l-610 and nu-value = 57.4. Optical Pressing - See `Optical Blanks'. Optical Zinc Crown - Optical crown glass containing a substantial proportion of zinc oxide ( ZnO ). Orange Peel - Numerous small regular defects giving the surface the appearance of orange peel. Orifice - An opening through which glass flows, also called `Orifice Ring' or `Bush'. In a feeder, the term refers to the opening formed by an orifice ring in the bottom of the spout. Out-of-Flatness - Deviation from the intended form. Out-of-Round a) The imperfection of nonroundness in glass articles. b) See `Out-of Flatness'. Out-of-Shape - See `Oat-of Flatness'. Out-of-Square End - End of tubing not perpendicular to the axis. Output -See `Draw'. ovality - Deviation of a cylindrical or spherical glass article from circular towards an elliptical cross-section. Oven-Glass a) Glass suitable for manufacture of articles to be used in baking and roasting foods. b) Glassware made from oven glass. Overflush- An excess of glass round the joint line of the finish or the flange of a glass article. Overlap - A fault in a ring graduation line where the line is scribed more than 360" and the overlapping section is thickened or doubled. Overpress - An imperfection consisting of the projecting resulting from imperfect closing of mould joints. 35 excess glass

Is :.13m - 1981 Overseal -

The result of over-heating a sintered disc during sealing which reduces the porous area.

Owens Process - A bottle making process in which the blank or parison mould is filled by suction.
Oxidizing Agent -A compound that decomposes during the melting or fining stages supplying oxygen to other batch cheniicals. P Pack

a) The quality of ware packed. b) The ratio of packed ware to theoretical.
Paddling - The rough shaping of a piece of glass in a furnace by means of

paddles or tools preparatory glass blanks.
Parison -

to the pressing operation for making optical

A preliminary shape or blank from which a glass article is to be See `Blank Mould'.

formed.
Parison Mould Parting Line -

Line or seam on glassware resulting from joint

of two

mould parts.
Paste Mould -

A mould lined with adherent carbon, used wet for blown

ware.
Patching - Placing of a refractory block outside a badly worn block while the furnace is operating, or a block so placed, also called `Filling'. Pearl Ash Peephole -

Commercial potassium carbonate. A small opening in a furnace wall for observation-purposes,

Phosphate Crown Glass Phosphate Pig -

An optical crown glass containing a substantial quantity of phosphorous pentoxide ( P,O, ). is phos-

Glass - A glass in which the essential grass former phorous pentoxide instead of silica.

A rest for blowpipe or punty during the gathering operation.

Pilkington Process -

A process for making flat glass in which the glass continuously pours from a tank into a spout and then between forming rolls and is subsequently annealed as one continuous sheet. The arches spanning the pillars of a pot furnace.

Pillar Arches -

Pillar Block - Columns supporting the crown of a pot furnace between which the pots are set.

36

IS : 1382 - 1981 Pii Hole Pip A minute hdt.

A local smooth lump or thickening in a rim or bead. the glass-cutting method. See `Blow Pipe'. Pipe Blister Pit --A

Results from

Pipe -

A large bubble on the inside surface of a glass article often arising from dirt or scale on the blowpipe.

notch produced during grinding or sandblasting.

Pitch Polishing -

Polishing operation in which pitch rather than felt is the resilient carrier for the polishing agent.
Pittsburgh heet Process - The method of making sheet glass by drawing vertically upward from a free bath surface wherein definition of draw is established by a subm&ed refractory member.

Plain - Relatively free from bubbles and seed during the melting process.
Plain Glass Plainiag Plaster Glass free from seed or bubbles. See `Relining?.

Partially dehydrated gypsum used with water for welding plate glass to tables during the grinding and polishing of plate glass. Plate Glass - Flat glass formed by a rolling process, ground and polished on both sides, with surfaces essentially plane and parallel. Plug-- The reciprocating metal part which forces glass into the contours of a mould, or which, in a blank mould forms the initial cavity for Subsequent blowing ( see also `Needle' ). Plunger Pull - A protuberance sticking to the plunger.
Phger Ply -

on the internal

surface caused by glass

Tip - See `Plug'.

Glassware having a layer of opal glass covered on one or both sides with coloured or colourless transparent glass, normally used for illuminated globes and lighting shades. Pvk Mark - Surface roughness, produced by very small protrusions. Poling - See `Blocking'. Polished Plate Glass - See `Plate Glass': Pontil - See `P&y'. Port - Any opening in a furnace through which fuel or flame enters or exhaust gases escape. 37

IS 11382 - 1981 Port Tongue - Ketiactory structure inside, the port to! prevent early mixing of fuel gas and air in the port. Pot - A one-piece refractory container for melting glass, Open pot; a pot wherein the glass surface is not protected from the furnace atmosphere, Closed pot; a pot having a crown protecting the glass from the furnace atmosphere. Pot Arch - A furnace for firing or preheating a pot. Pot Yurnace - A furnace for melting glass in pots. Pot Glass a) Glass melted in a pot as distinct from a tank. `b) Glass suitable for pot melting. Pot Opening - The opening between the pillars of a pot furnace. Pot Ring - See `Ring'. Pot Setting - Placing a pot in position in a pot furnace. Pot Spout - A channel block connecting the working end of a tank furnace with a revolving pot. Pot Wagon - A vehicle used for transferring a pot from a pot arch to a pot furnace. P&ash - Potassium oxide ( K20 ). Loosely, a carbonate ,of potassium. Potette - A refractory shape introduced into a furnace and partly immersed in the glass to protect the gathering point from the furnace gases; also. called `Hood'. It is used. for hand gathering and also for certain suction machines. Powder Blue - A prepared, finely ground pigment containing cobalt oxide (COO) added to the batch as a physical decolorizer. Press and Blow Process - A process of glass manufacture in which the finish and parison are pressed and the parison is subsequently blown to form the final shape. Pressed Glass -Glassware plunger. hessihgs - See 6Blank~`. Pressure Check h) An imperfection; a check or crack in a glass article resulting from too much p&sure in forming. 38 formed by pressure between a mould and a

Pressing - The operation of forming pressed glass.

Is : 1382 - 1981 b) A fine, unobtrusive check caused by,excess pressure during forming or by second contact with the mould. Prismatic - Translucent rolled glass, one surface of which consists. of parallel prisms made in three designs giving three different nominal angles of refraction to a beam of light passing through the glass. Proof - See `Rod Proof'. g'iGzhe
.

quantity of glass delivered by a furnace in a given time, usually

P&h Ware - Handmade, thin, blown glassware, especially tumblers. a) A gathering iron of solid cross-section. b) A device to which ware is attached for holding during fire pol:shing or finishing. Posher-A worker who pushes glass into the kiln after flattening, called `Flattener's Assistant'. also

Q
Qaarl Block - See `Burner Block'. Quartz Glass - A term applied to silica glass made by fusing vein quartz. Quenched Gullet - Cullet made by running molten glass into water, also called `Dragaded Cullet' or `Dragladled Cullet'. R R-Value - The partial dispersion ratio given by the following equation: R-Value = ( nn - no )/( nf - nc ) Rack Mark - A surface imperfection in rolled glasses due to faulty gearing in the forming roller drive. Raw Batch Raw Cnllet A glass charge without cullet. A glass charge made totally of cullet. layers or strings

Ream - An imperfection consisting of nonhomogeneous in flat glass.

Reboil - Reappearance of bubbles in molten glass after it had previously appeared free of undissolved gases. Recuperative Furnace - A furnace having a recuperator. 39

rs:1382-1981 Recmperator- A continuous heat exchanger in which heat is conducted from the products of combustion to incoming air through flue walls. Red Edge- Numerous rouge pits located around the edges of a large sheet of polished plate glass. Reducing Agent - A chemical that, at high temperature, of oxidation of other batch chemicals. lowers the state

Retill ( of Vaumm Flask ) - A double walled glass container, with the walls silvered and the space in between maintained under v cuum to reduce to a minimum the transfer of heat to and from the conten 4 placed on,it. R&ner - A compartment of a glass tank furnace, for the purpose of conditioning the glass ( see also `Nose' ). Refining- The stage in the melting process of glass at which the undissolved gases are removed from molten glass, also called `fining' or ,gplaining'. Re6ning Agent - A chemical which promotes refining of glass, also called `Plaining Agent'. Reflector - A prismatic glass which reflects light. Refractor - A prismatic glass which refracts light. Refractory Stone-A fragment of refractory furnace or pot in which the glass was melted. material coming from the

Regenerative Fomace - A furnace having regenerators. Regenerator-A cyclic heat interchanger that alternatively receives heat from gaseous combustion products and transfers heat to air or gas before combustion. Remoulding- A process in which optical glass is preheated and pressed into lens blanks. Reversal - A periodic operation of reversing the direction of firing in a regenerative furnace, also called Change-Over'. Reverse - To reverse the direction of flow of gas and air in a regenerative furnace. Revolving Pot - A rotating machine gathers glass. circular container from which the Owens

Revolving Tube - A hollow cylinder, concentric with the needle of a feeder, revolving in the glass. Ribben - A continuous strip of glass in the process of making. 40

ls:13m-1981

Blbbon Recess - A process whereby molten glass is delivered to a forming unit in a ribbon form. Rib Marks - Characteristic arc-shaped lines on a fractured surface of glass indicating the direction of fracture travel. Rider'Arcb - One of a series of arches that support the checkerwork in a regenerator. RkB a) A floating refractory body surrounding a glass surface from which gathers are made. b) A mould part that forms the rim of a pressed article. Ring Se&en -Narrow, optical examination. peripheral section cut from a glass article for

Ringhole - An opening in a tank through which glass is gathered. Reek (Rlownware ) - Deformation stand firmly on a flat surface.
Rock Crystal

of a base so that an article does not

Rock (Ground S&ace) - Excessive play between ground surfaces. a) Trinsparent quartz. b) Highly polished blown glassware, handcut or engraved.
Rocker-As Rodm imperfection -

A bottle with bottom deformed so that it does

not stand solidly ( rocks ).
Bottom

a) See Roekev'. b) See 6Rock'.
.%od Proof -

A test specimen taken from the melt on an iron rod.

Rdkd Glass a) Optical glass formed by rolling into plates at the time of manufacture, as distinguished from transfer glass. b) Flat glass formed by rolling.
Roller - A blown cylinder for making window glass by the nearly absolete hand process. R&r Mark - An imperfection in the surface of sheet glass due to contact with the rollers in the tower of a flat glass drawing machine, also called `Roller Scratch'.

41

Is :138a-1981

ROW Scratch - See `Roller Mark'. Rolling Process - A process for making plate glass in which it is formed between rollers. Rouge Pits - An imperfection consisting of traces of rouge remaining in an incompletely polished glass surface. Rougtr Cast - Flat glass, one surface of which has a definite texture, made by rolling molten glass either on a plate or between rollers. Rough Glass - A glass obtained by cutting the original sheet of rolled glass in'to,workable sizes. Rough Grinding - Producing a coarse ground surface on flat glass or glassware, also called `Roughing' or `Rough Polishing'. Rbughii - See `Rough Grinding'. Rough Polishiig - See `Rough Grinding'. Round Table - A type of laying table used for supporting plate glass for grinding and polishing, now largely superseded by the continuous system. Rubber Cut - An imperfection in plate glass resulting from rupture of the surface by the runner bar. Rubs - Abrasion of glass surfaces producing a frosted appearance. `differs from a `scratch' in having appreciable width. Run Back -Deformation raised. due to glass movement A `rub

after the plunger is

Runner Bar -Iron casting attached to a circular grinding runner or head for abrasive grindong of plate glass. Runuing Batch-The regular batch formulated composition when used with its own`cullet. S Safety Glass-Glass so constructed, treated, or combined with other materials, as to reduce, in comparison with ordinary sheet, float or plate glass, the likelihood of injury to persons by objects from exterior sources or by these safety glasses when they may be cracked or broken. Type of Safety Glass include: a) Laminated Safety Glass-Two or more pieces of glass held together by an intervening layer or layers of plastics materials. It will crack and break under sufficient impact, but the pieces of glass tend to adhere to the plastic and not to fly. If a hole is produced, the edges are likely to be,less jagged then would be the case with ordinary glass. 42 to produce the desired

IS :1382-1981

b)

Tempered ( Toughened ) Safety Glass - A single piece of specially heat treated glass, with a stress pattern such that the piece when fractured reduces to numerous granular fragments, with no large jagged edges. C)Wired Safety Glass - A Single piece of glass with a layer of meshed wire completely imbeded in the glass, but not necessarily in the centre of the sheet. When the glass is broken, the wire mesh holds the pieces together to a considerable extent.

Sagging-Process of forming glass by reheating until it conforms to the shape of the mould or form on which it rests. Salt Petre - Commercial potassium nitrate ( KNOa ). Salt Water -Molten sulphates floating on the surface in a glass melting unit (see also `Gall' ). Sand - A source of silica for the glass batch, also called `Glass Mal@ng Sand'. Sand Blasting - Producing a matt surface on glass by projecting on to the surface a jet of small abrasive particles at high velocity. Sand Holes - Small fractures in the surface of glass, produced by the rough grinding operation, which have not been removed by subsequent fine grinding. Scale - Flakes of metal oxide or graphite included in the glass dr stuck tp the surface during forming. Scai - See %?%ear Mark'. Schellback Tubing - Tubing generally used for burettes and thermometer having an opal backing with a central blue line to facilitate reading of graduation marks. Score Marks - Lines round a barrel or key caused by excessive turningof the key with a high spot or foreign body present. Scratch - A deep score mark, or tearing of the surface, in t@ coursb of -manufacturing or handling, appearing as though made by a hard rough or sharp body. Scrub Marks - See `Brush Marks (b)`. Scoff - An area covered by fine scratches, usually due to abrasion of one piece cf glass against another. Sann - A floating layer of unmelted material on the molten glass surface. Sealing - St+e`Fasion'.
-

43

IS:13?32-1981 Sealing Surface - The portion of the finish which makes contact with the sealing gasket or liner ( see also `Fini&`). Seam a) Mark on glass surface resulting from joint of matching mould Parts. b) To slightly grind the sharp edges of a piece of glass. Seat - Prepared position on the siege where the pot rests. Second Side - The final side of a plate glass to be ground and polished. Seed - An extremely small gaseous inclusion in glass not more than 03 mm in any direction, measured by the average of the maximum and minimum dimensions. Selenium- Selenium metal used as a decolorizer and also as a colouring agent in glass batch. Selvedge-The edge of a ribbon of rolled glass which is automatically formed during manufacture. Semi-Cry&l Glass - See Crystal Glass'. Setting Rate - A comparative term referring to the time required for the glass surface to cool through the working range. A short time implies a fast setting rate and a long time implies a slow setting rate. Settle Mark a) See `Chill Mark'. b) An;;lar thickening of the container wall, generally in the lower . Settle Wave - See `Settle Mark'. Shadow Wall -A more or less solid structure built on the top of the bridgewall or suspended, from the crown to limit the flow of heat from the melter to the refiner. Shapping Block - A piece of wood used in shaping the glass on the blowing iron before blowing in the mould. Sharp Fin& a) Rough43iish with sharp edges. b) A rough finish with sharp edges left on glass which has been cut. Sbup Fire - Combustion with excess air and Short flame. Shear Cake - A counter weighted refractory slab used as a gate or door to a small furnace or oven. U

of the cuttirig shear. sbe( Gbas Shell - See Tbip'.

Skar Mark - A scar appearing in glassware, caused by the cooling action
Flat glass made by continuous drawing.

Bee - A clay vessel, in the shape of a crucible, laid horizontally at the side of the pot mouth for heating the ends of blowing irons.
*P a) A unit group of workmen producing glassware; and b) Also, its location at the furnace.

Sbert-AcomparatktermsigniQingafastsettingglass. She14 IWeb - An imperfection in plate glass, resulting from incomplete poli@ing. ~GThgrved . . surfhce between the wails and the neck of a bottle

!3kead - The process of making culkt by running molten glass into a water s&am. We Bkk-kfixtory contact with gras!s. blocks forming the sides of a tank furnace in

We-Fir4 - A furnace with fuel supplied from the sides ( see u&o `CrflWFk4 phme' ). Side-Port Farce -A fbrnacc with ports on the sides. nsually a Siding - Variatj~n in wall thickness at a given eon, iesult of eocMtclQtp of the inter&section. Sicgc-F%ordapot~oftencalled%ench'. `GkW&inH&. SgMIWe-SM ~sigdGhr-GGlasscsiotbe~ofrormddsor~usedforsignalfing purposes, for cxampk in the railwas aviation, etc. !%a W -Vitreous silicon dioxide ( SiOs ); quark glass; pure 4licon dioxide ( SiG) glass. !3lk !9creem Rucem -A dawmting pruass in which a design is printed on gkiSStioUgh asilkmesh, woven wire, or similar screen. Sk-The application by chemical methods of a fihn of silver to a glass surface. Sucrtd GIVS - Porous glass made for filtration or other purposes by heating graded ghss poWkr. 4s

Is:i382498i

Skewbacks - Specially shaped blocks forming a furnace crown or other arch. A worker who skims surface metal from a tank or pot furnace. Skin Blister - A thick, often, elongated, blister on or near a glass surface.
Skimmer -

Skia~Cricks - See Wrizzle'. Skittle Pot-A pot for melting small quantities of glass in a fum& containing pots otherwise of normal sixe. Skylight - A very poor quality of plate glass. Slab Cl&s - Optical glass obtained by cutting or forming the chunk glass into plates, or slabs. Slag - Partially fused mixture of spilled batch, overflowed glass, breeze ' coal, and, clay from the siege. slag Glass - Glass in which slag is the principal constituent of a batch, .Shnthg Line - A graduating fault in which the plane of the line is not at right angles to the axis of the workpiece. Sleek Y An imperfection; a fine scratch like mark having smooth boundaries, usually produced by a foreign particle in the polishing operation. Sliver - Bundles of noncontinuous or shortlength !`ibresthat have reached that stage of their fabrication into yarn wherein they are parallel and overlapping and have no twist. SW! a) Any nonfibrous glass in a glass-fibre product. b) A.rI.;k part, due to an excess of glass at a point on the internal
.

Slugged Bottom - An imperfection; very heavy glass on one side and very

light on the opposite side of the bottom of a bottle or container (see a&o `Heel Tap' ) . Small Glass - Small particles of glass adhering to the mterior surface. Smear - A check, especially on the neck tiish. Smoke - Streaked areas appearing as slight discoloration.
`Smoked a) A term applied to the djscolourjng. of glass in a reducing flame. b) Glass covered with smoky fitm f&m open-fired lehrs. Smooth powliilg. Finely ground, as applied to a flat glass surface, prior to 46

IS:1382-1981 Snake,`_Snaking a) Progressive longitudinal cracking in continuous flat glass operation. b) Variation in width of sheet during the sheet glass drawing process. Snap - A device for gripping a piece of formed glass for fire polishing and finishing. Soakllg Area - The area between the gablewall and the first pai: af ports in a cross-tired tank furnace also called `Fritting Zone'. Soaking Pit - A conditioning furnace used to bring the glass in open pots to a uniform temperature for casting. Soda a) Sodium oxide ( NasO ). b) Commercial anhydrous sodium carbonate ( Na,CO, ). Soda Ash -See Soda'. Soda-Lime Glass ( Soda-Lime-Silica Glass ) - A glass in which the main constituents are normally silica, lime and soda; also called `Lime-Soda Glass'. Soft Fire - A flame with a deficiency of air. S6ft Glass a) Glass with relatively low softening point. b) Glass having a low resistance to weathering.
i

Softening Point -The temperature at which a uniform rod 055 to 0.75 mm in diameter and 23.5 mm in length, elongates under its own weight at a rate of one millimetre per minute when the upper 10 cm of its length is heated in a prescribed manner at a rate of approximately 5�C per minute. For glass of density near 25 g/cm*, this temperature corresponds to a viscosjty of lo'*@ poises. Softneq - Friability, or liability to crumbling, sintered disk. caused by underfMg a

Sblarixation - Change in transmission `of glass as a result of exposure to sunlight or other radiation in or near visible spectrum. Solnhle Glass 4 Silicate of soda or potash, also called `Water Glass'. SpalliiBreaking otf of small fragments caused by internal stress of thermal or mechanical origin. Speetaele Crown- A type of crown glass nsed specially for making spectable lenses and usually of refractive index l-52. 47

a) A wheel-like casting consisting of a rim and radial spokes on which are mounted fdt polishing pads. b) Assembly of radiating tie rode on the top of a furnace.
Spider Wel, -

Water soluble crystals produced by chemical attack and forming patterns resembling spider web.

Spihe - A pointed protaberance, particularly on the inside of the base. Sy4ral Fradwealongatube. A crack which propagates in a spiral ( helical) path

a) An imperfection; crack or check going from surface to surface of a glass article. b) A crack which penetrates from one surface to another either throuph the thickness or at an edge. Sgg_~Test hulle specimen taken during various stages of melting

Spat - The part of a feeder that carries the oritice, revolving tube, needle, etc. Sprea&gThe irregular thickening of a line in which the etchant penetrates the resist.
SpmGhae-Sce`Fibre'. SiqmamC& Glrss-

Optical glass cut in small squares, separated and

designated by weight. a) Resistance to devitrification. b) Chemical durability, resistance to weathering. a) Glass beat-treated in such a way that it is in an equilibrium state corresponding to some particular temperature. b) Glass articles, for example, thermometers, heat-treated so that they suffer no permanent change of dimensions or properties over a particular range of temperature. c) Glass resistance to darkening by high energy short-wave radiation ( Radiation Stabilized ).

48

ls:l3m-1981 staekar - see `L&r Loader'.

-

a) An imperfection consisting of chemical corrosior of glass. b) Colour applied `to glass by absorption at an elevated temperature.
Stained Glass

a) Glass coloured by fusing pigments to the surface. b) Windows made of pieces of stained glass, or of coloured sheet.
Stapler Fibre - See `Fibre'. Star back - See `B&e'. Stemware - General description of stemmed glass drinking vessels. Stepped Line - See `Stepping Out'. Stepping Oat - A `dislocation in a line resembling the cross-section of a

step. Sting Out - Combustion gases or flames issuing from openings in furnace walls due to positive internal pressure. Stone - An imperfection comprising crystalline contamination in glass.
St per-A refractory piece shaped to fit a channel and used for con7 ing the flow of glass into a revolving pot of a suction machine, also .trol called `Gate'. Straight Throat - A throat at the same level as the bottom of the melting end of the tank. Strain - Elastic deformation due to stress. Strain Disc - A disk of glass having a calibrated amount of birefringence at a specified location, and used as a comparative measure of the degree of stress. Strain Point - The temperature at which the internal stress is removed in about 16 hours. It corresponds to the equilibrium temperature. at which the glass has a viscosity of 40 x 10" poises. Strand - A multiplicity of continuous glass filaments combined in a single compact unit, without .twist.

Streak a) Dark or differently coloured inclusion of linear form in colourlesa or coloured glass. b) A thread of glass differing in colour from the surrounding glass, 49

IS : 1382 - 1981 Strength a) A term to indicate relative thickness in sheet glass. b) Tensile strength of glass.

,

StresS - Any condition of tension or compression existing within the glass, particularly due to incomplete annealing, temperature gradient, or inhomogeneity. Striai a) A cord of low intensity generally of interest only in optical glass ( see also `Cord' ). b) Glassy threads or veins finer than cord. Striking- Development of colour or opacity during cooling or reheating, also called `Flaming' or `Flashing'. Strings - Transparent lines appearing as though a thread of glass has been incorporated into the glass. Stringy Knot - A stone surrounded by an envelope of glass, produced by dissolving of the stone, and generally having a tail of cord. Stripping Yard - The place where glass plates are removed from table after grinding and polishing. Stroctoral Glass a) Flat glass, usually coloured or opaque, and frequently ground and polished, used for structural purposes. b) Glass block, usually hollow, used for structural purposes. Submarine Throat A throat with level below the bottom of melter. Submerged Throat a) See `Dropped Throat'. b) A throat will level below the bottom `Submarine throat'. Substance - The thickness of sheet or rolled glass. Sock and Blow Process - A process of glass forming in which glass ,is sucked into a parison mould, and then blown to its Anal shape in a blow mould. Suetion Process - Any process where glass is gathered by vacuum into the mould. Slllpimr Stain - A surface defect in sheet glass, in the form of streaky lines or multicoloured blemishes caused by sulphur dioxide, if present in furnace atmosphere. 50

of melter, also called

IS : 1382 - 1981 Sump Throat - See `Submarine Throat'. Sunken Sides - An article with sides bulged inwards. Sunken Throat -See Soper Structure `Dropped Throat'. in petriAll the parts of a tank furnace above the side blocks.

Surface Blows - Air inclusions on the outer surface (particularly dishes ), leaving small sharply defined impressions. Surface Polishing - Further defects. polishing

of plate glass to remove slight

Suspended Arch - An arch in a furnace which is suspended independent of the side or jamb walls. Sweet - A term applied to easily workable glass having a long working range. T Table Blower - See 6Bench Worker Glass Blower'. Take-Out - A mechanical device for removing a finished article from any glass-forming unit. Taker-In - An operator who takes hot glassware from the forming machine, glass blower or presser to the lehr for annealing. Taker-Out - A worker who removes glassware from the forming mould for collection by the `Taker-in'. Takii Down Period - See `Coaling Down Period (b)`. glass is

Tank-A melting unit, in which the container for molten constructed from refractory blocks, also called `Tank Furnace'., Tank Block -A refractory block used in the construction compartment of a glass-melting furnace. Tank Furnace - See `Tank'. Tank Glass a) Glass melted in a tank as distinct from a pot. b) Glass suitable for tank melting. Tap a) To drain a furnace. b) To remove excess slag from the floor of a pot furnace. c) Opening in the side wall of furnace for (a) or (b). 51

of a tank

`is:1382-1981 Taper - See %nicity~ TdP - A thin film of stain on the surface of glass.

\

TeU a) An imperfection consisting of a small surface section of glass tortl out by sticking to a hot metal. b) See `Pip'. Tear Drop - A small, rounded protuberance left in an article. Teaser - The worker in direct charge of furnace operations who regulates to charging of batch and adjust fires. Teemer - The person who teems or casts the pot of glass (see cjso `Caathlg' ). Telescope Flint - Optical flint with very high relative partial dispersion usually containing a substantial proportion of zino oxide ( ZnO ). Temper-The amount of residual stress in annealed ware measured by comparison with strain discs. Tempered Glass - Glass that has'been rapidly cooled from near the softening point, under rigorous control, to increase its mechanical and thermal endurance ( see also `Safety Glass' ). Tg Point - See 6Traasformation Points'. Thermal Endurauce - A measure of the relative ability of&ss to withstand sudden changes of temperature. Thermal Shock - A sudden variation iq temperature as applied to glassware. `Riermal Shock Test - A test in which glass is subjected to relatively sudden changes of temperature in order to determine its thermal tindurance.. Thuble - A refradtory shape used for stirring pot-made optical glass. Thread - A very tie but clearly defined cord. Throat - A submerged pass&e between the melting apd refining ends of a tank, also called `Dog-Hole'. Tinsel- Small flaky pieces of glass of paper thickness, powdered, graded and silvered or lacquer&
Tit StrsamS.

An imperfection; a small protrusion on a glass a&la. a port, the projecting partition betweeh gas and aii 52

Tongue Tile -In

IS:1383-l981 Touglteaed Glass - See `Tempered Glass' and `Safety Glass'. Tower - A vertical chamber through which drawn sheet glass is passed in the Fourcault and the Pittsburgh processes. Transfer Deco&ii -, A decorative process in which a design is applied to the glass by means of a transfer. Transfer Gloss - dptical glass cooled in the pot in which it is melted. Transfommtion Points& In the measurement of the thermal expansion coefficient of glass there may be two temperatures, the Ma and Ts points, at which the slope of the graph. of expansion against temperature changes fairly.sharply. At the &Is point ( Deformation Point ), viscous deformation of `the sample makes accurate measurement of the thermal expansion, as such, impossible. The term is subject to the same lock of definition as the softening point. The Tg pcint occurs at a lower temperature usually below the annealing range of the glass. Traaslucent Glass Glass transmitting light mainly by diffuse transmission. without noticeable Transparent -.Allowing light rays to be transmitted, absorption so as to be distinctly seen through.

TripI+-Cavity Pracess Moold - A mould possessing three cavities for simuhaneous fabrication of three articles of glass. Trip+-Cavity Process - Any glass-forming process that uses three charges of glass and forms them simultaneously.
.

Triple-Gob Process - See 6Triple-Cahty Process'. Tubular Container.- A container made from glass tubing. Tackstone -Blocks placed on top of flux blocks to protect them from flame and gases and as a seal between them and the supported side and end walls. Tiu& Wall - The series of tuckstones or a wall serving the same purpose made ,of courses of bricks. Tweel, Tuille - A counterweighted furnace door, opening vertically. Twisted !3cale - A scale with its centmline helically disposed on the tube. U Uneven Likes Graduation lines of random dissimilarity in length.

Uhtllled - An article incompletely formed when the glass is not entirely in contact with the mould wall during forming. 53

IS : 1382 - 1981

Updraw-The process of continuously drawing glass of various crosssections, such as cane or tubing, by a method similar to the Fourcault process. Updraw Process-The process of continuously drawing glass of various cross-sections, such as rod or tubing, upwards from an.orifice and/or over a refractory cone. Uptake-A flue connecting the portneck with the top of the regener@or or recuperator. V Vacuity'- The space left above a liquid in a closed container to allow for possible expansion of the liquid. It may be expressed as a percentage of the liquid volume at the time of sealing. In the case of containers made of glass it is known as ullage. Vacuum-sod-Blow Process - A bottle manufacturing is gathered by vacuum and subsequently blown. process whereby glass

Vacuum Flask -A composite container comprising on outer protective case housing a refill and provided with a closure, stopper, and suitable means for its carrying. V-Value - See `Nu-Value'. Velie Process - A process for continuously drawing glass tubing ( or cane ), in which glass is fed downward to the draw through an annular orifice. vent a) Small hole drilled. through the wall of a low mould to allow air trapped between the mould and the glass to escape during final blowing. b) See `Check'. Vitrite - Black glasses used in the caps of electric lamps. Volumetric - A term applied to graduated glassware, usually for laboratory or medical purposes. Volumetric Glassware - See `Graduated Glassware'.

w
Warming-In- Reheating glass to permit further working, also for striking. Warp a) Lack of flat:: =ssof sheet or rolled glass. b) Departure from straightness in length of glass tubing. 54

Is : 1382 - 1981 Washboard-An glassware. imperfection; ripples, waves, etc, on the surface of horizontally bn the

Washboard-Ladders - Fine laps or ripples running external surface, usually on the sides of the article.

Water Glass - Sodium silicate glass that is soluble in water. Water Marks - Local deformation mould.
Wave

or pattern caused by water in a paste

a) An optical effect due to uneven glass distribution, or striae. b) A defect resulting from irregularity of the surface of glass; making objects, viewed through it at varying angles, to appear wavy or bent. Wavy Bottle - A glass bottle with an irregular inside surface. Wavy Cord - Fine, rather diffuse cord(s) in the course of resorption. wavy Liicharacter. Graduation lines having a damped periodic or oscillatory

Weathering - Attack of a glass surface by atmospheric elements. Wedged Bottom - See 9hqged Welding -Joining Bottom'.

two pieces of glass by heating and pressing together.

Welding Glass - Coloured glass to protect a welder's eyes from injurious radiations. Westlake Process - An automatic process using vacuum gather for producing articles in paste moulds, simulating the action of a hand shop. White Bead - A localized milkiness. white Line - Occulsions of air bubbles in a joint of which the componelits had roughly cut or ground ends. widret -A properly designed opening in a furnace normally kept sealed by a brick structure known as `Wicket Wall'. Wicket Wall -A wall, built into an opening in a furnace, which may be removed and rebuilt without disturbing the main furnace structure [see also `Breast Wall (b)' 1. Wtidow - See `Bright'. Window Glass - See `Sheet Glass'. 55

ls:l383-1981
Wired Glam - Flat glass with embedded wire mesh, squire or hexagonal, wired glass with embedded squaro mesh is called Georgian (see also Safety Glass )`.
Fir& Cast Glass - See %iced

Glass'.

Wired Safety Glare - See `Wired Glass'. Wobble - See `Rock'. WOOI a) See `Glass Wool'. b) Fleecy mass of plain glass flbres. Working End - The compartment of tank furnace where glass is conditioned and from which it is delivered or gathered for forming. Workii Range - The range of temperature in which glass is formed into ware in a specific process. At the upper end of the working range the glass is ready for working(-generally at a viscosity of 10s to 10' poises ), while at the _louuer_. end-the glass is sufficiently viscous to hold its formed shape ( gonerany at a viscosity of greater than 10' poises ). For comparative purposes, but not necessarily in relation to any specific process, the working range of glass is assumed to correspond to a viscosity range from 104 to lO'*@ poises. Wrinkle - See T!hill Mark'.

X
X-ray Protective Glass - Glass which contains a high .percentage of lead oxide and sometimes also barium oxide, and which has a high degree of cpacity to X-rays, also called `X-ray Shielding Glass'. The opacity of an `X-ray glass is usually expressed in terms of the thickness of metallic lead which would give equal absorption of X-rays of specified wavelength. X-Ray Shielding Glass - See `X-ray Protective Glassy.

z
Zinc Crown Glass - A crown glass containing a substantial proportion zinc oxide ( ZnO ). of

56

ls:1382-1981

SHRII. H. PiDAMSRE

Eagle Flask Pvt Ltd, Bombay Boroail Glass Works Ltd, Bombay Hindustan Vacuum Ghan Ltd, Faridabad

SHRI S. N. KAUL ( Ahmu&) SH~~IP. R. Rao SmuA.K. BANSAL(A~~UR&) SHRSR. K. SAXAX
SERlS.C.SHARYA(dl&lIUt#) DR F. L. SALDHANA
SHRXA.

B.

CHIJNODXAR(

SHRI G. K. SOb!AM

SHRIR. K. GUPTA (dlbmutr ) Sam B. M. ROY ( Altcmatr )
SHRI B.N. THAKORE SHRI S? C. VARSHNEI SHRI B. &ANDRA(A~&z&)

Haffkine Institute, Bombay Aihmak ) Hindustan National Glur Calcutta Pfizer Ltd, Bombay
Seraikella Glass Works

&

Industria

Ltd, P. 0. donnagar

57

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters; Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110062 Telegrams : Manaksanstha Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all offices) Telephones Regional 0fvze.s: 331 01 31 Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, [ 3311375 NEW DELHI-1 i 0002 36 24 99 *Eastern : 1 /14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 21843 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, I 31641 CHANDIGARH 16003% Southern tWestern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 `t: fzz I 41 2916 6329295

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AH M EDABAD 380001 tPeenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C I_. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road), HYDERABAD 500001 RI 4 Yudhister 117/418 Marg, C Scheme, Nagar, JAIPUR 302005

26348 [ 26349 38 49 55 [ 38 49 56 66716 5 36 27 3 31 77 23 1083 63471 C6 98 32 21 68 76 121 82 92 62305 6 21 04 [ 621 17 251 71

B Sarvodaya

KAN PUR 208005

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam TRIVANDRUM 695032 lnspecfion Office (With Sale Point) : Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji PUNE 411005

Nager,

52435
27 68 00 89 65 28 22 36 71

*Sales Offke in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, Calcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, Bombay 400007 *Sales Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square Bangalore 560002

-

Printed at Slmco Prlntino Press. Delhi. India

