HANDBOOK OF TYPIFIED DESIGNSFORSTRUCNRES WITH STEEL ROOF TRUSSES
(WITH AND WITHOUT CRANES)
(BASED ON IS CODES)

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

FIRSTPUBLISHED MARCH 1989 FIRSTREPRINT DECEMBER 1005 SECOND REPRINT DECEMBEfi 1'19s 0 BLJREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

UDC

: 624.072.336.3(021)

ISBN : 81-7061-021.4

PRICE : Rs 650.00

PKINI`ED

IN INDIA

Al- hUTAN PRINTEKS. I--89/12. OKIHLA INDL. AKtA. I'! lASE 1.NEW l>I:l.l !I- 1 10020 AND PUBLISHED KY WREAIJ OF INDIAN STANDAKDS. Nl .VI'111 _I I II 1 10002

SPECIAL COMMITTEE FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS (SUP)
CHAIRMAN National DR H. C. VISVESVARAYA Council for Cement and Building New Delhi REPRESENTING StrM",`d",H",' Engineering Central Building Research Centre (CSIR), Roorkee Materials

MEMBERS DR M. RAMAIAH DR R. K. BHANDARI SHRI V. RAO AIYAGARI

Research and

Institute

(CSIR),

Department

of Science

`Technology, New Delhi

New Delhi

Bureau SHRI T. S. RATNAM SHRI P. K. KALRA (Alternate) SHRI HARISH CHANDRA SHRI A. K. BANERJEE Central

of Public Public

Enterprises,

Works

Department,

New Delhi (India) Ltd,

Metallurgical Ranchi

and Engineering

Consultants

SHRI J. D. CHATURVEDI Planning SHRI G. RAMAN, (Member Secretary) Bureau

Commission, of Indian

New Delhi Yew Delhi

Standards,

Working
CONVENER
DR H. C. VISVESVARAYA

Group

for Project

B-8

National Council New Delhi

for Cement

and Building

Materials,

MEMBERS SHRI HARISH CHANDRA SHRI S. R. KLJLKARNI SHRI J. C. GANGULY

REPRESENTING Central Public Works Department, New Delhi

M. N. Dastur Braithwaite Calcutta

& Co Pvt Ltd. Calcutta & Jessop Construction Madras Consultants Bombay Centre (CSIR), Madras Madras (India) Ltd, Co Ltd,

Burn

DR P. SRINIVASA RAO Indian Institute of Technology, PROF (DR) L. N. RAMAW;RTH~ (Ahernate) SHRI A. K. BANERJEE SHRI P. V. NAIK DR M. RAMAIAH Metallurgical Ranchi Richardson Structural Madras and Engineering & Cruddas Engineering Ltd,

Research

SHRI C. N. SRINIVASAN C. R. Narayana
SHRI A. RAMAKRISHNA Engineering SHRI S. SUBRAMANIAM (Alternare)

Rao Architects

& Engineers, Ltd.

Construction

Corporation

NationaI SHRI ASHOK TREHAN SHRI A. C. GUPTA (Alternare)

Thermal

Power Corporation

Ltd, New Delhi

.. .

III

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

0. FOREWORD
The Department of Science and Technology set up an Expert Group on Housing and Construction Technology in 1972. This Group carried out in depth studies in various areas of civil engineering and construction practices followed in the country. During the pre aration of the Fifth Five-Year Plan in 1975, the Group was assigned the task o P producing a Science and Technology Plan for research, development and extension work in the sector of housing and construction technology. As a result of this and on the recommendation of the Department of Science and Technology, the Planning Commission approved the following two projects which were assigned to the Bureau of Indian Standards (BlS): a) Project Building b) Project
B-7 -

and

Programme on Code Development Civil Engineering Construction; and of Industrial Structures.

Implementation

for

B-8 -Typification

BIS has set up a special committee (SCIP) consisting of experts to advise and monitor the execution of these projects. A Working Group for Prqject B-8 overseas the work of the project. In a developing country like India, the capital outlay under each Five-Year Plan towards setting up of industries and consequently construction of industrial buildings is very high. It is, therefore, necessary that the various parameters of industrial buildings be standardized on broad norms so that it will be feasible to easily adopt prefabricated members, particularly where repetitive structures could be used. The standardization of parameters for industries by itself will be, no doubt, a difficult task as it will not be possible to specify the requirements of each industry. The layout including height will vary from industry to industry, for it depends on the process of manufacture and end products. However, a little more detailed analysis of the requirements indicates that the problem may not be as difficult as it appears. Although it would not be possible to specify any constraint on the parameters, a broad norm can be given within which most industries could be accommodated. The object of the project B-8 is to typify at national level the common forms of industrial structures used in light engineering industries, warehouses, workshops and storage sheds, and to obtain economical designs under these conditions. Even if an industrial complex is-classified as heavy industry. it need not necessarily mean that all the industrial structures coming within the complex should be heavy industrial structures and that many structures could be from the typified design. The main objective of typification of industrial structures is to reduce the variety to the minimum and provide standard prefabricated designs so that the structures could be easily mass produced and made available to the user almost off the shelf. In doing so, there will be tremendous saving in time in putting up an industry into production and hence increased production. This would indirectly increase the overall economy of the country. This would also help in the orderly use of source materials like steel and cement. This would be of immense use to structural engineers as well, since it would relieve them, to a large extent, from the routine and repetitive calculations. Thus the engineers time could be used to look at more innovative and economical alternatives. The project on typification of industrial structures involved main tasks prior to preparation of typified designs: a) Task 1 Survey types; and classification of industrial the following three

structures

into different

b) Task II -

Identification of industrial structures repeated a large number of times in the country, which are amenable to typification from the classified list prepared during Task 1; and

c) Task III -- Specifying the elements of the industrial structures to be typified taking into consideration a number of parameters, such as structures with cranes and without cranes, span, iength, height, support conditions, slope of roof, wind and earthquake forces, spacing, field and shop connections, material (steel, reinforced concrete). etc. The data regarding physical parameters like span, spacing, roof slope, column heights, crane loading, etc, of existing structures has been obtained from several public sector enterprises through Bureau of Public Enterprises (BPE). Some information from private industries has also been collected by BIS. The typified design for the following types of industrial structures in steel and reinforced concrete is envisaged to be brought out based on appropriate Indian Standards: a) Steel
I) Structures

Structures

with steel roof trusses with steel kneebraced with steel portal with steel portal with steel !attice
Concrete Structures

(with trusses

and

without

cranes)

2) Structures 3) Structures 4) Structures 5) Structures b) Reirzfotwd
1) 2)

(without

cranes)

frames frames frames

(without (with

cranes) (SP : 40)*

cranes) cranes)

(without

Structures Structures

with with with

RCC RCC RCC

roof trusses portal portal frames frames

(with

and

without cranes)

cranes)

(without (with

3) Structures

cranes) of crane

In each case of structures with cranes, the maximum capacity considered is limited to 20 tonnes. normal range in light industries.

This Handbook deals'with tvpification of structures with steel roof trusses (with and without cranes) having A-type as well as lean-to roof type trusses supported on columns. In structures with cranes, crane columns are build-up cantilever columns to resist wind and transverse crane loads. The roof trusses which are the same for buidlings with and without cranes have been designed both as angle trusses and tubular trusses. Some of the points to be noted regarding are as follows: a) Typified Span design have
been

analysis

and design of these structures parameters: 9, 12, 18, 24 and 30 9, 12 and 15 4.5 and 6.0 1 in 3, 1 in 4 and 1 in 5 (m) Truss'

given

for the following = = = =
Colunlrl Height

lengths (metres): A-type lean-to roof Spacing of trusses (metres) Roof slopes
Span

n (m) 9.0 12.0 15.0 18.0 24.0 30.0 f A-Type Truss 4.5. 6.0 4.5, 6.0. 9.0 6.0, 92, 12.0 9.0, 12.0 9.0. 12.0 Lean-to Roof 4.5. 6.0 4.5, 6.0. 9.0 4.5, 6.0. 9.0 = = = = = =

Crane column height (metres) Crane capacities (tonnes) Minimum clear head room (metres) Minimum side clearance (metres) Wind zones (see IS : 875-1964) Earthquake zones (see IS : 1983-1984) *Printed. vi

4.5 and 6.0 5, 7.5, 10 and 20 3.0 0.5 I, II and III I, II, III, IV and V

In general use of 1 in 3 slope is recommended as this may not pose any fabrication problem. Flatter slopes may be adopted after taking due

precautions for fabrication of trusses. In case of flatter slopes, the end laps between adjacent sheets shall be correspondingly increased over that of 1 in 3
slope and/or the joints recommendations. suitably sealed in accordance with the manufacturer's based on the in the stiffness design.

b) The analysis has been made using a computer programme stiffness method of analysis. The member properties required analysis hqve been assumed on the basis of a preliminary c) Trusses

have been designed both as angle trusses and tubular trusses. The' structure with steel roof trusses have been designed following the provisions of IS : 800-1962 for hot-rolled sections and IS : 806-1968 for tubular sections. There will be some variation in the permissible stress in case IS : 800-1984 is used for design of hot-rolled sections. However, it is felt that the design results presented in the Handbook will not be much different from those obtained by. using IS : 800-1984. pressure/section permeability (kO.2) specified in IS : 875-1964 for buildings has been considered in design. with

d) The internal
normal

e) The joint details have been included to illustrate the method of detailing and they should not be considered as the only available method for detailing. f) The typified design results are given for purlins, girts, trusses and columns. Design of other elements such as column cap plates, base plates and fasteners are also covered. Typified design of gantry girders for various crane loads and spacing of columns is also given in the Handbook. Bracing and foundation designs have not been typified because of varying design parameters. However, a typical example of bracing design and footing design is included. g) A detailed design example in. the design office format is given in the Handbook illustrating the use of analysis and design information presented. h) On the basis of typified designs for different spans, spacings, roof slopes, etc, some conclusions regarding the more economical designs is covered in the Handbook. j) The Handbook is not to be used for design of structures intended for processiheavy industries. The Handbook may be used only for design of industrial sheds meant for storage purposes or light industrial structres. Use of cranes will be limited to light duty according to the classification No. 1 of IS : 807-1976. k) Minimum section specified for internal web members in trusses with angle sections is equal angle ISA 40 X 40 X 6. However, for larger A-type trusses with spans of 24 and 30 m, this minimum angle may be replaced by angle ISA 50 X 50 X 6, wherever there is any chance of distortion or deformation taking place during transportion or erection of truss. m) The Handbook is intended to be used by qualified engineers only.

The Handbook is based on the work done by Structural Engineering Laboratory, Department of Civil Engineering, lndian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras. The draft was circulated for review to the. University of Roorkee, Roorkee; National Projects Construction Corporation Limited, New Delhi; Engineer-inChief% Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi; Gammon India Limited, Bombay; Association of Consulting Engineers (India), New Delhi; Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay; Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (India) Limited; National Industrial Development Corporation, New Delhi; Research Designs and Standards Organization, Lucknow; S. R. Joshi and Company Limited, Bombay; Food Corporation of India. New Delhi; Engineers lndia Limited, New Delhi; National Hydro-Electric Power Corporation Limited, New Delhi; National Thermal Power Corporation, New Delhi; Western Railways, Bombay; Braithwaite and Company Limited, Calcutta; Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited, Jamshedpur; B. G. Shrike and Company, Pune; City and Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Limited, Bombay; Stup Consultants Limited, Bombay; Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Ranipet; Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, New Delhi; Hindustan Steel Works Construction Limited,

vii

Calcutta; Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi; Planning Commission, New Delhi; C. R. Narayana Rao, Architects and Engineers, Madras; Engineering Construction Corporation Limited, Madras; Central Building Research Institute; Roorkee; Jessop Company Limited, Calcutta; National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi; Structural Engineering Research Centre, Madras; Bureau of Public Enterprises, New Delhi; Central Public Works Department (CDO), New Delhi; M. N. Dastur and Company Private Limited, Calcutta, Shri J. Durai Raj, New Delhi; and their views have been taken into consideration while finalizing the Handbook.

VIII

. ..

CONTENTS
Page 1. GENERAL I. I 1.2 1.3 2. Introduction Truss Configuration 1 1 2 6 6 Truss Truss Analysis Analysis Results Results 6 6 6 6 and Girt Design 6 7 Design Loads of Metal 10 11 12 12 Detafis Details Details 12 12 12 20 Details 20 20 Details 20 26 28 33 Design 35 37 Design Design 39 39 40 40 43 for Crane Loads 48 54 CONCLUSIONS 54 56

Terminology

ANALYSIS 2.1 2.2 2.3 Introduction A-Type Lean-to Roof Roof

3.

DESIGN 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 General Purlin Truss

Design Column

Cantilever Design

for Crane Thickness

Minimum

4.

FABRICATION 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 Purlin Angle Tube Rafter Truss Truss

DETAILS Connection Connection Connection

Column Expansion Truss

Details Joint

Camber

Miscellaneous Erection

Procedure

5.

DESIGN 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 Purlin Truss

EXAMPLE Design Member

Design Truss Column

of Columns Shoe Angle

Base Plate Details

Connection Design Bracing Design

of Foundation Design Example

5.10 Drawings 6. SUMMARY REFERENCES AND

ix

SP : 38(,5&T)-1987

1.

GENERAL

Wind zones Earthquake Permeability zones

1.1 Introduction -- Steel trusses, supported on are one of the structural systems columns, commonly used in industrial buildings. The lateral load resistance (due to wind, earthquake, etc) of such systems may be derived either from the cantilever action of the supporting columns fixed at base or by the combination of horizontal wind girders at the truss tie level and vertically braced end bays. The steel trusses have been designed as simply supported on columns and subjected to loads (dead, live, crane, wind and earthquake loads) applied through the purlins, girts and gantry girders. The columns have been designed as cantilevers tied together resisting wind load and other loads acting perpendicular to the ridge, in

= I, II and III = I, II, III, IV and V = Normal

The typified designs have been done considering economy associated with minimum
weight and mass production of fabrication. The analysis and designs repetitive have been

addition to axial load. The analysis and design results are given for purlins, steel roof trusses made of angles or tubes, columns and base plates. The typified designs have beeri presented for the following different parameters: = 9, 12, 18, 24 and 30 Span length of A-type trusses (metres) Span length of lean-to = 9, 12 and 15 roof trusses (metres) Spacing between trusses (metres) Roof slope
Span

done on the basis of relevant Indian Standards. In general, use of 1 in 3 slope is recommended as this may not pose any fabrication problem. Flatter slopes may be adopted rifter taking due precautions for fabrication of trusses. In case of flatter slopes, the end laps between adjacent sheets shall be correspondingly increased over that of I in 3 slope and/or the joints suitaibly sealed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The hot-r&led steel members and fasteners conforming to IS : 226-1975, IS : 2062-1984 and steel tubes conforming to grade Yst 25 of IS : 1161-1979 have been used in the elements of the structure.
1.2 Truss Configuration - Before the choice of a final configuration of truss for the typified design, several commonly used truss configurations have been studied. From among these, three configurations shown in Fig. 1 selected for an indepth weight comparison. These are: (a) fink or fink fan, (b) N-truss, and (c) a configuration incorporating the advantages of the first two alternatives. These three configurations were analyzed and designed for two A-type truss spans (12 and 24 m) spaced at 4.5 metres spacing and 200 kg/m* basic wind pressure. For 12 m span length configuration, a and c were essentially the same and hence configuration a was not analyzed. The weights of trusses are also given in Fig. 1.

= 4.5 and 6.0 = 1 in 3, 1 in 4 and 1 in 5
Colutm Heights

(m) G-Type 9.0 12.0 15.0 18.0 24.0 30.0 6.9, 9.0, 12.0 9.0, 12.0 9.0, 12.0 4.5, 6.0 4.5, 6.0, 9.0

A Lean-to ' Roof 4.5, 6.0 4.5, 6.0, 9.0 4.5, 6.0, 9.0

(m)

It was found that the configuration c shown in Fig. 1 had the minimum weight among the three configurations and at the same time may be easier to fabricate. Consequently, all A-type trusses and lean-to roof trusses have been designed using configuration (c) (See Fig. 1). 1.2.1 A-type Truss Configuration - Figure 2A shows the configuration of the typified trusses for different span lengths alongwith tie runner positions. These configurations have been arrived at, after a detailed study of various possible configurations as explained in 1.2. The distance between nodes in the rafters is restricted to be less than or equal to 1.4 m such that the purlins may be located directly at the nodes and thus avoid panel bending of rafters which has led to lower truss weight.

= 4,5 and 6.0 = 5, 7.5, IO and 20 = 3.0 = 0.5

Crane column height (metres) Crane capacities (tonnes) Minimum clear head room (metres) Minimum side clearance (metres)

SP : 38 (S&T)-1987
SWUNG SPAN = 4500 SLOPE: I IN 3 WIND ZONE: Ill TOTAL WEIGHTIN Kg.

CONFIGURATION

(bl
24.00 M k)

N-TYPE 980. I 9.1

COMPOUND OF (a) 6 (b)

d

*5o*o 7.8
(b)
N-TYPE

NOTE-

All weight excluding wt of fixtures, purlin etc.

FIG. 1 WEIGHT COMPARISON OF ROOF TRLJSSCONFIGURATIONS The joint numbers are shown in the right half of the trusses and the member numbers within circles in the left half of the trusses in Fig. 2A. The joint and member numbers in the other halves are symmetrical. Analysis and design details are presented with respect to the joint and niember numbers. 1.2.2 Lean-to Roof Truss Configuration Figure 2B shows the configuration of the typified lean-to roof trusses for different span lengths alongwith tie runner positions. These configurations have been arrived at after a detailed study of various possible configurations. The distance between nodes in the rafters are restricted to be less than or equal to 1.4 m so that the purlins may be located directly at the nodes and thus avoid panel bending of rafters. The member numbers are shown within circles Columns - These are members, generally vertical, which primarily resist axial load. They are more often subjected to thrust and moment. Usually rolled single sections are used but laced and battened columns are also used where two or more rolled sections are connected together by lacing or batten plates. Column Height -- It is the height of column from the top of column pedestal (or bottom of column base plate) to the bottom of truss shoe angle in the structures without cranes and up to bottom of gantry girder in case of columns with cranes. Crane Girders - These resist vertical and horizontal loads from cranes. They usually consist of a l-beam with a channel, flanges down, welded to the top flange. Girts - Beam members supported by columns. carrying side sheeting and roof sheeting

adjacent to members and joint numbers adjacent to nodes in Fig. 2B. These joint and member numbers are used to present all the analysis and design details.
1.3 Terminology

Purlins - Beam members carrying and supported by trusses. Roof Slope - It is the slope of with respect to the span length. dividing height of truss by half for A-type truss and height of span for lean-to roof truss. Spacing distance

Bay-The
called a bay.

space between succesgive bents is

the roof material It is obtained by the span of truss truss divided by

BracingThe single or double diagonal membeh which form trusses with columns or beams (trusses) to provide stability and resist horizontal load.

Between Trusses - The centre line of two trusses in longitudinal direction. of roof columns

Span -The centre line distance in transverse direction. 2

SP : 38(S&cT)_1987

MEMBER

NOS.

----I--

JOINT NOS.

TIE RUNNERSL (a) SPAN = 9.0m

(b) SPAN = 12.om

(c) SPAN= 18-O m
2A Configurations of A-type steel roof trusses-Conrd.

SP : 38(!S&T)-1987

MEMBER

NOS -I---

I -

JOINT

NOS.

LTIE

RUNNER

(d) SPAN=24.0m

LTIE

RUNNER (e) SPAN=30.0

m
steel roof trusses

2A Configurations

of A-type

4

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TIE RUNNERSJ (a) SPAN: 9.0m

-IE

RUNNER

(b) SPAN: 1.2.0 m

(C) SPAN:

15Om
steel roof number trusses. tbe circle indicate the joint location,

2B Configuration of lean-to NOTENumber within the circle indicate the member and

without

`Y--F'indicate the field splice locatiort
FIG.

2.TRUSS

CONFIGURATIONS

5

SP : 38(s&T)-1987 Truws - These are framed assemblies generally carrying loads in the plane of the frame. The individual members are primarily in te?sion or compression which may be accompanied with some bending moment. 2. ANALYSIS 2.1 lntrodtiction - The steel trusses have been analyzed as simply supported on columns. The rafter and tie members of the trusses have been adequately braced raterally thus preventing outof-plane buckling. 7 he trusses have been analyzed assuming the connections between the members to be rigid and capable of transferring moment and shear in addition to axial force. The support at one end is assumed to be hinged and the other end on rollers for the purpose of analysis. This is achieved in the actual structure by the flexibility of columns. The analysis has been made using a computer programme based on the stiffness method of analysis. Due to the large number of trusses to be analyzed, pre- and post-processing subroutines have been appended .to the analysis programme which automaticall;; generate the necessary input data and print the output results in the required tabular format, alter calculating the governing design forces from among various load combinations. The resulting analysis programme requires the span, length, spacing, roof slope and wind zone as the input data for the analysis and after the stiffness analysis and post processing of analysis results, it prints the member forces and the truss support reactions. The member properties required in the stiffness analysis have been assumed on the basis of a preliminary design. The trusses have been analy/cd tar dead load, live load and wind Ioad according to IS : X751964. ~l~hctotal dead load varies from 36 kg: m'? to 4.5 kg, 111'.The basic wind pressure for the three wind 7oncs hace been considered as specified in IS : 875 I964. 1 hc internal pressure 1suction as applicable for huilclings with normal permeability has been considered. The wind direction parallel to the ridge govern the member forces in all the horizontal forces from trusses. However. trusses on to columns have been obtained Irom wind direction perpendicular to the ridge. The forces and moments In the trur,s members due to the combination of dead load and live load are compared with that due to dead load and wind load in order to determine the governing design forces. The member design forces for all the trusses to be typified and their support reactions have been given in this Handbook. A few typical >hort with roof trusses were forces according to member forces cvcn earthquake was always and long span structures analysed for earthquake IS : I X93-1975 and the due to the severest found to be less than that due to the minimum basic wind pressure of 100 kg/m?. Hence the earthquake loads does not govern the design of structures with steel roof trusses. 2.2 A-Type Roof Truss Analysis Results -~ I'hc analysis results for all the A-type trusses are given in Tables 1 to 90. The heading of each table gives the design parameters of the truss. The maximum due to the compressive force, the mement corresponding load case and maxlmum -tens& force and the moment due to the corresponding load case for each member are tabulated. The forces tabulated are the values after 25 percent reduction in the analysis result. if wind load has contributed to the force in the member. (This 1 reduction accounts for the 33 - percent increase 3 in the tillowable stress in such loading cases). The reactions at truss supports are given at the end of table>, following the member forces. 2.3 Lean-To Roof Truss Analysis Results The analysis results for all the lean-to roof trusses arc given in Tables 91 to 144 along the same lines as in the case of A-type trusses as discussed in 2.2. 3. DESIGN 3.1 General ~~ The structural design of. hot roll& steel sections is based on IS : 800-1962. There will be sdme variation in permissible stresses in case IS : X00-1984 is followed. It is however felt tnat the design results presented in this handbook will not be much different from obtained using IS : 800-1984. Tubular those sections have been designed based on 1S : 806196X. The following clauses present the design I-csuits of purlinh. girts. trusses, columns and base
plates.

The maximum 3.2 Purlin and Girt Design spacing between purlins has hcen taken to be equal to I.4 m and between girts to be equal to 1.7 m as per manufacturer's specifications. The design has been done using A.C. sheeting for cladding. C.G.1. sheet cladding mai also be used with the same purlin and girt si/e and spacing. The purlins and girts have been designed to span the spacing between the trusses or columns (4.5 or 6.0 m) and transfer the loads (dead. li\,e. wind and earthquake loads) from the sheeting to the supporting frame taking iuto consideration biaxial bending. The purlinz ,IIKI girts have been designed for the nornl;t1 I\ iud pressure on claddings as per IS : X75-l(W iot the USC 01 buildings with normal permcabi!ity. HoweLet sheeting and ahccting fasteners have to be designed for incrcabcd wind prescurc due to loc;~I effects as per IS : 875-1964. I IIC dcsipn has been presented for tubular purlins ;111d girts without any sag rod, and for channel purlm~ and girts without sag rod and altcrnati\el!~ with one sag rod at mid span. The diagonal sag rods arc assumed to be provided at the top most panel and also at every 8th panel for purlins and 7th panel for girts.

6

SP : 38(S&T~l!M7
(a) Purlin Sizes (All the 3 wind zones) Purlin Span (m) Channels: 4.5 I .4 Ma.\-im urn Spacing -Et h sag rod With Size .-. sag rod

(m) ISMC 125 X 12.7 ISMC 150 X 16.4 ISMC 100 X 9.2 ISRO 10 mm dia sag rod ISMC 125 X 12.7 ISRO 12 mm dia sag rod
Purlin Spacing I':: (m) 125 L 150 L Size (without

6.0
Tubes: Span (m) 4.5 6.0

1.4

`sag rod)

(b) Girt Sizes: (All the 3 wind zones) hannels: Girt Span (m`, Maximum Spacing CWithout sag rod 1'25X 12.7 150X 16.4 Size A

With sag rod
ISMC 100 X 9.2 ISRO 10 mm dia sag rod ISMC 125 X 12.7 ISRO 12 mm dia sag rod

4.5
6.0 Tu hes: Span (m)

1.7
1.7

ISMC ISMC

Maximum Spacing (mj

Girt -

Size (without sag rod) For Wind pressure

`100 kg/m' 4.5 6.0 1.7 1.7 80 L 100 L

150 kg/m' 90 L 100 M

200 kg/m21 100 L 125 M

The staridard connection details of girts to the framing is shown in Fig. rod and diagonal sag rod details used purlins and girts and given in Fig. \(Jrl.
dcsien Inrtcad of simply Eikc'tt i!i thib tv&ied

purlins and 3. The sag in channel 4.

supported purlin and girt debirn. halanctxl cantilever

been designed both as angfe trusses and tubular trusses. A computer programme which could directly process all the analysis programme results and design the truss members using angle and tubular sections was developed for the purpose. All the shop connections have been assumed to be welded and the field connections to bc bolted or welded. for the design. The effective length of compression members has been assumed to be 0.85 times the actual length of the members ccntre to centrc of nodes. The masimum slenderness ratio of compression mcmbcrs has been restricted to be less than IX0 and tension members-to be_ less than 250. I-`01 ;tnglcs in tt'nL.i0n. the net effective area as petIS : 800-1962 has been considere.d in design. `I`hc compression members ha\;c been designed against buckling in and out ol the truss. In order to reduce the inventory of too many diffcrcn! sectIons. on!! thirteen diflercnt angle sections anJ

3.3 Truss Design - The A-tspc trusses habc been designed for the forces g&n in Tables I to
90 and lean-to roof trusses for the forces $en in Tables 91 to 144 using angle and tube hcctiona. The members of steel roof truhses have .ce I1 designed for the simultaneous actIon of axial lorces and bending momenrs, obtained from the analysis programme, following the go\,erning protlsions of IS : 800-1962. rh.: trusses have

7

SP : 38(S&T)-1987
G. I. FLAT WASHER-

G.I*NUT .I. CRANK BOLT

RAFTEm
/'

280mm_A
1' ,/

,,,,---

Bmm DIA G.I.H(IOKBOLT

_ . _...-

~34mm

+146mm

_

lSA90*@6

.I. NUI . I. FLAT WASHER ITUMEN WASHER

(a)CHANNEL

PURLI NS

G.I. FLAT WASHER7 G-I. NUT--\4 GiHOOK BOLT - \\\"' // BITUMEN WASHER TUBE PURLINS.

SECTION
I

A - A

RAFTER -/ .I. FLAT WASHER UMEN WASHER

cbl TUBE

PURLINS

PURLI

SECTION
FIG.

B-B

3 PURLIN RAFTER AND SHEETING CONNECTIONS

SP : 38(S&Tk1987

STRAIGHT

SAG RO

FOR4.�m TRUSS MAX. PANEL SIZE FOR ROOF PURLIN FOR WALL GIRTS DIAGONAL SAG RODS BE PLACED AT EVERY STH WNEL FOR PURLIN

I----

SPACING OF tTiUSSES

SECTION

X-X DETAIL- A

ENTRE OF PURLIN SPAN

DETAIL-B
(WITH 20mm STRUT)

W&
DETAIL

"

!

6mm PLATE) f-l

C

tl
(WITH ISA

I

ALT. DETAIL

8

50X50X6)

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 lourteen different tubular sections have been used in the final design. These sections have been choosen on the basis of most frequent occurrence in the least weight design. In case any .section specified in Handbook is not available in market, the same can be substituted with next heavier section available. Minimum section specified for internal web members in trusses with angle sections is equal angle ISA 40 X 40 :< 6. However for larger Atype trusses with spans of 24 m and, 30 m, this minimum angle may be replaced by angle ISA 50 X 50 X 6, wherever there IS any chance of dlstortlon or deformation taking place during transportation or erection of truss. The rafter members, tie members and the !ongest leading diagonal member of all trusses and the end vertical at the support of lean-to roof trusses are kept double angles back to back. All the other members arc single angles. The rafter and tie members. in tbe final design have been chosen to be the same section over their entire length for &,orter spans (9 and 12 m span A-type and lean-to `roof' trusses) and at the most two different sections foi longer spans ( IX, 24 and 30 m span A-type trusses and 15 m span lean-to roof trusses). The tic member!, .rf the trusses have been designed for compression due to wind uplift considering the tie members to be laterally braced against buckling at tie runner locations as.shown in Fig. 1 and 2. The tie members have also been checked for laterai buckling while lifting the trushcs for erection .l'he steel A-type truss design results are presented in Tables 145 to 159 fc.r angle trusses and Tables 160 to 174 for tubular trusses. The steel lean-to roof truss design results are presented in Tables 17.5 to i 83 for angle trusses and in Tables 184 to 192 for tubular trusses. Each tablb covers all the trusses having the same span and roof slope but two different spacings between trusses (4.5 and 6.0 mj and three different wind zones. A reference to Table I of IS : I t 61-1979 indicates that for some of diameters (for example 50 and 150 mm dia) tubes of more than one weight are available. In such cases tubes of minimum weights have only been used for the purpose of this Handbook. Altogether, ninety different designs for A-type trusses and fifty four different designs for lean-to roof trusses have been given for trusses made up of angles or tubes the number of different typified trusses may be further reduced for the purpose of mass production by choosing the most critical design for all the wind zones and spacings, if so desired. This however may mean an Increase in the weight of trusses by as much as about 40 percent. The total weight of each truss, excluding tne weight of gussets and other accessories. is also presented in Tables 145 to 192. The weight of each truss per square metre of the plan area covered, is given in at the bottom of each table. The gusset design for a few typical angle trusses indicates that the weight of gusset would be in the range of 20-30 percent of weight of the truss, the larger percentage being applicabIe for smaller spans. The tie runners have been designed as te_&pn members giving lateral restraint to the bottom chord under wind uplift. Since the forces in these members are very nominal, their sizes as given below are determined by the maximum allowable slenderness ratio of 350. The eaves beams have been designed to have a slenderness ratio not to exceed 250. These also should be checked for compression due to bracing forces.

of truss
Im) 4.5 6.0

Spacing

Size of eaves beams ISMB ISMB 200 250

c I-ISA I-ISA

Size q f tie runrwrs A Angle 6565 X6 9090X 6

Tube' 32 I_ so L.

3.4 Cantilever

Column

Design

3.4.1 The columns of the atcci rool tiu\sch h:t~c hccn dcsigncd air cantiicvcr CO~LII~I~~. tile cantlicwr columns in structures without cranes h:tvc been designed 10 slIpport the load5 coming irom the truhscs in addition to the dead load and Mind forces from side ctaddings. 25 per-cent reduction of wind load allowed in IS : X75-1964 ioi building height:, less than 30 metrcs has been considct-cd for column design. l`hc colum~ts hahc been designed as beam columns. having thcil m 3.j0 r axis perpendicular to the ~pallning direction of the trusses. I'he effcctivc Icngth of the cantiievcr columns for axial load ih taken to bc I.5 tinles the actual length for huchiing about the maior axis and 0.75 times the actual icngth tor buckling about the minor axis. `I hc effective length for lateral buckling in flcxurc 01' the cantiicvcr columns is taken to be quaI to 0.75 times the actual length. In the multihay structures, t!lc columns have been chcckcd cousidcring the wind drag on the interior roof ;I\ per IS : X751964. The columns arc ~~ssumcd to be I~\,cd at base and tied together by trusses :tt the top. thus forcing the cantilever deflection ol all the columns ,ioined together by trusses in a iinc to be equal. 3.4.2 .Thc design results arc presented in Tab!es 193 to 202 for the A-type roof truss columns and in Tables 203 to 20X for the lean-to roof trubs columns. Each table gives the details for a column. supporting the truss having a given span length and spacing between trusses. l`he dctaiis given are reactions at the bottom of the column. and the minimum section required from each of the four different types 01 roiicd I-sections namely iSI.R, ISMB. ISWB and ISlIH. All the

1

SP : 38(S&T)_1987 column sections listed in SP : 6(l)-1964 have been considered in the design. If any particular section is not available,' the next bigger section may be used in fabrication. Since the columns are acting more as flex-Ural members than as compression members, the slenderness ratio limit has been taken'as 250 rather than 180 in the design of columns. The horizontal deflection of the columns (sway) at the top has been restricted to be less than height/325. The bending moments in interior columns of multibay structures is less than that of the corresponding single-bay column arti hence the column sizes given in Tables 193 to 208 may be used also for interior columns of multiple bay structure. 3.4.3 Forces for the design of foundations of these columns may be taken from Tables 193 to 208. The details of columns supporting crane is given iu next section. 3.5 Design for Crane LoadsStructures supporting cranes are' discussed in this section. The roof truss are the same as discussed in Section 3.3. The columns are designed for the light duty cranes conforming to Classification No. I of IS : 807-1976 and having 5, 7.5. 19 and 20 tonnes capacity. 3.5.1 Crane Load Details - Wheel loads on gantry girders mainly depend on the crane weight, crab weight, the capacity of crane, the wheel base, the mimmum hook clearance, etc. These load details generally depend on the crane dimensions manufactured by different manufacturers/ organizations. Based on a survey of many sources the wheel loads on the gantry girders (excluding impact) used in this Handbook for medium duty E.O.T. cranes are shown in Table 209. 3.52' Analwis und Design of' Ganrrv Girders ~-The maximum vertical hnd horizontal moments are calculated by proper arrangement of wheel loads on the gantry span length. Twenty five percent impact factor has been considered in calculating the vertical wheel load values. A horizontal surge load of IO percent of crane capacity including weight of crab is considered to be acting at the top level of crane rail and transverse to it. This is equally shared by two crane girders. Horizontal surge load, as calculated above, shall be equally distributed on wheel loads on one side of the crane at a time. Combination of channel and rolled l-sections has been considered in the design. The top and bottom stresses of the combined section have been limited to the permissible stresses as specified by IS : 800-1962. The deflection check has been carried out to limit fhe maximum total vertical deflection to be less than spani750. Although the shear stress in web is wifhin permissible limit?;, even then one stiffener has been provided at support. Mimmum side clearance from face ' 6f. roof leg to the centre line of rail has been kept as 500 mm and minimum top clearance of 3.0 m has been provided in accordance with IS : 8640-1977. The design sections are given only for the commonly, available ISMC and ISMB sections. Tables 210 and 2 11 give the analysis and design results for different spans of gantry girders. 3.5.3 Analysis and Design of Stepped Columns - in case of structures with cranes,. the cantilever columns have been designed to resist crane loads in addition to dead, live and wind loads. The columns have been designed to restrict the maximum transverse deflection cf the columns to be-less than `height/ 325' at the top. At the crane level the lateral deflection due to combined transverse crane surge and service load (wind pressure 25 kg/m2) is restricted to be less than `height/ 1 000'. The stepped column mainly consists of two portions as shown inFig. 5. The upper part above the crane cap with a length of LI is termed as roof supporting column RI, while the lower part below the crane cap consists of two rolled sections (I or channel section) spaced along the span direction and laced together. The column below the gantry girder known as crane column `C' has length Lz and the other column supporting wall cladding known as lower roof column RZ also has length
L2.

The crane columns RI, R2 and C have been designed for the critical forces from the following combinations: a) Dead b) Dead c) Dead load + imposed load + imposed load + wind loads loads + wind loads

loads

The dead load consists of roof load including weight of trusses and bracings, wall claddings and girts, and columns. The imposed load includes roof live load and crane loads including lateral loads and vertical impact. Wind load includes maximum external wind pressure on wall and roof in addition to internal pressure/suction due to normal permeability with the wind blowing perpendicular to the ridge. In the design of stepped column the effective length factors have been considered as follows: Column Strong axis (xx) coqfjiciivit (2) tE5 0:SS 1.5 Weak axis (YY) c'oeifjicient (3) 1.0 I8 0:85

(1) Roof column RI Roof column R2 Crane column C Combined column

11

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 The slope of truss system has not been considered as a variable because there is no significant variation in the design forces of columns due to variation in roof slope. All the analysis and design results for columns have been carried out for only signle bay system.
In the design o`f columns, the 25 percent reduction of wind load as allowed in IS : 875-1964 for building height less than 30 metres, has been considered. The typified design results are presented in Tables 212 and 213. 3.5.4 Foundation Forces - Founctation forces due to dead load, live load, crane load and wind load have been presented separately to facilitate the use of working siress or limit state design as desired by the engineer. For the base moments due to wind load, critical values from among those corresponding to different roof slopes (I in 3, I in 4, I irl 5) have been presented. `The foundation forces are presented'in Tables 214 to 218. 3.6 Minim m Thickness of Metal - Minimum thickness o P, structural steel sections has been provided as 6.0 mm .assuming they are fully accessible for cleaning and. repainting. Where structural steel sections are not fully accessible for cleaning and repainting, thickness may be increased in accordance with IS : 800-1984. Minimum thickness of steel tubes has been provided as 2.6 mm thick assuming construction is not exposed to weather ,and t'ubes are applied with one coat of zinc primer conforming to IS : 104-1979 followed by a coat of paint conforming to IS : 2074-1979 and two coats of paint conforming `to IS : 123-1962. In case the construction is exposed to weather or where regular maintenance is not possible, minimum thickness of tubes may be increased in accordance with IS : 806-1668. 4. FABRICATION DETAILS the truss shall be connected to cleat angle with 212 mm diameter bolts at each end. The straight sag rod and diagonal sag rod details are shown in Fig. 4 for the roof purlins and wail girts respectively. In wide roofs having large number of purlins and in high wall claddings having large number of girts, the diagonal sag rods should be provided at every 8th Panel for purlin and 7th Panel for girt. The top most panel close to the ridge in the roof, and the top-most panel close to the eaves in the wall should have diagonal sag rods and in addition should support, by a strut, the top purlin or girt as shown in Fig. 4. 4.2 Angle Truss Connection Details - The typical details of connections between angle truss members are shown in Fig. 7 to 25. The members at a joint should be connected such that their C.G. lines intersect at a point as shown, without any eccentricity. All the shop connections are welded and field connections may be bolted or welded. The 9 and 12 m span trusses are to be completely fabricated as one unit in the shop. The 18 and 24 m span trusses are to be fabricated in two units and assembled in field to form the desired truss whereas the 30 m span trusses are to be fabricated in shop and transported in three units and are to be assembled in field to form the 30 m span. The type of detail from Fig. 7 to 25 to be used in any connection of an angle truss is indicated in Table 219 for A-type trusses and in Table 220 for lean-to roof trusses. The gusset plate thickness has been calculated on the basis of fastener bearing requirement and the gusset thickness required is presented in Table 221. The actual size and length of weld and size and number of bolts to be used in the connections are given in Table 222 on the basis of angle joined. The connection between the gusset and the continuous rafter/tie members need not be on the basis of the fastener requirement of Table 222, but as in the foot-note of Table 222. The tack welding detail of the back to back angles is shown in Fig. 25 and the end welding requirements is given in Table 222. 4.3 Tube Truss Connection Details Typical details of connections between tubular members of the truss are shown in Fig. 26 to 41. All shop and field connections are welded. The 9 and 12 m trusses are to bc fabricated in shop as whole unit and transported to site. The 18 and 24 m trusses are fabricated in shop as two units and 30 m trusses as 3 units for ease of transportation and finally joined together at site by welding. The type of detail from Fig. 26 to 41 to be used in any connection of tubular trusses is indicated in Table 223 for A-type trusses and in Table 224 for lean-to roof trusses. All the shop connections

4.0 Typical details of connections in steel truss structures; are discussed in this clause. The details given here are by no means all encompassing or the only possibility. The most commonly followed procedure has been recommended here. The standard welding symbols used in the details in this Handbook are as per IS : 813-1961 and the salient features are shown in Fig. 6. 4.1 Purlin Rafter Connection Details -- The sheetingi and the fasteners connecting sheetings to supporting members should be capable of resisting local high pressure recommended by IS : 875-1964. The connection detail between truss rafter and channel/tube purlin is shown in Fig. 3. The purlins are to be located at or as close as possible to the nodes of the roof trusses. The channel purlins continuous at the truss shall be connected with 2-12 mm diameter bolts td cleat angles and the channel purlins discontinuous at

12

SP : 38(SBiTW87

SLOTTED

HOLE AT

ONE Em) AND CIRCULARHOLE AT 2F
COLUMN RI `"' `ii;; 6%&i&R HAVWG CIRCULAR HOLE TO BE WELDED AFTER ERECTION

SECTION A-A

;

h-\

ISA

SOXSOX6 /RAN6 RAIL

CRANE LEVEL TIE WITH ISMC IO 6. ISA 50X50X6 5' DIAGONAL DE1-t .

i

< 2-l6MC
-CRANE 3 \

200 COLUMN-C!

/f-ISMC

200

.ATE

ROOF COLUMN-R 2 40cm ISM6

SECTION C-C
30%

SLOTTEd HOLE AT ONE END AND CIRCULAR HOLE AT THE OTHER END

*SA

50X 50X6

SINGLE ANGLE LACING EACH FACE

!
CONCRETE KERli'

NOTE:
P OF FOUNMTlON2.

SECTION D-O

I. REFER TABLE 229 h 230 FOR AOMlCNAL DETAILS BASE WIDTHBSCM I6 CONSTANT Fm ALL sEoTwl6 AND LI =s7sm FOR ALL CASES 3. L2=%sm dA 6.0111

sox

FIG. 5 Swrnr~~

COLIIMN

( Cortfcl)

13

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

iSMC

1006

---CRANE

RAIL

GANTRY

GIRDER

FIG. 5 STEPPED COLUMN
Ftr4SH sYr4BoL
LENGTH OF WELD

UNWELDED LENGTH FIELD WELD SYMBOL

CONNECTIN`G REFERENCE LINE TO ARROW SIDE OF JOINT, TO EDGE PREPARED MEMBER OR BOTH

STANDARD

LOCATION

OF

ELEMENTS'

OF A WELDING

SYMBOL

FORM OF WELD

SEC IONAL REPRE HENTATION

APPROPRIATE SYMBOL

FILLET

SQUARE BUTT

II

SINGLE V BUTT

faza

-

DOUBLE V BUTT

-

8 w

SINGLE U BUTT

DOUBLE

U BUTT

8

SINGLE BEVEL

BUTT

DOUBLE BEVEL

BUTT

FIG.

6

SThNDAHD

WEI.DIN(;

YMHOLS

14

SP : 38(S&T~lWI'I
I . 2. 2. 4. PROVIDE A YYWUM OF IC KTWXly TWS8 111 ALL c02n2c1lOwI. PO2 m8TEKR 021WARffCR TMLC 222. FOR SI7.L Of YEMILR% NF2R TM28 I4S TO A20 TMl.28 I75 TO 182 10" LCAW-TO lloof 1011 GUSLCT PLATCTliX2KS2. REFER TML2 MCYBt!R A10 OUIILT CDCL

159 FOR %' TYCC TRUSl2S TRUSSES. 221.

SECTIZX x

FIG. 7 DETAIL RT

FIG. 11 DETAIL R4

SECTION Y Y

FIG. 8 DETAIL RI

FIG. 12 DETAIL R4s

47

-WEI MEHOER FIG. 9 DETAIL R2

FIG. IO DETAIL R3

FIG. 13 DETAIL R5

15

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

FIG. 14 DETAIL Tl

FIG. 17 DETAIL R6

FIG. 15 DETAIL T2 FIG. 18 DETAIL T3

WEB MEMBER8

FIG. 16 DETAIL W 1

FIG

19 DETAIL R6f AT FIELD SPLICE (18, 24m Spans only)

16

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

FIG. 20 DETAIL T3f

AT FIELD

SPLICE

(18. 24m Spans

only)
FIG. 23 DETAIL R7 AT LEAN-TO ROOF END

FIG. 24 DETAIL T4 FIG. 21. DETAIL. R If AT FIELD SPIXE

AT LEAN-TO ROOF END

(For

30m Span

only)

WEB MEMBER

NOTE

.
Table

I. iefer
TIE MEMBER

222

for spacing d of tack size.

welds length to the

2. Use 60 3. FIG. 22 DETAIL T2f AT FIELD SPLICE

mm wide spacer plates of adequate to angle of the spacer plate is equal

corresponding The thickness thickness

of gusset.

(30m span only)

FIG. 25 TACK WELD DETAIL.

17

SP : 38(S&T)1987
AN0

TRW9

TIE MEMBER

FIG. 33 DETAIL Tl

FIG. 36 DETAIL R6

`) ----UC9

MCMrn

109 9,l2,29m ROOF lllu99 9 9,l2,l5n.L2AN-10 m9F mu99

c a TIL MCYIER

FIG. 37 DETAIL T3
TIE MEMbER

FOR A-TYPE TUBE TRUSS

FIG. 34 DETAIL T2

FIG. 38 DETAIL

RIF

AT

FIELD SLICE

Mm
ALL

txccn

LUN-TO ROOF TM
Sl2m TWBbCs

FIG. 35 DETAIL Wl

FIG. 39 DETAIL T2f

AT

FIELD SLICE

19

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 4.5 Expansion Joint Details - Expansion joints are not usually necessary when the building dimensions are less than 180 m. When the buildings are longer, the expansion joint is provided by constructing two different super structural support system on both sides of the joint with the gap being properly bridged by cladding and roof sheeting. The wind bracings are discontinuous across expansion joints and hence the bracing systems should be structuralI) independent in each segment of the structure separated by expansion joints. truss deflections are FIG. 40 DETAI!. R7 FOR LEAN- 1.0 ROOF TRUSS 4.6 Truss Camber -The well below span length/325. If however initial camber is desired for tie members, appropriate camber may be provided. 4.7 Miscellaneous Details - Various bracing arrangements are shown schematically in Fig. 47. Even though bracing may appear to be a secondary matter, it is highly important and deserves careful attention. Probably more failures, or at least unsatisfactory performances, have resulted from inadequate bracing than from deficiencies in main framing. It is apparent from Fig. 47 that the bracing in even simple structures is highly indeterminate. There can be several alternatives by which loads may be carried to the ground, and in a number of bays redundant diagonals may be used. l`hese may be so slender, however, that they are incapable of carrying appreciable compression, which reduces the system to one in which only the tension diagonals are effective: The bracing is necessary to ensure integral behaviour of the structure and to avoid differential displacement of frames which may cause undesirable cracking of claddings. A typical example of the design of bracings using angle iron sections is shown in 5.8. Similar procedure is to be followed for tubular sections also. Typification for bracing has not been attempted since lot of variations are possible due to different design parameters like length of building, span, spacing, height, wind zones, etc. The bracing in the roof along the length of the building in the truss panel adjacent to the eaves is provided to minimize the differential movement between frames arising from wind and crane surge forces perpendicular to the ridge. This bracing is designed normally based on minimum slenderness ratio when the columns are designed as cantilever columns to transfer the wind loads perpendicular to ridge. The bracing in the roof across the building at the two end bays and necessary number of interior bays is provided to take care of wind load on the gable ends and wind drag on roof due to wind blowing parallel to the ridge. These bracings shall be provided in sufficient number of bays, such that the spacing between them do not exceed 90 m. The above mentioned bracing can either be provided at rafter level or at the tie level of the trusses as desired. In the latter case vertical 20

/-IOmm GUSSET

SEE T4BLE 226 r-OR--/ COLUMN CAP&BOLT WI-G.

FIG. 41 DETAIL T4

FOR LEAN `ro ROOF TRUSS

between tubular members except at the rafter tie junction and at junctions with overlapping members are direct connection with weld around the perimeter of the joining tube The field connections, tie rafter junction joints and joints having overlapping members are made using gusset plates. The size and length of weld required in both types of connections is given in Table 225. 4.4 Columns Details -Typical column cap details for exterior columns is given in Fig. 42 and for interior columns in Fig. 43. The column base details are given in Fig. 44 based on foundation made of M 15 concrete. The size of column cap, column base and size and member of bolts are given in Tables 226 to 228. For structures with cranes the typical connection details of column cap, column base plate, gantry girder seating details and crane rail connection details, etc, are given in Fig. 5,45 and 46. The size of column cap, column base and size as well as number of bolts are given in Tables 229 and 230. Proper embedment of anchor bolts into the foundation should be ensured while designing foundations. The size and thickness of base plates can be reduced further by using higher strength concrete in foundation and/or stiffened base plates.

1.

SHOE ANGLE

I 4 NOS

SIDE

ELEVATION
TRUSS)

(ANGLE

SIDE ELEVATION
(TUBULAR TRUSS)

SECTION

8 B"

HOLES AT ONE END OF TRUSS ULAR HOLESAT OTHER END. THE SLOTTED HOLES TO BE PROVIDED WITH 6m-n THICK CIRCULAR HOLE WASHER TO BE WELDED AFTER ERECTION.

NOTE: REFER TABLES 227&229 FOR SIZES OF SHOE ANGLE, COLUMN CAP PLATE AND BOLTS

SECTION

A A

FIG. 42 EXTERIOR COLUMN CAP DETAIL

3

SP : 38(S&T)-I987

TOP

RA;;S\

_

MEMBER YP. FOR SIZE OF SHOE ANGLE 6 CAP PLATE REFER TABLE -226

A. Angle Trusses

TOP

RAFTERS-...

ER

FOR SIZE OF SHOE ANGLE 6 CAP PLATE REFER TABLE 226

B. Tubular Trusses

FIG. 43 INTERIOR COLUMN CAP DETAILS

22

SP : 38(54&T)-1987

2!5mm

OmmTHlCK KEY BELW BASE Pun KEY DETAIL

NOTE : 1.SEE

TABLE 2 28 FOR COLUMN BASEA BOLT SIZES.

I-

-i

FIG. 44 COLUMN

BASE DETAILS

23

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

lSMC Section

l6mm 0 BOLT WITH TAPER WAWERS

ISMB action

ELEVATIOY

ISMC Sect ion

SMB Srct ion PLAN SPRI NG `WASH El? SPLICE PUT AT-X X HOLE IN SPLICE PLATE HOLE IN RAIL

StCTION

E LE.VATION
CRANE RAIL JOINT

FIG. 45 CRANE RAIL DETAILS 24

SP : 38(s#p1987

I

6SO

1

-

ISA 50X50X6

ELEVATION

lhm THICK KEY BELOW BASE PLATE

----_ kl
KEY DETAIL

A-___ ---OF KEY

-T:-II II

w

SECTION

X

X

PLAN
NOTES:

DETAIL

I. REFER TABLE 230 FOR SLAB BASE SIZE &BOLTS DFTAILS
FIG. 46 BASE PLATE DETAILS

25

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 bracing should be provided between the rafter level and tie level in these bays to transfer roof drag force to tie level bracing. In addition to tie `eve1 bracing designed to transfer lateral loads, Sracing across the buildings in the end bays is frequently provided at the rafter level also to ensure the stabilit:l of the structure during erection. The vertical bracing in the longitudinal walls is shown in Fig. 47 in a central bay. This is being suggested to avoid temperature stresses, that may occur. However in this bracing system having vertical bracing in the central bay, temporary bracing &nay be necessary at the end bay also during erection for purpose of stability. Vertical bracing is usually provided at gable ends to give stiffness to the building in the transverse direction. This bracing is nominally designed based on minimum slenderness ratio. The bracing in the longitudinal direction at the roof level in coqiunction with end gable bracings should be capable to resist the load perpendicular to the ridge. Gable end columns can be designed as supported at top and bottom. Typified designs of foundation is not included in this Handbook, have to be erected taking into varies from site to site would influence the design of foundation. The foundations supporting the columns may be designed as spread footing, pile foundation or caisson foundation depending upon the soil condition at site. Since the columns are assumed to be fixed at base, the foundations should be capable of resisting the moment from the column without undergoing objectionable rotation. An example of spread foundation design is given in 5.7. The genera1 details of supporting A.C. gutters are presented in Fig. 48. in this Handbook since the soil conditions which 4.8 Erection Procedure - The structures with steel roof trusses, the design of which is presented in this handbook since the soil conditions which consideration the stability and strength of the structure during the erection process. Temporary bracings and other precautions should be taken during erection, if necessary. Recommendations

AY USE

X TYPE

NNE --- Tie level bracing

may be used in addition

to rafter

level bracing.

FIG. 47 BRACINGSARRANGEMENTS 26

SP:38(S&Tb1987

A.C. SHEET-

SOOmm
/

M.S. FLAT/BAR GUTTER CLAMP

/MS.

FLAT BAR GUTTER CLAMP

ALF ROUND GUTTER

_OCKET OF GUTTER

w

`"ALF

M.S. FLAT/BAR GUTTER CLAMP ROUND GUTTER

FIG. 48 GUTTER DETAILS

27

SP : 38pdk~)-1987
of IS : 800-1984 regarding erection shall be followed. The following during erection: points should fabrication be taken and care of Height of column Type of roofing Location of shed Type of truss Truss Configuration and = = = = 9.0 m A.C. Sheeting Delhi A-type of Loading 12 m is

Stability - A roof truss when first placed in position on its end supports may be unstable. Lifting attachments should not be released until the truss has been positively attached to provide restraint against overturning. It should be noted that normal purlin connections provide only a limited resistance to lateral movement. No reliance should be placed on connections made to other parts of the structure unless the connection can develop its full load carrying capacity, for example connections made to brickwork or concrete should be secure and resistance to displacement or withdrawal from new brickwork or concrete should be developed to an adequate extent. The erection procedure should aim at the fixing of the first two trusses complete with cross bracing and it&connections so as to provide a rigid and stable basic assembly. No subsequent erection work should take place. until this initial stage ha.s been `completed.
Freedom of movement --- The lifting path should be clear of obstruction if necessary, tail or guide ropes should be used to ensure that the truss does not encounter obstructions in course of hoisting. Arrangements,/br ljfting - The attachments made to the truss for lifting should impose only those forces which have been allowed for in design. Lifting can cause load-reversal and overloading in certain members and properly designed lifting attachments for example strong backs may be necessary to ensure that overloading does not occur and buckling is avoided (see rig. 49). Bearings -- When a truss is placed on earings which are designed to provide freedom of temporary restraints should be movement, provided. Any temporary fastening of the bearings or of the truss should be removed as soon as its permanent stability has been ensured.

Choice

The configuration given in Fig. 2A. Basic wind pressure Spacing of trusses Roof slope

for roof truss span = 150 kg/m' = 6.0 m = 1 in 3

CORRECT

WAY

FIG. 49 LOFTINGOF TRUSSES The roof slope of 1 in 3 and spacing of 6.0 m give the minimum weight of truss as observed from Tables 148 to 150. Other roof slopes and spacings can be choosen, if so desired. Therefore Span Spacing Roof slope pressure basic parameters for the analysis = 12.0 m = 6.0 = 1 in 3 = 150 kg/m' are:

Care shold be taken that any thrust imposed on the bearings by a truss when it is being landed in position does not create a displacement sufficiently great as to cause hazard. Any displacement caused during the erection of a truss should be rectified before the lifting equipment is released. For laying of asbestos cement sheets, recommendations of 1S : 3007 (Part I)-1964 `Code of practice for laying of asbestos cement sheets: Part I Corrugates sheets' shall be followed. 5. DESIGN EXAMPLE span = 12.0 m X 42.0 m = 12.0 m

Basic wind

= 17 kg/m' Weight of roofing materials (including extra weight due to overlaps and fasteners) Governing wind pressure for design with normal permeability loads = (0.6 + 0.2) X 150 = 120 kg/m* = 3.5 kg/ m2

Plan area Roof truss

Miscellaneous

28

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 Live load = 75-2 X (18.435" - lo"), = 58.13 kg/m' TRUSS ANALYSIS Loads a) Dead loads : Length along the sloping roof Self weight of truss at 6 kg/m2 Weight of roofing material No. of purlins = &%!& 6.32 m Live load taken as Live load acting on shoe c) Wind load: Total wind load Load acting on one intermediate panel point Load acting on shoe A. Analysis of Truss for = 17 X 6.32 X 2 X 6 = 1 290 kg = 12 = 280 kg/node = 140 kg = 120 X 6 X 6.32 x 2 = 9100 kg = 910 kg

= 6 X 12 X 6 = 432 kg

= 455 kg Vertical Loads

The analysis is done for half of truss since it is symmetric. The joints are assumed pin jointed to facilitate manual calculations. Joint 1 F4 sin 18.43 Therefore R Fd = 4.5 w = 14.23 W (compression) = F4 cos 18.43" = 13.50 W (Tension)

Purlins at 12.7 kg/m = 12 x 12.7 X 6 (Assume ISMC 125)= 914 kg Miscellaneous load Total No. of panels Load `acting on one intermediate panel point = 3.5 X 12 X 6 = 252 kg = 2 888 kg = 10 2 888 = -10 = 288.8 kg = 145 kg

Dead load is taken as = 290 kg/node Dead load acting on shoe b) Live load: Total live load <Table II, IS : 8751964) Load acting on one intermediate panel point = 58.13 X$x 12 x6 = 2 :90 kg = 279 kg

FI

1
'
NOTE :-

SPAN

= 12. om. THE JOINT AND NUMBER WITHOUT

r NUMBER hf/I'THIN THE CiRCLE INDICATE WE CIRCLE INDICATE THE MEMBER

1

29

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 Joint 3 FS = F4 = 14.23 W (compression) = W (compression) Solving (i) and (ii) = 11.071 w (compression) = 1.803 W (compression)

Joint 2 Fls sin 33.69" Therefore
F2

W 1.803 W (Tension) 13.5 W- 1.8 W cos 33.69" 12 W (Tension) Consider Taking a part of truss as in the above figure. moment about Joint W10, 2.4 W1.2 W

Fts

4.5 WX 6 - 4.8 W-3.6 = F3X2 Therefore Taking F3 moment about

= 7.5 W (Tension) Joint 1,

F,, X 3.6 sin 39.81 Therefore FIT

= 12 w = 5.206 W (Tension) about Joint 5,

w
F6

Taking

moment

(4.5 X 3.6 - 2.4 - 1.2 + 1.2) X W = Fg X 3.6 sin !8.43 Therefore Joint 8 FS = 12.125 w (compression)

Fl3

= 12.125 W (compression)

FII
Joint 4 = - 1.803 W X cos 33.69" + 14.23 W cos 18.43" . . .(i) = 12 w = 14.23 W sin 18.43 - 1.803 W X sin 33.69" - W = 2.498 6 W . . .(ii) Joint 6

= W (compression) W 1 @ F7 1 FII 12'125W

Fe cos 18.43 + F,A cos 33.69"

F6 sin 18.43" - F,t sin 33.69"

FM cos 9.46O I;;4

= 12.125 W cos 18.43 - 11.071 W cos 18.43 = 1.013 W (Tension)

30

SF' : 38(SBT)_1987

Ro

= 1.0 W+ 12.125 Wsin 18.43' - 11.071 W sin 18.43 + 1. 013 W sin 9.46 = 1.5 W (compression)

Joint

7 0 = - I.013 W cos 9.46 + 5.206 W cos 39.81' = 3.905 W (Tens&n)

FM cos 39.81 Therefore FM

W 5'206 W

B. ANALYSIS

OF

TRUSS

FOR

HORIZONTAL

LOAD

SPAN NOTE NUhBER WITHIN THE THE CIRCLE INDICATE CIRCLE THE

= I2.Om INDICATE MEMBER. THE JOINT AND NUMBER WlT++OUT

The analysis is done for half the truss only since it is symmetric. Joint FI F4 I = l/2 0 Joint 2 F4 I 18.43O V* -/FI H (Tension) H

H

3

' f5 8.43O

f9

F15 sin 33.69O = 0,333 H Fl5 F2 = 0.6 H (compression) = 0.5 H + 0.6 H X cos 33.69 = H (Tension) 0.333H

Joint F5 cos

3 18.43O F5 = 1.0 H = 1. 54 If (Tension) P = 1.054 H sin 18.43

Therefore F9

= 0.333. H (Tension) 31

Sp : 38(S&T)-1987 Joint 4

3.52H

F6 cos 18.43" + F,3 cos 33.69O = 1.054 H cos 18.43O + H - 0.6 H cos 33.69 = 1.50 H . .(i)

l.os&F,,
Joint FM Fh sin 18.43" - F13 sin 33.69" = 1.054 H . .(ii) X sin 18.43" - 0.6 f/ sin 33.69" = 0.0 Solving
F13

6 = 2.466 H cos 18.43" - H - 1.054 H cos 18.43= = 0.344 H (compression) = (2.466 - 1.054) H sin 18.43" + 0.344 H sin 9.46" = 0.503 H (Tension)

F,z, cos 9.46

RC,

(i) ana

(ii}

pb

=

1.054 H (Tension)

= 0.6 H (Tension)

Joint

5 = 0.6 H sin 33.69" + 0.503 H = 1.305 H (compression) combination

\&-'
Let us consider figure. Taking moment a part Joint of the 10, truss as in

F16 sm 39.81 Fl6 For W H Dead

load + Live load

= 290 + 280 = 570 kg = 0

about

H (2 X l/2 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.2 + I .6) = Fj X 2 Therefore Taking R moment about = 2.5 H (Tension) Joint 5, 18.43 X 3.6

O-503 H

H (0.4 + 0.8 + 1.2 + 1.6) = FS sin Therefore Taking FS moment about

= 3.52 H (Tension) Joint 1, For W H Dead load + Wind load combination

H (0.4 + 0.8 + 1.2 f 1.6) = FIT X 3.6 sin 39.81� Therefore Joint F, cos Fl FII 8 18.43" = 3.52 H cos 18.43" -H FIT = 1.735 H (compression)

= 0.75 X (290 - 910 cos 18.43") = (-) 430 kg = 0.75 X 910 sin = 216 kg 18.43"

= 2.466 H (Tension) = (3.52 - 2.466) HX sin 18.43 = 0.333 Z-I (Tension)

The force in the members of truss are calculated using appropriate values of W and H given above and are tabulated in following Table.

32

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

DESIGN Member Number CotTfficient for r-\ H W

FORCES Force in the Member for A DL+ WL ' DL+LL W=570 kg H=O kg +7 +6 +4 -8 -8 -6 -6 -6 695 840 275 111 111 311 912 912 570 855 570 0 - 1 028 + 578 + 1 026 +2 226 + 2,968 - Compression

'

W = (-) 430 kg H=216 kg -5 -4 -2 +6 +6 +4 +5 +5 + + + + -1 -2 697 944 685 119 347 989 747 974 502 754 502 0 905 510 904 961 614

4

1 3
:,

87 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 t(:

+0.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 f0.0 + 1.054 + 1.054 + 2.466 + 3.52 + 0.333 + 0.503 + 0.333 0.0 $0.6 - 0.344 -0.6 - 1.305 - 1.735 + Tension

+ + + -

13.50 12.0 7.5 14.23 14.23 11.071 12.125 12.125 1.0 1.5 1.0

- So3 + 1.013 + 1.803 t 3.905 + 5.206

Comupter analysis results for all the members of the truss are given in Table 29. The computer results presented in this table have both axial forces and bending moment whereas the manual analysis presented above gives only the axial forces. It can be seen that the axial forces given in the table above from manual calculations compare well with computer analysis results presented in Table 29. 5.1 Purlin Design -- Purhn is designed sag rod at mid-span. Maximum spacing of ourlin = 1.4 m
1

Considering the channel section

unsymmetrical

bending

of the

M,, = 123.18 ' `OS r.435ox Considering M

6 ' 6 = 525.9 kgm

the sag rod at mid span

with one

= 123.18 X sin 18.435O X 3 X 3 = 43.8 kgm YY 8 Checking the section TsMC 125 52 590 + 4 380 fbc = 56.6 13.1 = 1 124.0 < 1 650 kg/cm'

Weight

of sheeting

= 1.4x 17 = 23.80 kg/m = 18.00 kg/m

Self weight of purlin (say) Total Total DL+ dead load (DL) (LL)

GRAVITY LOAD

I/
b/

= 41.8 kg/m = 58.13 X 1.4 = 81.38 kg/m = 123.18 kg/m

WIND LOAD

live load LL uplift force

Wind load Net uplift

force

= 0.8 X 150 X 1.4 = 16g kg/m = 168 - 41.8 X cos = 128.3 kg/m 18.435"

4
h
3

33

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 Under uplift condition Use 150 Light tubes for purlins.

M xx = M F = Yy bc

128.3 X 36 - 577.4 kgm 8 41.8 X sin 8 18.435 X 9 = 14.9 kgm

= 57 740 +-- I 490 :3.i 66.6 = 981 < 1.33 X 1 650 kg/cm'

Therefore Size

O.K.

of sag rod the size of purlins load on sag rod = ISRO = 6 Girt Span For For 12 mm dia

Assume Number Total =2X Required =

3m
Design of girt: vertical horizontal spacing bending

I

3m

123.18X sin 18.435" X 6 X 6 = 876 kg 8 net area of sag rod cm*

= 3.0 m = 6.0 m

bending

f& =0.58
sag rod

Maximum Channel Vertical A.C. Girt Total Vertical

of girt = 1.7 m

Use ISRO Diagonal

12 4 rod.

girt with sag rod at the centre bending = 17 x 1.7 = 28.9 kg/m = 15.0 kg/m = 43.9 kg/m

Diagonal sag rods are used at least every 8th panel of purlin from bottom and at the top most panel of purlins. Maximum = iX fort: in the sag rod sin 18.435' X 6 X 8

sheet weight self weight DL B.M. = M, (say)

123.18 X

= 1 169 kg Maximum = Required force in diagonal sag rod = 1 382 kg sag rods Wind

= 43.9 X 32 = 49.4 kgm 8 Horizontal load bending = 0.7 x 0.75 X 150 X 1.7 = 133.9 kg/m B.M.

1 169 J= 2x 1.4 net area

of diagonal

Horizontal

1 382 = G= Use ISRO Tube Purlin

0.92 cm* 12 4 rod Try Y,, 25 grade

= 133.9 X 62 = 602.6 kgm 8 ISMC 125 at 12.7 kg/m

(IS : 806-1968)

Minimum L =-=40

outside 6000 40

dia of pipe

fb.+

+ y$

x 100

= 1 282 kg/cm2 < 1 650 kg/ cm* (No increase in permissible stress wind load causes the predominant Tension in central straight is taken stress) since

= 150 mm Section modulus required

sag rod/purlin

= 123.18 X 6 X 600 13 230 = 33.5 cm3 34

= i x 43.9 X 6 = 164.6 kg.

SP : 38(S&T)=1#7 Maximum number panels supported of = E = 6' (say)

Trying 100 M tube, fb= 634 X 100 4,

Maximum straight

tension in sag rod

=6X 164.6 =`988 kg =- 988 1500 = 0.66 cm*

= 1 546 kg/cm* < 1 655 kg/cm*
Therefore O.K. Use 100 M tube.
NOTE- Restriction of smderness ratio applicable for tubular purlins need nof be applied for girts.

Required net area of sag rod

5.2 Truss Member Design - Sample
Use ISRO
No.

design

of

12 d, r;>d supported by diagonal sag rod

Truss

Members

(Angle

Trusses)

of girts

Tie Member
Considering

Design
the forces

(including Actual Tension =

eaves girt) of girts

= 7 = 9.0/B= 1.5 m

of member

1 in Table 29.

spacing

Maximum force

compressive moment force

= 5 567.1 kg = 3 322.1 kgcm = 7 457.0 b = 4 378.2 kgcm = 102 cm = 106 cm at 3.6 m spacing) 10 mm gusset. = 56 o

in diagona! 2 x 1.5 = 1 289 kg

sag rod
l

Corresponding
52

/j2 + (988 + 165~

Maximum

tensile

corresponding
req.red 1 289 = ~~~

moment

i,, = 120 X 0.85 iYY = 360 X 0.85 (Tie number Try 2-ISA piaced

Net area

of rod

= 0.86 cm2 Use ISRO 12 4 :od.

6 060 X 6 with 0.85 X 120.0 1.82

(I/ 7Qxx=

7

(Ii&

= 0.85 X 360 ~ ,07 4 2.85 stress for axial and axial comprcssmn coi~~pression

Therefore allowable = 775.6 kg/cm2 E 4 For combined

bending

5 567.1 775.6 X 13.68 = 0.72 < 1.D Therefore O.K. bending

3 322.1 _.__ I ___--' I 650 x 10.4

For combined

and

axial

~~ns~un

7 457.0 I 500 X 13.68 Tubular Girt Vertical B.M. = 43.9 X 6' 8 Hence =0.62< Therefore O.K. 1.0

4 378.2 * ___-^---' 3.650 X 10.4

use 2-ISA

6 060 X 6

= 198 kgm Horizontal B.M. = 133.9 X 62 8

Rafter member design procedure wili be simi!ar to method followed for Tie member, ke:rce not repeated.

Web Member Design = 602.6 kgm
Resultant B.M. = Jw =`634 kgm 35 Considering in Table 29. Actual length the member of member forces of member = 144.22 cm 13

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

Compression force Corresponding moment Tensile force Corresponding moment Try l-ISA 4 040 X 6
llrw = 0.85 X 144.22

= 1 006.8 kg = 571.8 kgcm = 897.4 kg = 497.0 kgcm Therefore

+

0.707 x 497 X 1.13 1 650 X 2.6

= 0.306 < 1.0 O.K. Hence use I-ISA 4040 X 6
Sample Design of Truss Members Design (Tube Trusses)

0.77 Allowable stress in axial compression = 427 kg/cm2 Therefore for compression
1 006.8 427 X4.47 + +

= 159.2

Tie

Member

combined

bending

and

axial

Considering the same member forces used in the sample design of angle sections (Member 1. Table 29) Maximum compressive force Corresponding Corresponding I,, = 120 X 0.85 IV = 360 X 0.85 moment moment Maximum tensile force = 5 567.1 kg = 3 322.1 kgcm = 7 457.0 kg = 4 378.2 kgcm = 102 cm = 306 cm

0.707 X 571.8 X 2.83 1 650 X 10.0 0.707 X 571.8 X 1.13

I 650 X 2.6
= 0.703 < 1.0

Therefore

O.K.

try 80 L Tube section (Y,, 25 grade)
(I/ r)xx = g = 33.66

100.99

ANGLE 40X40X6

F, = Permissible stress in compression =

910 _

910 - 813 10

1 =

900 kg/m2

For combined bending and axial compression, ++ a
F, = 5 567.118.74

$<l
= 636.96

kg/cm2

fb= 3 322.1/18.1 Under tension forces Area leg of outstanding Area of connected leg = 1 b `;`i",,O.~) 0.6 = a = 4.47 - 2.22 = 2.25 cm2 = 0.7 433 Fb = 1 655 kg/cm2

= 183.54 kg/cm'

Therefore = -636.96 + -183.54 9oo 1 655 = 0.818 < 1 For combined bending and axial tension, 7 457 4 378.2 8.74 X 1 500 + 18.1 X 1 655 = 0.715 < 1 Therefore O.K. Use 80L Tube section.
Web Member Design

Effective area in tension = a + bk = 3.9 cm* For combined bending and axial tension
897.4 + 0.707 X 497 X 2.83

Considering the`forces of member 13 in Table 29 Actual length of the member = 144.22 cm

1 500 x 3.9

1 650 X 10

36

SP : 38(S&Tb19%7 Compression Corresponding Tension force moment force moment = I 006.8 = 571.8 kgcm = 897.4 Lg = ,497.0 kgcm r= 1.10 cm 1 006.8 800 X 2.58 571.8 + 1 655 X 1.86 O.K. compression

= 0.674 < 1 Therefore For combined 897.4 2.58X1500 + bending and axial

Corresponding Try 25L,
l/rmin =

A = 2.58 cm2,

0.85 X 144.22/ 1.10 = 111.4 stress
=813

497.0 1655X1.86 O.K.

Permissible

rn axial
-

compression Hence (1.4)

= 0.39 < 1 Therefore use 25L Tube section.

813;721]

= 800 kg/cm2 For combined bending and axial compression,

The design of all the members following the above example was done using a computer programme and the suitable angle and tube sections are as follows:

Members Tie Rafter Web Web Web Web Web Web Web Web

Length 12.0 6.32 0.40 1.20 0.60 2.00 1.44 1.22 1.44 3.12

(m)

Member Number 1, 2. 3 4, 5; 6, 7, 8 9

Angle 2-6 060 X 2-5 050 X 1-4040X6 l-4 040 X 1-4~040 X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 14040X6 2-4 040 X 6 6 6 6

Sections Tube 80L 65L 20M 20M 20M 20M 25L 20M 25L 5OL

1'; 12
13 14 15 16, 17

6

5.3

Design

of Columns

Reaction

due to DL of Truss

In this example the column is designed as a cantilever fixed at base and resisting moment due to wind in addition to axial force,

+ Self weight of columns = 5 X 290 t 9 X 100 = 2 350 kg Net upward thrust = 3 240 - 2 350 = 890 kg Since uplift force on column for wind perpendicular to ridge would be smaller than the above, the above values has bet-n used conservatively.

9

Calculation

of loads
force in column

4 Compressive

Force in columr; due to DL = 2 850 kg of truss + LL = 5 X 570 Weight of asbestos side walls =9X6X17 = 918 kg Weight of girts at 13 kg/m = 13.0 X 7 X 6 = 546 kg SeE9w;ei:' of column at 87 kg/m = 783 kg Total compressive force =5097_kg

b) Tensile force in column
To calculate the tensile force uplift pressure case is taken. Vertical uplift force maximum

= 0.8 X 0.75 X 150 X 6 x 7 = 3 240 kg

37

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

Moment

at base

of AB

= 202.5 X 9 x:+490x9 = 12 611.25 kgm

Moment 0.3Pd; 1

at base of CD

= 472.5 X 9 X:+68X9-490X9 = 15 338.25 kgm

I =0.7Pd
PcJ=-75X150X6 = 675 Kg/m

Considering the increase in allowable stress for wind load combination forces, the reduced forces are: Tensile to ridge due to Moment force = 0.75 X 890 = 668 kg = 0.75 X 15 338.25 = 11 504 kgm

c) Moment

at base

Consider wind acting perpendicular with internal pressure. Net horizontal wind on roof force at tie level

= (0.7 - 0.65) sin 18.43" X 6.32X 6 X 0.75 X 150 = 68 kg TO determine the force in the Tie, consider frame given below. -_t__ T e the

It is found that the values of base moment. compressive force, tensile force, etc, compare well with values from Table 196. ii) Design
qf section

For the above 196 are: Compressive Tenstle force force

column

the forces from = 4 643.0 kg = 785.0 kg

Table

Base moment Try ISMB 500/86.9
20*21

= 1 151 000 kgcm

(1lrxx) = 1.5 X 900 = 66.80
pd= *75X150X6 V/Q Allowable Deflection _ I'X9' 3EI Deflection of column AB = 0.75 X 900= 191 .* 3.52 axial force = 300 - (300 - 270) X1.8 10 = 294.6 kg/cm' Allowable load Therefore compressive = 294.6 X 110.74 = 32 624 kg = 32.6 t > 4.64 t O.K. length for lateral = 0.75 X 900 = 675 cm = 82.50 cm4 Considering the effective buckling Torsional Effective 3EI
(l/r,)=%=

A P

+ 202.5 X 94 8EI of column CD

68 X 93 T X 93 472.5 X 9' - ,- 3EI = 8EI + - 3EI Equating deflections of AB and CD

TX93 3EI

+ 202.5 X 94 = 472.5 X 94 8EI 8EI + -_Txg' 68X9' 3EI

constant

= K

depth = h = 50 - 1.72 = 48.28 cm 191.76

Therefore

T = 490 kg

38

SP : 38(SBiT)-19%7 Critical buckling stress = C, _ 1.2 X 10.1 X IO6X 1 369.8 X 48.28 1 808.7 X 675* X
X

~2

ISA llOXIIOXl5

1 369.8 X 48.28* 82.5.X 675* + 0.162

= 1 658.4 kg/cm*

1
From Table 196, column section = ISMB 500/86.9 Try 2-ISA x=2 110 110x 15 cm t= 1.5 cm = 721 X 4.5 = 3 244.5 kgcm tan 6O"X4.5+2=17.58

4110wable bending stress = 780.94 kg/cm* Check for simultaneous action of bending and axial tension and moment: 1 151 000 785.0 110.74 x 1 500 + 1 650 X 1 808.7 = 0.39 < 1.0 Therefore 1 151 000 780.94 X 1 808.7 = 0.82 < 1.0 Therefore Check for deflection Deflection at top = 472.5 X 94 X--1003 8 X 2.047 X lo6 X 45 218.3 + (68 - 490) X 9' -X loo3 3 X 2.047 X 10hX 45 218.3 = 3.0 cm -Q/325 = 2.8 cm 5.4 Truss Shoe Angle Design Therefore safe = -4 320 kg = + 1 438.2 kg From analysis Table 29 WL reaction DL reaction O.K. Therefore safe Cap Plate Design Moment = 721 X 6.5 Size of plate = 4 686.5 kgcm x = 2 tan 60" X 6.5 + 2 = 24.52 cm = 520 X 270 X 14 from Table 226 4 686.5 X 6 24.52 x 1.4 x 1.4 O.K. Check for compressive stress due to bending,

Moment in angle

3 244.5X6 Bending stress = 17.58 x le5 x le5 = 492 < 1 650 kg/cm*

Bending stress =

= 585 < 1 650 kg/cm'

Therefore wind load tension per bolt =ft = 4 320 - 1 438.2 =721 kg 4 Wind load shear per bolt =fi [see 5.3(c)] = 122.5 Try 4-20 black bolts F.=$&X865 =2 717 kg; kg 5.5
Try-

+I---

490 = 4

k===Il
i+l .+ t

I

1

-3-65 -

`Y'

Column

Base Plate

Design

800 X 500 X 36 as given in Table 228. = 785 kg = 2 873 kg = 1 151 000 kgcm = 40 kg/cm*

F,=+&X945X0.75=2227

Uplift force Base shear Base moment Assuming the allowable bearing_ pressure on footing

(No increase in permissible stress is taken as wind load is predominant) 39

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

I-+ --Taking the moments about ; s ;X.40XKX712X50 l-K 3)

800 ..__ ----_j
the anchor bolts elements, procedure they can be designed illustrated. by following the

+785X31

= 1 151 000 kg.cm IZ2-3K+0.67=0
K - 0.245,

A more economical design of base plate can be achieved by using higher strength concrete in foundation and/or stiffened base plate. 5.6 Connection Details

Therefore,

Kh = 17.395 cm

(where Therefore Limiting
lNfi \I."

h = 71 cm)

Table 219 and 220 give the type of detail to be used at different nodes and these details are shown in Fig. 7 to 43. The joint details for the example follows:
Node AT.....L.-.. ,YU,,I"C, Angle Truss DPfGil

T= i X 40 X,50 X 17.395 i- 785 = 18 170 kg stress in steel bolts to 945 kg/cm'
rtrecr L&I"".. ir I" taken . ..I.".. einre I...""

problem

are as

~~CIP~EP I,Ic-.~-t*.7~

in nermirrihle as* y~&..".,.,~"`~

Tube Truss nntn;/ "I-LUCI

wind

load

is the predominant = 19.23 cm'

load)

(Fig. 2A) :

(Fig.

7 to 25) RT l-1 Rl !E R5 Wl Rl T3 R6

(Fig.

26 to 43) RITl

A,, = 18 170/945 Provide side Thickness =

3 nos. of 39 mm diameter of slab base

bolts on each

3

4 2 18 50 170X9X6 X 1 890 provided = 3.22 cm < 3.6 cm is adequate. ; 9 10 Gusset thickness

J

Therefore Bearing

base plate key

RI R2 T2 R5 WI Rl T3 R6 Table 221 = 10 mm

stress as the base

from

2 873 = = 11.5 kg/cm'< 50 X 5
c2

0.25 fCk

Bending Bending Therefore

in plate = 11.5 X -$ = 144 kgcm stress O.K. the key. in 10 mm plate = 144 X 6/ 1 = 864 < 1 890 kg/cm2

Fastener details are presented in Tables 222 and 225 for angles and Tubular Trusses, respectively. I-L, "~.-....I.%*- tiuss .~ith and Kkembei I 11L L"`llp`GLG connection enclosed. detail is shown in the drawing

Use 5 mm fillet weld to connect

Due to standardization sizes `of column cap plate, shoe angle and base plate are conservative in this example. If one desires less conservative

5.7 Desip of Foundation ~-- Typified ?es_igns of foundation is not included in this report since the soil condition which varies from site to site would influence the design of foundation. A typical example of isolated footing design for assumed field condition is illustrated in this section. IS : 456-1978 limit state design procedure is used in this example.

40

SP : 38(S&T)_1987 P Therefore actual tension (without reduction) in one bolt = 18 170 X 1.33 3 = 8 073 kg = 8.96 cm*

M

Net area of 39 mm r#~bolt (Net area taken as 0.75 times gross area) Stress in steel in limit state of collapse

= 8 073 X 1.5 8.96 = 1 351.5 kg/cm' 1351.5x39 10 x 1.0 x 4 = 1 318 mm = 131.8 cm

Development

length

required =

Use 135 cm embedment Design of Pedestal

in concrete.

Self weight

of pedestal = 0.87 X 0.57 X 2 X 2 500 = 2 480 kg load = 2 480 - 1 047 = 1 433 kg = 2 X 3 831 = 7 662 kgm

So net downward

Moment due to shear force at base of pedestal Total moment of pedestal

at base = 7 662 + 15 346 = 23 008 kgm = 1.5x1433 = 2 150 kg =1.5X23008 =34512 kgm

Assumptions: Fck = 15.0 MPa Allowable on soil bearing pressure = 15 000 kg/m' = 2.5 m fill = 1 500 kg/m' reduction due to

Therefore design compression Design moment

F,, = 15 N/mm*

Required depth below ground Unit weight

of footing level

of soil back

2 150x 10 15 X 870 X 570 (From For chart 31 of SP : 16) ; = 0.05

= "Oo3

Forces in foundation before wind (as per Table 196) P=l.33X4043=6 191 kg

Fe 415 and

T= 1.33 X 785 = 1 047 kg V=1.33X2873=3831 M= kg I= 0.03 fck P = 0.03 X 15 = 0.45 minimum area reinforcement = 0.8 percent, steel = Bolts (see 5.5)

1.33 X 11 510 = 15 346 kgm Length of Anchor

Development From

Provide Therefore $

the design

of base plate

of longitudinal

Total tension in 3 bolts (due to wi'd, after reduction P5 percent)

= 18 170 kg X 570 X 870 = 3 967 mm2

41

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 Try a footing Weight 2.7 m X 2.4 m X 0.5 m footing, IF',

of soil above

= (2.7X2.4-0.57X0.87) X 2 X 1 500 = 17 952 kg Weight of footing IV, = 2.7X2.4X0.5X2.500 = 8 100 kg Wi= 1 433 kg = w, + w2 + u `s = 27 485 kg = 15 346f3 83 1 X 2.5 = 24 924 kgcm

Load from pedestal,

--.-.A&-

Total

vertical

load moment

Overturning

Eccentricity of resultant _ 24 924 vertical force 27 485 = 0.91

Provide 8 bars of 25 mm 4, 3 on each face. (Reinforcement has been distributed on all the faces since nominal steel required to resist the actual bending moment.) Lateral Diameter ties: = greatest of i) 5 mm ii) l/4 diameter main bar t = 1/4X25 = 6.25 mm ties. of

I

A

Therefore Spacing i) least

provide

8 mm lateral

of ties = least of the following: lateral dimension of main of ties = 570 mm = 16X25 = 400 mm = 48X8 = 384 mm Therefore base pressure distribution triangular with part of the footing lifting = 1 433 kg = 23 008 kgm capacity of soil = 15 t/m* = 15 000 kgjm2 = 1,500 kg/m3 Width = of footing ~-0.91) pressure in contact X3 with soil is up:

ii) 16 times diameter bar iii) 48 times diameter Therefore Design provide of Footing

X mm lateral ties at 38 cm c/c.

Direct load from pedestal, WI Moment SaFf ;;;ring Unit weight

!2.7

= 1.32 m = 27 485 X 2 1.32 X 2.4 = 17 352 kg/m*

Maximum

42

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 < Pressure at C 1.25 X 15 000 kg/m' - 0.915) Area = 5 324 kg/m' B.M. at B due to back = 1 500 X 2 -I- 2 500 X 0.5 = 4 250 kg/m' fill and concrete of steel= 0.12 X ig X 45 width = 5.4 cm2/m Minimum tension is sufficient. reinforcement of 0.12 percent

= s(l.32

Use 12 # Fe415 bars at 200 mm c/c top and bottom both ways. Shear in the footing would be small and hence not critical requiring shear reinforcement. @or economy reasons, the depth of footing may be reduced to 200 mm at the free edge (see Footing Details) 5.8 Bracing Design --The columns have been designed as tied cantilevers to resist the wind force normal to the ridge. Consequently the tie level bracing in the longitudinal direction is designed nominallv to minimise the differential deflection of various frames. Some designers do not provide tie level bracing when the columns are designed as cantilevers. This may be provided to achieve better rigidity if so required. The bracing across the building at the two end bays is deigned to transfer wind load on the building due to wind parallel to the ridge. The generai figure.
Design

layout

of bracings
bracings

is shown in the

of tie level

Cross

Bracings

in bays (1) -

(2) and (4) -~ (5). = J62 f 3.62

Total length = 7.0 m Since these

of bracing are tension

members members = 350 = g=

(I/ rImax
Maximum factored (W, of soils above B.M. at Section C foundation neglected) = r,,,,, required
rxx required

1.0

+ (17 352 - 5 324) x 0.91 x2x 2 0.91 3

,,,,)+ 1

=

g

= 2.0

Use ISA 6 565 X 6

1

x1.5

Tie runners

= 8 286 kg m/m = 81.25 kN.m/m Maximum = 1 5x factored 4 250X0.912 2 B.M. at Section B

width width

Tie runners of l/r ratio. Length

are designed

nominally

on the basis

of tie runners l/ r

= 6.0 m
= 350
=

Maximum
rmin

= 2 640 kgm/m

g=

1.71 cm

Try = 25.9 kN.m/m Effective (Refer depth= Chart 50 - 5 = 45 Cm
rmin

IS.4 9090 X 6
= 1.75 cm

Therefore

O.K.

5 of SP : 16)

Use ISA 9 090 X 6

43

SP:38(S&Tb1987

II
---

`-lSMB 4ASE

500 PLATE 800X 500X36

o ii!

3-39mm pBOLTS

.L

8mm #STIRRUPS @ 380 c/C

ts

LEAN

CONRETE

J

12# 200

@ c/c

-.

A

0 0
P (u

Y

FOOTING

DETAILS 44

SP : 38(S&Tb1987

lj_
I2m j

I

b&4.8m

&3.6m_i

SECTION-X-X

GABLE

END

SIDE ELEVATION
i >

TYPICAL

DEtAlLS

OF BRACINGS

NOTE:- RAFTER BRACING NOT SHOWN

45

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 The tie runner size (if they are part of tie level bracing system) may have to be modified on the basis of bracing design.
Design of bracings for Gable End Wind columns wind perpendicular to

Assuming the roof drag force to be equally shared by the two end bay bracings. Drag force at lines (2), (4) = 36 ; 4*8 x 166 = 691 kg

Height Wind force per column

= 9 m. = 0.7x 150x = 441 kg/m 3.6 X 4.8 2

Vertical cross bracings are provided between the rafter and tie in the end bays to transfer these forces to tie level along the grid lines (2) and (4) in the end bay. Length of cross bracings = Jm=3.23m
rxr Min required =

3-2;;0100 = 0.923

M m.x

1 441X92 = 4 465 kg m 8

Use ISA 6565 X 6

Try ISMB 450 1 -= r,
fk

900 .= 299 Therefore 3.01
= 4 465 X 1001f 350.7 = 330.6 kg/cm

RAFTER LEVEL
0. K.

I*2 ; :

Critical Stress = C,

=

1.2 x 10.1 X 106xr,h z, I2 1 +0.162X Kr' I;hT

Tie level gable end bracings

X

where I', = Modified moment of inertia,
h = Distance between c.g of compression

l-0
b

flange and c.g of tension flange,
K = Torsional 1

constant as per Appendix E of IS : 800-1962, flange,and

= Effective length of compression

2, = Section modulas about x-x axis. = 1.2 X 10.1 X lo6 X 834 X (45 -- 1.74)

Allowable bending compression = 547 X 1.33 > 330.6 kg/cm' Therefore O.K.
Wind Parallel to Ridge

Wind drag on roof

= -X42X0.025X 6

150

= 166 kg/m across the width.

ml
I

4.0m

_1s6
I-

46

5P :38(S&T~1!387
Windward side bracing% Wind force at Nodes (2), (4): Drag on roof Force on gable ends (areas `b? = 1 3.6 l4.8 1 x (4.5 + 1.2) x 0.7 X 150 = 2 514 kg Total: Wind force at Nodes (I), (5) Drag on roof = y.0.5)X ( (assume projection 166 = 382 kg = 3211 kg = $97 kg Total compression on eaves beam Wind drag from side walls= 0x.072: z I50 X 4.5 = 709 kg = 5 209 kg

of roof = 0.5 m)

Force on gable ends (areas `a') = 4'5 + ";" + O6 Total: Max, tension in bracings = X 1.8 X 0.7 X 150 = 907 kg. = 1289 kg 3211XJm 6 = 3 746 kg r min required = g = 2.4 cm

Try ISMB 250; r,i, = 2.65,
-1 = -600 = r 2.65
226

Net effective area required= 3 746/I 500 = 2.5 cm2 I,,,., of bracings =JZK? = 7.68 m
r,. required

Actual compressive stress

- 5209 47.55 = 110 kg/cm2 = 207 X 1.33 = 275 kg/cm2

= 2.19 cm Use, ISA 7070 X 6 with r,,= 2.14 and Gross area provided = 8.06 cm2 (The next higher section namely ISA 75 X 75 X 6 will be too conservative) Rafter bracing is generally provided in the end. pair of trusses for erection purposes. Extreme two set of purlins can be connected with ISA 8080 X 6. Length of bracing = J62+(1.265X4+ = 8.63 m
r,, required =

Allowable compression stress Use ISMB 250
Bracing.%

Maximum tension in bracings = 5 209 X &O02 + 4502 600 = 6511 kg Length of bracings =&iKz = 750 cm
r,, required

1.15)2

E&2.46
(0) (E)

750 = ~~2.14

cm

Try ISA 7070X 6 Therefore
Vertical Eaves

use ISA 8080 X 6.
bracings in the bays

Gross area = 8.06 cm2 Area of outstanding leg = = Area of connected leg = =
b = (7.0 X 0.3) 0.6

beam

Force from tie level bracings

= 1289+3211 = 4500 kg

4.02 cm2 a = 8.06 - 4.02 4.04 cm2

47

SP : 38(S&Tk1987

Effective area in tension
+ ( 4.02

= 4.04

Column height

= 9.75 m

=T7.0 cm2

Spacing of columns (12)= 6.0 m Other roof truss details are same as given in the design example in 50. 5.9.1 Gantry Girder Design - Table 209 gives the crane load data for design. Wheel load without impact Crab weight (Q) Wheel base (a) = 10.5 t =4t =3m

1+ 0.35 x Z)

6 511 Tensile stress = 70 = 930 < 1 500 kg/cm' Use ISA 7070 X 6 Additional axial force on columns =6 511 X 450 m = 3 907 kg

Maximum wheel load with = 10.5 X 1.25 impact (FV) = 13.125 t (see 3.4.3 of IS : 875-1964) OF BEAM

Since. the columns do not experience bending due to wind parallel to ridge, the braced bay columns as already designed should be adequate. The foundations of the braced bay column should be checked' for adequate factor of safety against the additional axial force due to bracing forces. Gable End Bracing Since all the columns are designed as cantilevers to resist' the wind load on the respective bays due to wind blowing perpendicular to the ridge, the gable end bracings are only nominally designed for overall stiffness of the structure. Length of bracings = &%??%I = 576 cm rxxr min required Use ISA 5555 X 6. Use ISMB 250 horizontal struts. = g= 1.65 cm

C.G. OF LOADS = A 4 = "T I I 1 t

A

I= 6.0 m

Maximum vertical bending moment

=

6 = 22.16 tm Check: Maximum wheel load vertical B.M due to single

= 13.125X6 4 = 19.69 tm < 22.16 tm Transverse wheel load per wheel

=&P+
=$$(Y)] Max horizontal moment 5.9
Design Example

a]
=0.35 t = _!???_ 13.125 xq'16 = 0.59 tm '

bending

for Crane Loads

Data Capacity of crane (P) = 10 t

Max shear due to wheel = 13.125 X 1.5 load = 19.7 t

48

SP : 386&T)-19117

Assuming self weight of girder Max shear due to self weight

= 0.25 tm = 0.75 t and self weight B.M WLZ = -8- 1.13 tm

Therefore the design forces for Gantry girder are: Vertical bending moment = 22.16 + 1.13 = 23.29 tm Horizontal bending = 0.59 tm moment Vertical shear Horizontal shear = 19.7 + 0.75 = 20.45 t = 0.35 X 1.5 = 0.53 t Actual tensile bending stress = 23.29 X ld 1 968 6

Table 211 also gives the same design forces. Try section ISMB 500186.9 and top channel ISMC 250130.4. The individual section properties obtained from SP : 6(l)-1964. Combined section properties are: can be

= 1 183 kg/ cm* < 1650 kg/cm'

Actual compressive bending stress

=

23.29 X 10' 3 111.7

= 748 kg/cm' < 1 547 kg/cm2 Bending stress due to lateral load = 0.59 x Id 360.1

rt
Yb

= 50 + 0.71 - 31.06 = 19.65 cm;
110.74 X 25 + 38.67 (50 + 0.71 - 2.3) = 110.74 + 38.67

= 31.06 cm
I, =

= 164 kg/cm2 Therefore Therefore combined bending stress = 748 + 164 = 912 kg/cm=< 1.1 X 1547 kg/cm' section is O.K. for stresses.

45 218.3 + 110.74 (31.06 - 25)' +219.1 + 38.67(19.65 - 2.3)' = 61 144.7 cm4;

zy

= 3 816.8 + 1 369.8 = 5 186.6 cm4

Zy of compression flange = 3 816.8 + y ry = 5 186.6 110.74 + 38.67 = 101.9 = 4 501.7 cm4 = 5.89 cm

20 450 Bearing stress at the function = of gantry web and flange 1,@+2xJ3j;;) where tw = thickness of web, b = width of load contact or bearing plate h2 = distance between edge of flange and ;ooA of flange as given in SP : 6(l)-

(Z/rJ = $J c, Fb

= 4 359 kg/cm* = 1 547 kg/cm* = $=3
t

zx (top)
2, (bottom)

111.7 cm3; 1 968.6 cm3,

=

20 450 1.02(7.5+2Xd?%%j

= yb= I,

= 970 kg/cm= < 1 890 kg/cm= Therefore O.K.

5

(top)

= 360 cm3

49

SP :38(S&T)-1987
Check for Web Buckling

In this example: = -/$-w IS max= 10.5 X 6003 X lo3 6 X 2.047 X lo6 X 61 144.7 --150 3 = 0.52cm ( 600

Compression at N.A. over support w'here R= vertical shear at support,
tw = web thickness, and

)I

Total Gantry weight = 118 + 50 = 168 kg/m (assuming crane rail weight = 50 kg/m) Deflection due to self weight = $4

B = the length of stiff portion of bearing +

half depth of beam + thickness of flange plate (if any)
=

20 450 (7.5 + 25.0) 1.02

= 616.9 kg/cm*

X =

1.68 X 6004 2.047 X lo6 X 61 144.7 0.002 3 cm

Effective slenderness ratio of web = 9 where
d = clear depth between the top roots

Total deflection = 0.52 + 0.002 3 = 0.522 cm Limiting deflection = -& = !@! 750 = 0.8 cm

= 50 - 2 X 3.8 = 42.4 cm
tw = web thickness = 1.02 cm

Therefore O.K. 5.9.2
Stepped Column Design Crane Cap

i) Design

df Roof

Leg Above

Therefore

slenderness ratio = 42.4 X J3 = 72 1.02

Axial compression: Length of roof leg = 3.75 m Reaction from truss = 5X 570 Gussets + Tie runners weight Load from girts=3X6Xl8 Load from side asbestos sheets Self weight of column at 50 kg/m Total DL and LL Moment at crane cap: Wind load moment = 3.75* 0.75 x 0.7 x (150 x 7.0) x 2 = 3 323 kgm 398 kgm = 2 850 kg = = 500 kg 324 kg

Allowable compression = 1 061 kg/cm* > 616.9 kg/cm* Therefore no bearing stiffener is required. However nominal 6 mm plate is provided as stiffener at each support. Bear in web = .l~24~050 = 401 kg/cm* < 945 kg/cm* Therefore O.K. Check for deflection : Keeping two wheels equidistant from centre of span

= 3.75 X 6 X 17 = 382.5 kg = 3.75 X 50 = 187.5 kg = 4244 kg

Surge moment = 0.53 X 0.75 X 1 000 = where
P = value of one load without impact = 10.5 t,

(assuming surge force acting 75 cm away from base of roof leg) Total moment at base of roof leg = 3 721 kgm Considering the increase in allowable stress for wind load combination, the reduced forces are: Axial force = 0.75 X 4 244 = 3 183 kg

C = p;;fce = 2=

of one load from adjacent reaction, 1.5 m,

E = modulas of elasticity, and

I = moment of inertia.

50

SP : 38(S&T)4987

Moment = 0.75 X 3 721

= 2 791 kgm

Load from crane Self weight of column at 50 kg/m = 6 X 50 Total DL + LL

= 20 450 kg = 300 kg p_ = 21 458 -i,k

The forces and bending moment calculated above compare weH with the values given in the Table 213. In Table 213 the axial force given corresponds to 30 m span truss.
Try ISMB
300/44.2

Length Effective length xx = 1.5 X 3.75 Effective length yy ==1.0 X 3.75

= 3.75 m = 5.625 m = 3.75 m = 45.5
I

r-

85cm 80 .4cm

4'

(I/ r F.x =- 562.5
12.37

(l/ryyj

=-2.-L 2.84

= 132.04

Allowable axial compressive stress = 597~(597-531)$= 583.54 kg/cm2 Moment due to wind load

Therefore allowable axial = 32 830 kg load = 583.54 X 56.26 = 32:8 i > 3.18 t O.K. Effective depth, (II = 30 - 1.24) Torsional constant, Effective length. (I = 375 - 1.0) rY 2,
K

= 0.7 x 0.75 x (150 x 6.0) x ---y--

9.752

= 28.76 cm = 24.33 cm4 = 375 cm = 453.9 cm4 = 573.6 cm3 Surge moment = 0.53 X 6.75 X 1 000 Total moment

= 22 459 kgm = 3 578 kgm

= 26 037 kgm

Axial force due to total moment = 26037X 100 = 32 384 kg 80.4 Therefore total axial force = 32 384 + 21 458
Design : .

453.9 X 28.76 c, = 1.2 X 10.1 x lo6 x 573.6 x 3752 X

J
11 rYY

l + 0.162 X 24.33 X 3752 453.9 X 28.762 = 3 086 kg/cm2 375 = z= 132.04

= 53 842 kg 5 53.84 t = 6.0 m = 80 cm = 51.3

Length Effective length yy = spacing of Lacing

Effective length xx = 0.85 X 600 = 510 cm

Allowable compressive stress in bending = 1 276 kg/cm* Check for bending and axial compression: 2 791 x 1W 3 183 54.26 X 583.54 + 573.6 X 1 276 = o'48 < `*' Therefore O.K.
Design of Crane Leg Below Crane Cap

0 x==9.94

510

Allowable compressive stress = 1.3 1172-(1 172- 1130)~ Therefore capacity of leg = 38.67 1.33 x 1 166 x 1 ooo

= 1 166 kg/cm2

Try two ISMC 250130.4 spacing of 85 cm.

back to back with a =sx = 708 kg 13.41

= 59.9 t < 53.84

Load from top roof column

Therefore O.K. l/rW Maximum = 0.7 X 5 I .3 = 35.9 Maximum lacing spacing = 35.9 X 2.38 = 85.4 cm

51

SP : 38(S&T)-1987
Design of Roof Leg Below Crane Cap

Roof columns force = 4 244 - 708 Load from girts = 5 X 6 X 18 Load from side asbestos sheets = 6X 6 X 17.5 Self weight at 50 kg/m = 50 X 6 Total Axial force from moment Therefore total axial force =5006'+32384 Capacity of leg = 59.9 t > 37.39 t

= 3 536 kg = 540 kg = = 630 kg 300 kg

= 5006 kg = 32 384 kg = 37 390 kg

M/I

DIAGRAM

Therefore ISMC 250 for roof column is O.K.
Check for deflection

CONJUGATE COLUMN
= 8 603.6 cm' = 219.1 cm' = 125 423 cm' Therefore &,, = Bending conjugate column moment at X of

Moment of inertia of roof leg above crane cap Moment of inertia of each ISMC 250 Combined MI. = 2 X 219.1 + 38.67 X 40.2' X 2

= 1$X 38.6 X 375 X 0.75 X 375 + 17.9 3x975x.75x975-3 x375x0.75x3751
I = 2.7 cm < 325 = 3.0 cm

2.65

l 2.047 X lo6

Therefore O.K.

hJ
`l-he deflections are calculated using conjugate oeam method. Determination of the deflection at to of column due to full wind load on wall clad d! mgs: Wind load = 0.7 X 0.75 X 150 X 6 = 472.5 kg/m

Determination of deflection at crane level for a basic service wind pressure of 25 kg/cm2 and

crane surge load:
conjugate

Deflection at crane level = Bending moment at Y of column. Shaded area = $ X 2.98 X 975 - i 4.12 + 6.44 3x375-3x300 = 968.5 - 55 + 805 - 412 X 0.44 X 375

472.5

kg/m
I &

= 1306.5
Moment of shaded area about 0 = 968.5 X .75 X 975 - 55 X .75 X 375 + 805 X .75 X 375 - 412
x .75 x 300 = 826 453 826 453 1 306.5

11~11~~11~~~~(~1)~1~~~~~~~~~~~~

6.0m

3.75FII(

Distance of CG of shaded area from Y

LOADING DIAGRAM

= bb

- 300 = 332.6 cm

Deflection at Y crane level due to UDL 1 = (1 306.5 X 332.6) 2.047 x 1o6

B . M. DIAGRAM
52

= 0.21 cm

SP : 38(SBrT)-1987

t

6.Om LOADING
t

_i_
l-

3.75m _

DIAGRAM

8. M.

DIAGRAM

+

2.85 DIAGRAM

4.62

CONJUGATE

CQLUMN

Deflection at crane level due to point load = = 0.31 X 600 X 375 + 2.54 X y 1 X~!75+462X~X50 2 1 2.047 X 10' =0.21 cm Total deflection at crane level = 0.21 + 0.21 = 0.42 cm
< Z/ 1 000 = 0.6 cm

Maximum shear in the column

= 0.7 X 0.75 x 150 X 6 X 9.75 = 4607 kg = 80 cm

Keep spacing of lacing

tan 8 = &= :. 8 = 26.451' Maximum lacing force =(.025X26464+4607) 2

0.497 51

Therefore
Lacings

O.K.

xdT=
l/r=-= 0.96 62.8

2 942 kg

Axial force on the combined leg (Axial force due to wind will be negligible)

Effective length = 0.7 X 5 = 5 006 + 21 458 = 26 464 kg Try ISA 5050 X6 65*4

= 62.8 cm

53

SP : 38(S&T)-1987
F,=

1 130-(1

130-

1075)g=

1 lOOkg/cm*

Strength

of 1 mm weld = h 0.7 X 1 025 =71 kg = 6.96 mm

Allowable Therefore

load = 1 100 X 5.68 X 1.33 =8310 kg>2942 kg O.K.

Therefore

size of weld = F

Use 8 mm weld all around The column base design for crane column is similar to axially loaded column base design and hence not repeated here. Bracing ar crane level

80

Crane level tie beam is required to transfer the crane surge to vertical bracings and restrain laterally top of crane leg. Unsupported rmln length = 6.0 m = 600/180 = 3.33 100 at 85 5050 X 6
=

1
1
End ties

Try 2 ISlvlC together by ISA
rmm

mm 4.0

apart

laced

80.4

~

Therefore

O.K.

The vertical bracings belovv tie beam should be designed as earlier considering crane surge in the longitudinal direction also. 26 464 X 0.025 + 4 607 in end ties = 2 X y = 105 372 kg. cm 105 372 7-rcqd = = 63.9 cm3 1 650 Use ISMC 200 5.10 Drawings -- It must be realised that for design of structure to be valid, the assumptions made in design office should be realised in the field. This is all the more important in ensuring that the connections envisaged are actually fabricated. Therefore, extreme care is necessary while preparing the drawings which is the only source of communication between the designer and the executive staff. A set of 5 drawings have been prepared for the design example given earlier and is appended at the end of handbook. It may be understood that the details given in these fabrication drawings are only typical details and several alternatives may be feasible depending upon the common practice followed in different consulting engineering organizations. 6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Bending

I SMC 250 ISMC 20

NOTE:-LOCATION

OF WELD

SHOWN

HATCHED

Force in end tie weld (for 1 mm size weld) Assuming

=

105 372 X 10
(8X102+2X203/12)

= 494 kg

shear stress in fillet weld = 1 025 kg/ cm*

6.1 The analysis and design results of typified structures with steel roof trusses (with and without cranes) have been presented for trusses having five different A-type truss spans and three different lean-to roof truss spans, two different three different slopes, two/ three spacings, different column heights. four dtfferent crane capacities, three different wind pressures and five different earthquake zones. It has been found that forces in members, even due to the lowest wind pressure of 100 kg/m', is more than that due to the most severe earthquake zone forces.

54

SY : %(S&Tbl987 Typical connection details for purlins, trttsses and columns have been presented. Finally an example illustrating the use of the handbook has been presented. Comparison of steel weight in the roofing is given in Tables 231 to 242 for A-type and lean-to roof truss systems. The weights given in these tables include weight of all the members such as purlins, sag rods, truss weight, gussets (on the basis of approximate percentage of the truss weight), and tie runners but excludes the weight of columns, bracing, etc. From these tables the following conclusions may be drawn: 1) The ratio of spacing to generally in trusses and weight per square metre of 6.0 m 4.5 m spacing of trusses is the range of 1.04 to 1.2 for angle 1.13 to 1.32 for tubular trusses. The smaller values for the above ratio are for steeper slopes of roof. 2) Generally tubular structural system consume less weight per unit area compared to angle truss systems. The ratio of unit weight of tube to angle system is in the range of 0.61 to 0.81, the ratio being generally larger for flatter slopes and 6.0 m spacing of trusses. 3) Spans in the range of 12 to 18 m in the Atype truss system and 9 m in lean-to roof truss svstem generally require less material per unit area compared to other spans. 4) Purlins weight constitute between 39 and 81 percent of the total weight of the tubular truss systems and between 29 and 66 percent of the angle truss system.

55

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 REFERENCES 1. IS : 226-1975 Specification for structural (standard quality) (fiyfh revision) 2. IS : 2002-1984 Specification for structural steel (t/ri;d revision) steel 8. SP : 6(l)-1964 engineers IS Handbook for structural

9. 1S : 807-1976 Code of practice for design, manufacture, erection and testing (structural portion) of cranes and hoists first revision) 10. IS : 8640-1977 Recommendations for dimensional parameters for industrial buildings 11. IS : 3007 (Part Q-1964 Code of practice for laying of asbestos cement sheets: Part I Corrugated sheets 12. Arya (AS) and Ajmani (JL), Design of St/eel structures (Table 13-8), Third Edition, Nem Chand and Bros, 1977. 13. 1S : 813-1961 Scheme (amended). of symbols for welding

weldable

3. IS : 11.61-1979 Specification for steel tubes for structural purposes (third revision) 4. IS : 875-1964 Code of practice for structural safety of buildings: Loading standards (revised) 5. IS : 1893-1975 resistant design Criteria for of structures earthquake for use of building

6. 1S : 800-1962 Code of practice structural steel in general construction

`7. 1S : 806-1968 Code of practice for use of steel tubes in general building construction

14. IS : 800-1984 Code of practice for general construction in steel (second revision)

SP:38(S&T)-19117
TABLE Span Wind 900.08 cm 100 kg/m2
LENGTH Clll

1 STEEL ROOF Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

TRUSS 450.00 4

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

at

I in 3 118.59 cm
MO~~ESI

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION

kg.cm 449.9 729. I 2636.7 1947.5 2428.8 397 I .o 120.6 1236.7 0.0 689.3 305. I 368.9 873.3

kg

kg.cm 997.7 1445.4 1124.6 842.7 1208.0 2070.0 80.3 669.0 0.0 281.9 639.7 739.7 1703.0

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 13

225.00 225.00 118.59 118.59 118.59 118.59 75.00 37.50 15o.(io 118.59 112.50 135.21 135.21

(2) (2) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (2)
(1)

(2)
(2

(2)

1636. I 806.4 4147.7 3620.7 4040.3 3966.4 567.7 273.9 5.1 512.0 201.6 682.2 907.8

(1) (1)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

(3
(2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1)

3925.8 2338.9 1782.0 1608.6 1934.3 2001.3 291.9 142.0 9.8 273.6 384. I 1318.7 1752.0

2 In bracket indicates force due lo wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Vertical ) f Horizontal 0.0 742.8 0.0 788.4 17.9 - 1620.0 Right Horizontal 0.0 0.0 17.9 Reaction A Vertical 7 742.8 788.4 - 1620.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

TABLE Span Wind 900.00 cm I50 kg/m'
LENGTI~

2 STEEL

ROOF TRUSS 450.00 4

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I in 3 118.59 cm
MOMENT

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

at

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION

cm 225.00 225.00 118.59 118.59 118.59 118.59 75.00 37.50 150.00 118.59 112.50 135.21 135.21

kg

kg.cm

kg

kg.cm 997.7 1445.4 2166.6 1618.4 2253.8 3827.4 142.4 1228.5 0.0 548.2 639.7 739.7 1703.0

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3

(2) (2) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(2)
(1)

(2) (2) (2)

3168.4 1635.0 4147.7 3620.7 4OJio.3 3966.4 567.7 273.9 9.4 512.0 372.2 1263.3 1680.4

856.3 1356.6 2636.7 1947.5 2428.8 3971.0 120.6 1236.7 0.0 689.3 574. I 688.0 1619.7

(1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) 0)
(1) (1)

3925.8 2338.9 3427.6 3071.6 3636.5 3723.5 541.1 262.9 9.8 503.6 384. I 1318.7 1752.0

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction h Vertical > (Horizontal 0.0 742.8 788.4 0.0 - 2430.0 26.9 Right < Horizontal 0.0 0.0 26.9 Reaction h Vertical742.8 788.4 - 2430.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

57

SP : 38 (S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind
M

3 STEEL

ROOF

TRlJSS 450.00 4

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION kg

force

900.00 em 200 kg ml
LENGI ti

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

1 in 3
at 118.59 cm
MOMENT

t,..nsm

MOMENT

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 225.00 225.00 118.59 118.59 118.59 118.59 75.00 37.50 150.00 118.59 112.50 135.21 135.21

kgcm 1262.7 1984. I 2636.7 1947.5 2428.8 3971.0 120.6 1236.1 0.0 689.3 843.0 1007.0 2366.2

kg.cm 997.7 1445.4 3208.5 3294.0 3299.6 5584.7 204.4 i788.0 0.0 814.5 639.7 739.7 1703.0

(21 (2)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(2)
(1)

(2)
(2)

(2)

4700.6 2463.7 4147.7 3620.7 4040.3 3966.4 567.7 273.9 13.8 512.0 542.9 1844.3 2453.0

(I) (1)

(2) (2) (4 G9 (2) (2) (1)
(2) (1)

(1)
(1)

3925.8 2338.9 5073. I 4534.5 5338.6 5445.7 790.4 383.7 9.8 733.5 384. I 1318.7 1752.0

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Keaction ' Horizontal 0.0 0.0 35.8 Vertical' 742.8 788.4 - 3240.0 Right r Horizontal 0.0 0.0 35.8 Reaction Vertical' 742.8 788.4 - 3240.0

Dead load reaction Live ioad reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

TABLE _ Span Wind _900.00 cm 100 kg/m*
LENGTH Clll

4 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 4

(ANALYSIS cm

force

Spacing Panels -__-COMPRESSION kg

RESULTS) ___ ____-p-p Slope Purlins

at

I in 4 115.96 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT kg.cm

TENSlOhl kg

kgcm l?17.b 2294.1 2013.8 1471.6 1756.5 2859. I 88.4 951.5 0.0 542. I 1152.2 1283.9 2900.8

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 13

225.00 225.00 115.96 I IS.96 115.96 115.96 56.25 28.12 I 12.50 115.96 112.50 125.78 125.78

(2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (l) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2,

2212.9 1229.6 5670.9 5037. I 5467.9 5339.9 607.9 233.2 7.0 6:3.0 184.8 781.4 953.9

720.2 1032.2 4928.0 3576.2 3954.0 6218.1 148.0 20 12.4 0.0 1351.7 501.5 571.0 1318.2

(l) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (l) (2) (1) (1) (1)

5458.3 3357.3 2325.8 2104.6 2381.9 2399.5 275.5 106.5 15.2 290.8 397.5 1713.5 2088.9

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 20.0 Vertical' 726.4 907.8 - 1620.0 Right CHorizontal 0.0 0.0 20.0 Reaction Vertical ' 726.4 907.8 - 1620.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

58

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 900.00 cm I50 kg/m2
LENGTH

5 STEEL ROOF Spacing Panels

TRUSS 450.00 4

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

1 in 4
at I If.96 cm
MOMENT

force

MEMBER.

COMPRESSION kg

MOMENT

TENSION kg

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 225.00 225.00 115.96 115.96 I 15.96 115.96 56.25 28.12 112.50 115.96 112.5U 125.78 125.78

kgcm 1366.7 1930.7 4928.0 3576.2 3954.0 6218.1 148.0 2012.4 0.0 1351.7 944.4 1070.6 2460.9

kgcm 1717.6 2294.7 3842.0 2803.6 3293.8 5325.2 157.3 1762.6 0.0 1038.5 1152.2 1283.9 2900.8

(2) (2)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

(2)
(1) 0: (2)

(2)

4234.2 2404.0 5670.9 5037. I 5467.9 5339.9 607.9 233.2 13.0 613.0 343.4 1457.6 1779.0

(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2)
(1)

`(1) (1)

5488.3 3357.3 4433.9 3996.5 4484.3 4489.3 514.6 198.6 15.2 538.4 397.5 1713.5 2088.9

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Gorizontal 0.0 0.0 29.9 Vertica? 726.4 907.8 - 2430.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 29.9 Reaction .) Vertical 726.4 907.8 - 2430.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction' Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Span Wind

force

900.00 cm 200 kg/m*
LENGTH

TABLE 6 STEEL ROOF --Spacing Panels

TRUSS 450.00 4

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS)
Slope 1 in 4

Purlins

at

115.96 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

COMPRESSION

h<OMENT

TENSION

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 225.00 225.00 115.96 115.96 115.96 115.96 56.25 28.12 112.50 115.96 112.50 125.78 125.78 (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2)

kg 6255.4 3578.4 5670.9 5037. I 5467.9 5339:9 607.9 233.2 19.0 613.0 502. I 2134.0 2604. I

kgcm 2013.1 2829.3 4928.0 3576.2 3954.0 6218.1 148.0 2012.4 0.0 1351.7 1387.2 1570. I 3603.5 (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1)

kg 5488.3 3357.3 6542.0 5888.4 6586.6 6579. I 753.7 290.8 15.2 786.0 397.5 1713.5 2088.9

kg.cm 1717.6 2294.7 5670.3 4135.5 4831.1 7791.2 226. I 2573.8 0.0 1534.8 1152.2 1283.9 2900.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction . Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 39.9 Vertical ' 726.4 907.8 - 3240.0 Right r Horizontal 0.0 0.0 39.9 Reaction Vertical> 726.4 907.8 - 3240.0

(without

25 percent

reduction)

59

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 7 STEEL
span Wind force 900.00 cm

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 4

(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
cm Slope Purlins at

Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg

I

in 5 cm

100 kp,/m' LENGTR cm 225.00 225.00

114.73

MEMBE~I

MOMENT kg.cm 1063.3 1399.6 7776.5 558

TENSION kg

MOMENT kg.cm 2642.5 3316.4 3084.4 2222.6 2372.0 3758.8 115.2 1298.9 0.0 861.8 1749.2 1914.9 4281.2

f
4

114.73 114.73 114.73 114.73 45.00 22.50 90.00 114.73 112.50 121.17 121.17 indicates indicates

5
6
7 8 9 10 II 12 13 2 In bracket I In bracket 25 Percent

(2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1)

2746.2 1636.3 7140.0 6476.9 6814.3 6608.8 635.3 173.5 9.2 637.

(1)
(1) (2) (2) (2)

6984. I 4408.8 2838.5 2605.5 2814. I 2785.4 268.7 73.9 21.5 284.6 303.2 2099.3 2290.2

1.7

5678.8 8765.7 286.3 2966.8 0.0 2194.7 721.9 800.4 1819.5

(2)
(2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) 0)

I

0)
(2) (2)
combination

133.1 893.3 975.6 load combination other wind than

force due to wind force from

wind

load

reduction

IS applied

to force from

load combination ILeft Reaction (Hori/ontai Vertical3 718.7 98 I .9 1620.0 Right `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 32.5 Reaction Vertical 718.7 98 I .9 1620.0 >

Dead Live Wind

load load

reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

0.0 0.0 32.5

load reaction

TABLE Span Wind force MEMBEI 900.00 I50 cm

8 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 4

(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
cm Slope Purlins at I in 5 114.73 cm

Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (2) (I) (2) (2) (2) 5226. 3153.2 7140.0 6476.9 6814.3 6608.8 635.3 173.5 17.2 637. I 247.7 1672.6 1826.3 load combination other wind than

kg, m?

L.FNGTH cm

MOMEhr kg.cm

TENSION kg (I) (1) 6984. I 4408.8 5389.3 4934.7 5301.0 5225.5 503.8 138.3 21.5 527.9 303.2 2099.3 2290.2

MOMENT kg.cm 2642.5 3316.4 5859.0 4218.4 4458.0 7027.4 218.2 2418.5 0.0 1640.5 1749.2 1914.9 428 I .2

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 2 In bracket I In bracket 25 Percent

225.00 225.00

I

2013.7 2624.9

I I4 73 ' 14.73
II4 73 114.73 45.00 22.50 90.00 114.73 112.50 121.17 121.17 indicates indicates

7776.5
5581.7 5678.8 8165.7 286.3 2966.8 0.0 2194.7 1360.1 1504.1 3407.7

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (2) (1) (I) (1)

force due to wind force from to force

combination from

wind

load

reduction

is applied

load combination Left f Reaction Vertical 718.7 981.9 - 2430.0 Right 1 (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 48.8 Reaction Vertical 718.7 981.9 - 2430.0 3

Horizontal
0.0 0.0

Dead Live Wind

load load load

reaction reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

48.8

60

SP : 38(s&T)-1987

TABLE 9 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span
Wind force
MEMBER

900.00 cm
200 kg/ rr.2
LENGTH cni

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

450.00 4

cm

Slope

I

in

5

Purlins

at

114.73 cm
MOMENT'

MOMENT

TENSION

kg.cm 2964. I 3850.3 7116.5 5581.7 5678.8 8765.7 286.3 2966.8 0.0 2194.7 1998.2 2207.7 4995.9

kg

kg.cm 2642.5 3316.4 8633.6 6214.3 6543.9 10296.0 321 2 3538.1

8
Y 10

II 12 13

225 00 225.00 11473 II4 73 114 73 114 73 45.00 22.50 90.00 11473 112.50 121.17 121 I7

(2) (2) (1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2)

(2)
(2)

7706.0 4670.0 7140.0 6476.9 68 I-4.3 6608.8 635.3 173.5 25.2 631. I 362.3 2452.0 2677.0

(1) (1) (2! (2) (2) f-3 (2) (2)
ill

(2) (1) (1) (1)

6984. I 4408.8 7940. I 7263.9 1181.9 7665.5 738.8 202.8 21.5 771.1 303.2 2099.3 2290.2

0.0
2419.2 1749.2 1914.9 4281.2

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load I In bracket indicate:, force from combination 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from

combiniition other xhan wind load wind load combination Left Reaction (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 65.0 Vertxal 7 718.7 981.9 - 3240.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 65.0 Reaction A Vertical > 718.7 981.9 - 3240.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

TABLE 10 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS
Span Wind 900.00 cm 100 kg/ml
LEWTH

RESULTS)
SlOpC I

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

600.00 4

cm

Purlins

at

in 3 118.59 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

kfOMEWT

7ENSlON

cm

kg (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (I) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) 2066.6 1006.7 5692.2 4969.0 5544.8 5443.4 779.2. 315.9 6.5 702.7 251.5 871.0 1159.1

kg.cm 570.6 929.9 3618.5 2672.4 3333.2 5449.1 165.5 1697. I 0.0 945.9 388. I 470.3 I 114.5 (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 5387.6 3209.8 2254.6 2038.8 2460.8 2552.3 372.6 181.4 13.5 349.8 527. I 1809.8 2404.4

kg.cm 1349.3 1983.7 1422.3 1066.6 1539.5 2643.1 103.5 855.9 0.0 355.6 877.9 1015.2 2337. I

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO 11 I2 I3

225.00 225.00 118.59 118.59 118.59 118.59 75.00 37.50 150.00 118.59 112.50 135.21 135.21

(2)
(I) (2)

(1)
(1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 23.9 Vertical > 1050.2 1051.2 - 2160.0 Right <Horizontal 0.0 0.0 23.9 Reaction Vertical 3 1050.2 1051.2 - 2160.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

61

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 900.00 cm 150 kg/m*
LENGTH

11 STEEL ROOF TRUSS Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

600.00 4

I in 3
at 118.59 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

cm 1 2 3 4 5 225.00 225.00 118.59 118.59 118.59 118.59 75.00 37.50 150.00 118.59 112.50 135.21 135.21

kg.cm 1112.5 1766.5 3618.5 2672.6 3333.2 5449.7 165.5 1697.1 0.0 945.9 746.7 895.6 2109.8

kg.cm 1369.3 1983.7 2811.6 2100.8 2933.9 4986.9 186.3 1601.8 0.0 710.7 877.9 1015.2 2337. I

(2) (2)
(1) (1) (1) (1)

$ 9 IO II 12 I3

(1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2)

4109.5 2111.6 5692.2 4969.0 5544.8 5443.4 779.2 375.9 12.3 702.7 485. I 1645.7 2189.2

(1)

(1)
(2) (2) (2)

(2) (2) (2)
(1)

(2)
(1) (1) (1)

5387.6 3209.8 4448.7 3989.4 4730.3 4848.6 704.9 342.5 13.5 656.4 527. I 1809.8 2404.4

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Vertical3 1050.2 1051.2 - 3240.0 Right fHorizonta1 0.0 0.0 35.8 Reaction A Vertical J 1050.2 1051.2 - 32413.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

(Horizontal 0.0 0.0 35.8

TABLE Span Wind 900.00 cm 200 kg/m?
LENGTH

12 STEEL ROOF Spacing Panels

TRUSS 600.00 4

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I in 3 118.59 cm
MOMENT

force

at

MEMHER

COMPRESSION

MOMENT

TENSION

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 I3 225.00 225.00 118.59 118.59 118.59 118.59 75.00 37.50 150.00 118.59 112.50 135.21 135.21 (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (I) (2) (2) (2)

kg
6152.5 3216.5 5692.2 4969.0 5544.8 5443.4 779.2 375.9 18.1 702.7 712.6 2420.4 3219.4

kg.cm 1654.4 2603.2 3618.5 2672.6 3333.2 5449.7 165.5 1697. I 0.0 945.9 1105.3 1321.0 3105.1 (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 5387.6 3209.8 6642.8 5940.0 6999.9 7144.8 1037.2 503.6 13.5 963. I 527. I 1809.8 2404.4

kg.cm 1369.3 1983.7 4200.9 3135.0 4328.4 7330. I 269.0 2347.8 0.0 1065.8 877.9 1015.2 2337. I

(7-J
(I) (2) (I) (I) (I)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind Load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A (Horizontal Vertical? Dead load reaction 0.0 1050.2 Live load reaction 0.0 1051.2 Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction) 47.7 - 4320.0

Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 47.7

Reaction A Vertical3 1050.2 1051.2 - 4320.0

62

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE

13 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS)

Span Wind force
MEMBER

900.00 cm

100 kg7mr LENGTH cm 225.00 225.00 115.96 115.96 115.96 115.96 56.25 28.12 Il2.50 115.96 112.50 125.78 125 78

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

600.00 cm 4
MOMENT

Slope Purlins at
TENSION kg

I in 4
115.96 cm
MOMENT

kg.cm 914.3 1314.7 6746.9 4896.2 5413.4 8513.2 202.6 2155.2 0.0 1850.6 637.8 727.0 1679.8

kg.cm 2351.5 3141.6 2552.8 1866.3 2235.9 3645.4 113.9 1214.7 0.0 686.5 1577.5 1757.8 3971.4

I

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13

(2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2)

2803.3 1549.4 7764.0 6896.3 7486:l 7310.8 832.3 319.3 8.9 839.2 235.7 995.9 1215.8

(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1)

7514.0 4596.5 2948.9 2671.0 3029.2 3056.I 351.0 135.8 20.8 371.3 544.2 2345.9 2859.9

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction) fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 26.6 Vertical 1027.0 1210.5 - 2160.0

Right Reaction fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 26.6 Vertical 3 1027.0 1210.5 - 2160.0

TABLE

14 STEEL

ROOF TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS)

Span Wind force MEMRER I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

900.00 cm I50 kg/m'
LENGTH

Spacing Panels
COMPREWON

600.00 cm 4
IU~IUENT

Slope Purlins at
TENSION

I in 4 115.96 cm
MOMENT

cm 225.00 225.00 115.96 115.96 115.96 115.96 56.25 28.12 112.50 115.96 112.50 125.78 125.78

kg

kg.cm 1776.1 2512.7 6746.9 4896.2 54413.4 8513.2 202.6 2755.2 0.0 1850.6 1228.3 1393.0 3203.3

kg

kg.cm 2351.5 3141.6 4990.5 3642.2 4285.7 6933.4 205.7 2296.2 0.0 1348.4 1577.5 1757.8 3971.4

IO II I2 I3

(2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2)

5498.3 3115.2 7764.0 6896.3 7486. I 73 ID.8 .832.3 319.3 16.9 839.2 447.3 1897.6 2315.9

(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1)

7514.0 4596.5 5759.7 5193.5 5832.3 5842.5 669.8 258.6 20.8 701.4 544.2 2345.9 2859.9

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction) (rHorizontal 0.0 0.0 39.9 Verticals 1027.0 1210.5 - 3240.0 fiGZFG& 0.0 0.0 39.9 1027.0 1210.5 - 3240.0

SP : 38(51&T)-1987

TABLE 15 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS) Span Wind force
MBMBBR

900.00 cm 200 kg/m*
LENGTH

Spacing Panels
~MPRFSSION

600.00 cm 4
MOMENT

Slope Purlins at
TENSION

1 in 4
115.96 cm
MOMENT

cm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 I1 12 13 225.00 225.80 115.96 115.96 115.96 Il5,96 56.25 28. I2 112.50 115.96 I1250 125.78 125.78 (2) (2) 0) 0) 0) 0) 0) 0) (2) (I) (2) (2) (2)

kg 8193.3 4681.1 7764.0 6896.3 7486. I 73 10.8 832.3 319.3 24.9 839.2 658.8 2799.3 3416.I

kg.cm 2638.0 3710.8 6746.9 4896.2 5413.4 8513.2 202.6 2755.2 0.0 1850.6 1818.7 2059.0 4726.8 0) 0) (2) (2) (2J (2) (2) (2) 0) (2) (I) (1) 0)

kg 7514.0 4596.5 8570.6 7716.1 8635.5 8628.9 988.6 381.4 20.8 1031.5 544.2 2345.9 2859.9

kg.cm 2351.5 3141.6 7428.2 5418.1 6335.4 10221.5 297.5 3377.8 0.0 2010.2 1577.5 1757.8 3971.4

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates iorce from combination o:her than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A ( Horizontal Vertical7 0.0 1027.0 0.0 1210.5 53.2 - 4320.0 Right Reaction A horizontal Vertical 3 0.0 1027.0 0.0 1210.5 53.2 - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

TABLE 16 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS) Span Wind force
MEMBER

900.00 cm 100 kg/m*
LENGTH

Spacing Panels
COMPRES'arON kg (2)

600.00 cm 4
MOMENT

Slope Purlins at TENSION kg

I in 5
114.73 cm
MOMENT

cm

kg.cm 1350.3 1781.5 10633.0 7632. I 7764.8 11985.7 391.5 4056.7 0.0 3001.0 917.9 1018.4 2316.8

kg.cm 3613.2 4534.6 3914.2 2821.1 3017.8 4788.2 146.3 1656.I

1
2 3 4 5 6
7

8 9 IO II 12 13

225.00 225.00 114.73 114.73 114.73 114.73 45.00 22.50 90.00 114.73 112.50 121.17 121.17

(2) (1) (1)

(1)
(I) i)) (I) (2) 0) (2) (2) (2)

3483.5 2069.3 9762.7 8856.1 9317.4 9036.4 a68.6 237.3 11.7 871.1 169.7 1137.5 1242.4

(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1)

9549.6 6028.3 3602.6 3308.8 3578.3 3545.3 342.I 94. I 29.4 363.2 414.5 2870.4 3131.5

0.0
1093.1 2391.7 2618.3 5853.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to Iorce from wind load combination Left Reaction

' Horizontal
Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction) 0.0 0.0 43.4

Right Reaction A Vertical 1 ( Horizontal Verticah 1016.0 0.0 1016.0 1309.1 0.0 1309.1 - 2160.0 - 2160.0 43.4

64

SP : 38(s&T)-19sI
TABLE Span. Wind 9OO.tJO cm ISO kg/m' LENGTH cm 225.00 225.00 114.73 114.73 114.73 114.73 45.00 22.50 90.00 114.73 112.50 121.17 121.17 (2) (2) (1) Cl) (I) (1) (I) Cl) (2) Cl) (2) (2) (2) 17 STEEL ROOF TRUSS Spacing Pancis COMPREsSION kg 6790.0 4091.8 9762.7 8856. I 9317.4 9036.4 868.6 237.3 22.4 871.1 322.5 2176.6 2376.7

(ANALYSIS RESULTB)
Slope Purlins

force

6OO.OO cm 4 MOMENT kg.cm 2617.6 3415.3 10633.0 7682. I 7764.8 11985.7 391.5 4056.7 0.0 3001.0 1768.8 1956.6 4434.4 (I) (1) (2) (2) (2)

I in 5
at 114.73 cm MOM@Ni kg.cm 3613.2 4534.6 7613.6 5482.2 5799. I 9146.3 283.6 3148.9 0.0 2131.4 2391.7 2618.3 5853.8

MEMRER

TENSION kg 9549.6 6028.3 7003.7 6414.4 6894.2 6798.7 655.5 180.0 29.4 687.6 414.5 2870.4 3131.5

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3

(2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction rHorizontal 0.0 0.0 65.0 Vertical ' 1016.0 1309.1 - 3240.0 Right fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 65.0 Reaction Vertical ' 1016.0 1309.1 - 3240.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

TABLE Span Wind 900.00 cm 200 kg/m*
LENGTH

18 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION kg

force

Spacing Panels
G~MPRESSION kg

6OO.OO cm 4
MOMENT

at

I in 5 114.73 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO I! I2 I3 225.00 225.00 114.73 114.73 114.73 114.73 45.00 22.50 90.00 114.73 112.50 121.17 121.17

kgcm 3884.8 5049.2 10633.0 7632. I 7764.8 11987.7 391.5 40567 0.0 3OOl.O 2619.7 2894.8 6552.0

kg.cm 3613.2 4534.6 11313.1 8143.4 8580.4 13504.4 420.9 4641.8 0.0 3169.7 2391.7 2618.3 5853.8

(2) (2) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1) (1) (2)
(1)

(2) (2) (2)

10096.6 6114.2 9762.7 8856. I 9317.4 9036.4 868.6 237.3 33.1 871.1 475.3 3215.8 3511.0

(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1)

9549.6 6028.3 10404.7 9520.0 10210.1 10052.2 968.9 265.9 29.4 IO1 1.9 414.5 2870.4 3131.5

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction rHorizontal 0.0 0.0 86.7 Vertical 3 1016.0 1309.1 - 4320.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 86.7 Reaction Vertical 7 1016.0 1309.1 - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

SP : 38(S&Tb1987

TABLE 19 STEEL ROOF TRUSS(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 1200.00 cm 100 kg/m2
LENGTH

force

Spacing Panels
~MPREWON

450.00 5

cm

Slope Purlins

1 in 3
at 126.49 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 16 I7 120.00 240.00 240.00 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 40.00 120.00 60.00 200.00 144.22 121.66 144.22 156.20 156.20

kg

kg.cm 1314.4 711.6 486.8 2947.8 2468.9 202. I 1879.7 3149.9 650.2 195.5 891.3 0.0 416.8 163.5 382.8 295: I 605.7

kg

kg.cm 3191.5 t675.2 968.0 1230. I 1090.3 57.0 917.2 lM7.7 220.0 100.5 463.4 0.0 203.3 352.5 866. I 610.3 1216.3

(2) (2) (2) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

2193. I 1942.4 1026. ! 5137.4 5152.9 4519.4 4928.5 4887.3 378.3 599.0 340.9 3.3 733.9 166.4 313.8 787.8 996.9

(1)
(1) (1) (2)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(1) (2)
(1) (1) (1)

(1)

5435.8 4958.2 3129.1 2371.8 2488.9 2006.9 2295.7 2388.2 190.4 299.2 170.3 6.3 369.0 331.5 611.5 1575.5 1993.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applid to force from wind load combination Left Reaction `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 23.9 Vertical 3 1018.9 1051.2 - 2160.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 23.9 Reaction A Vertical 3 1018.9 1051.2 - 2160.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

66

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 126000 cm I?( kg Ill-l
1.b \C, I ,I

20 STEEI,

ROQF

TRUSS 450.00 5

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION

force

Spacing' Panels
COhlPRESS10S

1 in 3
at 126.49
MOMENT

cm

MEMH~R

Mr,blFST

cm I 2
3

kg
(2)
(2) (`I Ill (1) : I) (1) II) (II 0) (II (2) (1) 4293.0 3828.7 2116.7 5737.4 575219 4579.4 4928.5 48X7.3 378.3 599.0 340.9 6. I 733.9 310.8 583.6 1472.4 13h3.3

kgsm 2560.7 1376.5 908.9 2947.8 2468.9 202. I 1879.7 3 149.9 650.2 195.5 891.3 0.0 416.8 310.4 734. I 555.3 I 133.0 (I) 0) (1) (2, (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)

kg
5435.8 4958.2 3129.1 4616.7 4795.2 3855.5 4353.2 4484.4 355.5 559.3 318.4 6.3 689.0 331.5 61 I.5 1575.5 1993.8

kg.cm 3191.5 1675.2 968.0 2389.3 2091.2 122.8 1722.8 2993.0 450. I 186.9 859.6 0.0 381.8 352.5 866. I 610_3 1216.3

l2O.W
? 10.00 210.00

3

5 6 7 n 9 10 IL 12 I? I4

I26.49 I26.4Q 126.40 I2o.J4 I ;`h.49 40.00 ILO.I)O ho 00 200 I)0 l&l 12

Ii I (1
17

I ?I .I?0 I1`K.z iSh.70 I Yi.20

(2) (2) (2) (2)

2 In bracket indicate\ I In hrachet indIcatea 25 Percen! reductic$il

lorce due 10 wtnd load combination force from'comhlnation other than wind load s applied lo lo~ce from Hind load combmation Left Horizontal 0.0 0.0 35.8

Reaction Vertical ' 1018.9 1051.2 - 3240.0

Right fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 35.8

Reaction Vertical ' 1018.9 1051.2 - 3240.0 -

Dead load reaction I.ive load reuctioll Wind load reaction

(v.ithom

25 percent

reduction)

67

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE
Span Wind force 1200.00 cm

21 STEEL ROOF TRUSS
Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg 450.00 5

(ANALYSIS
cm

RESULTS)
Slope Purlins at I in 3 126.49 cm

200 kg/m* LENGTH cm

MEMBER

MOMENT kgsm 3806.9 2041.5 1331.0 2947.8 2468.9 202. I 1879.7 3149.9 650.2 195.5 891.3 0.0 416.8 457.2 1085.3 815.4 1660.4 (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

TENSION kg 5435.8 4958.2 3129.1 6861.6 7101.5 5704.2 6410.7 6580.6 520.6 819.4 466.5 6.3 1008.9 331.5 61 I.5 1575.5 1993.8

MOMENT kg.cm 3191.5 1675.2 968.0 3548.5 3092.0 188.7 2528.3 4378.2 680. I 273.3 1255.8 0.0 560.4 352.5 866.

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 15 I6 17 2 In bracket I In bracket 25 Percent

120.00 240.00 240.00 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 40.00 120.00 60.00 200.00 144.22 121.66 144.22 156.20 156.20 indicates indicates reduction

(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (I) (I, (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

6392.9 57 15.0 3207.3 5737.4 5752.9 4579.4 4928.5 4887.3 378.3 599.0 340.9 8.9 733.9 455. I 853.4 2157. I 2729.8 load combination other wind than

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)

I

610.3 1216.3

force due to wind force from is apphed to force

combination from

wind

load

load combination Left `Horizontal Reaction Vertical1018.9 1051.2 - 4320.0 Right `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 47.7 Reaction ), - `7 Vertical 1018.9 1051.2 - 4320.0

Dead

load

reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

0.0
0.0 47.7

Live load

Wind- load feaction

68

SP : 38(S&T)r1987

TABLE 22 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind

___I 1200.00 cm
force 100 kg/m'
LENGTH CQl

Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) 2953. I 2700.9 1565.6 78 13.0 7890.3 6363.8 6777: I 6709.6 387.6 629.9 324.2 4.3 955.3 176.2 321.3 885.9 1081.0

450.00 5

cm

Slope Purlins

at

I in 4 123.69 cm
MOhlENl kg.cm 5822.2 2837.7 1527.0 2152.5 1680.5 198.9 1324.9 2171.3 527.9 133.7 659. I

MEMBER

MOMEN*

TENSION

kg.cm 2295.8 1138.8 676.6 5432.4 4095.6 562.6 3057.9 4838.4 1456.1 292.5 1444.8 0.0 628.4 301.7 629. I 458.2 945.8

kg
(1)

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 I5 16
17

12(?.00

240.00 240.00 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 30.00 90.00 45.00 15G.00 134.16 120.93 134.16 141.51 141.51

(1)
(1) (2)

(2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)

7569.4 7032.6 4463.6 3090.0 3200.2 2600.0 2866.3 2919.0 171.8 277.4 142.8 9.4 423.9 397.8 709. I 2009.0 2451.9

0.0
275.4 712.9 1528.4 1063.3 2145.9

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates. force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction ' Horizontal 0.0 0.0 26.6 Vertical ' 996.3 1210.5 - 2160.0 Right `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 26.6 Reaction Vertical? 996.3 1210.5 - 2160.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

69

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 23 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS) Span Wind force
MEMBER

1200.00 cm 150 kg/m?
LENGTH

Spacing Panels

450.00 cm 5

Slope Purlins at
TENSION

1 in 4
123.69 cm
MOMENT

COMPRESSION MOMENT

cm
I

kg
(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) 5711.2 5242.0 3104.1 7813.0 7890.3 6363.8 6777. I 6709.6 387.6 629.9 324.2 8.0 955.3 331.7 602.0 1669.0 2036.6

kg.cm 4429.4 2188.6 1273.5 5432.4 4095.6 562.6 3057.9 4838.4 1456.I 292.5 1444.8 0.0 628.4 573.3 1202.4 867.3 1782.I (1) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (I) (1) (1) (1)

kg 7569.4 7032.6 4463.6 5957.7 6136.2 4971.5 5446.9 5514.5 323.3 522.1 269.I 9.4 797.6 397.8 709.I 2009.0 2451.9

kg.cm 5822.2 2837.7 1527.3 4148.5 3214.1 393.5 2505.I 4076. I 1038.4 250.0 1233.3 0.0 519.5 712.9 1528.4 1063.3 2145.9

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 I3 14 I5 I6 I7

120.00 240.00 240.00 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 30.00 90.00 45.00 150.00 134.I6 120.93 134.16 141.51 141.51

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percen4 reduction) f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 39.9 Right Reaction Vertical ' 996.3 1210.5 - 3240.0

Vertical 3 (Horizontal 996.3 0.0 1210.5 0.0 39.9 - 3240.0

70

SP :38(9&T)-1987

TABLE 24 STEEL Span Wind 1200.00 cm 200 kg/m*
LENGTH cm

ROOF TRUSS 450.00 5

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

I in 4
at 123.69 cm
MO&~ENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION

kg.cm 6563.0 3238.5 1870.3 5432.4 4095.6 562.6 3057.9 4838.4 1456. I 292.5 1444.8 0.0 628.4 844.9 1775.7 1276.4 2618.3 (I) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 1569.4 7032.6 4463.6 8825.5 9072.2 7354.9 8027.5 8 I 10.0 474.8 768. I 395.4 9.4 1171.3 397.8 709. I 2009.0 2451.9

kg.cm 5822.2 2831.7 1527.0 6144.5 4747.8 588.2 3685.3 5980.9 1548.8 366.4 1807.4 0.0 763.6 712.9 1528.4 1063.3 2145.9

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

120.00 240.00 24x).00 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 30.0 90.00 45.00 150.00 134.16 120.93 134.16 141.51 141.51

(2) (2) (2) (I) (1) (1) (I) (1) (:) (I) (I) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

8469.3 7783. I 4642.7 78 13.0 7890.3 6363.8 6777. I 6709.6 387.6 629.9 324.2 11.8 955.3 487.2 882.7 2452. I 2992.3

(2)
(2) (2) (1) (2) (I) (1) (1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 53.2 Vertical 996.3 1210.5 - 4320.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 53.2 Reaction Vertical ' 996.3 1210.5 - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

71

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 2S STEEL ROOF TRUSS
Span Wind force MEMBER

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION

1200.00 cm 100 kg m? __-LENGTH

Spacing Panels
COMPWESSIOH

450.00 cm
5
MOMENT

at

1 in 5 122.38 cm
MOMENT

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 2 In bracket I In biacket 25 Percent 120.00 240.00 240.00 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 24.00 72.00 36.00 120.00 129.24 120.60 129.24 134.16 134.16 indicates indicates reduction

kg

kg.cm 3511.7 1657.4 925.5 8623. I 6045.2 1067.7 4512.2 6922.6 2577.8 420.9 2169.2 0.0 870.7 468.4 919.1 663.9 1363.9

kg

kg.cm 9171.6 4278.7 2239.9 3309.4 2376.5 386.9 1833.1 2889.9 935.2 179.5 918.0 0.0 358.6 1168.7 2331.3 1640. I 3311.3

(2) (7-j (2)
(1)

(1) (1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

(3 (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

3646.5 3434.3 2077.7 9789.2 9984.8 8182.0 8600.8 8494.3 385.4 644.1 287.0 5.7 1171.4 167.2 314.7 1006.9 1170.4

(1)

(1)
(1)

(2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (1)
(2) (1)

(1)
(1) (1)

9585.6 9115.9 5827.7 3757. I 3893.6 3205.8 3445.0 3465.8 159.2 264.7 117.9 13.4 465.4 403.7 742.5 2446.4 2844.6

force due. to wind load combination force from combination other than is applied to force from wind

wind

load

load combination Left Reaction rizontal 0.0 0.0 43.4 Vertical 3 985.7 !309. I - 2160.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 43.4 Reaction Vertical ' 985.7 1309. I - 2160.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

72

SP : 3S(S&T)-1987

TABLE 26 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS) Span Wind force
MEMBER

1200.00 cm 150 kg/m2
LENGTH
Ctll

Spacing Panels
~MPllESSION

450.00 cm 5
MOMENT

Slope Purlins al
TENSION

I in 5
122.38 cm
MOMENT

kg
(2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) 7013.8 6619.8 4055.3 9789.2 9984.8 8182.0 8600.8 8494.3 385.4 644. I 287.0 10.7 1171.4 315.8 591.7 1904.4 2213.9

kg.cm 6744.9 3175.4 1749.I 8623. I 6045.2 1062.7 4512.2 6922.6 2577.8 420.9 2169.2 0.0 870.7 890.8 1754.1 1260.1 2579.3

kg

kg.cm 9171.6 4278.7 2239.9 6353. I 4538.5 752.4 3816.4 5450.0 1815.4 337.1 1726.4 0.0 678.2 1168.7 2331.3 1640.1 3311.3

I

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17

12Q.00 240.00 240.00 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 24.00 72.00 36.00 120.00 129.24 120.60 129.24 354.16 134.16

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)

9585.6 9115.9 5827.7 7212.4 7448.7 6126.6 6552.8 6566.9 300.9 500.8 223. I 13.4 916.9 403.7 742.5 2446.4 2844.6

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combinatibn other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction) f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 65.0 Right Reaction Vertical? 985.7 1309.1 - 3240.0

Vertical ' fHorizontal 985.7 0.0 1309.1 0.0 65.0 - 3240.0

73

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 27 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind

force

1200.00 cm 200 kg/m2
LENGTH cm 120.00 240.00 240.00 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 24.00 72.00 36.00 120.00 129.24 120.60 129.24 134.16 134.16 (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

Spacing Panels

450.00 5

cm

Slope Purlins

1 in 5
at 122.38 cm MOMENT kg.cm 9171.6 4278.7 2249.9 9396.8 6700.5

MEMBER

COMPRESSION MOMENT kgcm kg 10381.0 9805.4 6032.9 9789.2 9984.8 8182.0 8600.8 8494.3 385.4 644. I 287.0 15.6 1171.4 464.4 868.7 2801.9 3257.3 9978. I 4693.3 2572.6 8623. I 6045.2 1067.7 4512.2 6922.6 2577.8 420.9 2169.2 0.0 870.7 1313.3 2589.2 1856.2 3794.6

TENSION kg

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 17

(1)
(1)

(1) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(1)
(2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2) (2) (2) (2)
(1)

(2)
(1)

(1) (1)
(1)

9585.6 9115.9 5827.7 10667.7 11003.8 9047.4 9660.7 9668.0 442.6 736.9 328.3 13.4 1348.3 403.7 742.5 2446.4 2844.6

1117.8
5119.8 8010.0 2696.3 494.7 2534.7 0.0 997.8 1168.7 2331.3 1640.1 3311.3

2 In bracket indicates ,force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 86.7 Vertical `\ 985.7 1309. I - 4320.0 Right fHorizonta1 0.0 Reaction Verticap 985.7 1309. I - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

0.0
86.7

(without

25 percent

reduction)

74

SP :38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 28 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind

1200.00 cm
force 100 kg/m2
LENGTH

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

600.00 5

cm

Slope Purlins

1 in 3
at 126.49 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 1 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 I6 I7 120.00 240.00 240.00 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 40.00 120.00 60.00 200.00 144.22 121.66 144.22 156.20 156.20

kg

kg.cm 1660.4 900.4 621.1 4043.9 3386.9 277.3 2578.6 4321.2 892.0 268.2 1222.8 0.0 571.8 207.9 485.4 375.8 712.5

k&cm
4318.2 2298.1 1327.9 1555. I 1382.5 70.2 1168.7 2052.7 214.6 128.4 592. I 0.0 259.0 483.6 1188.2 837.2 1668.6

(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

2167.2 2446.7 1277.8 7870.7 7892.0 6282.2 6761. I 6704.5 519.0 821.7 467.6 4.2 1006.8 212.3 400.8 1004.9 1271.6

(1) (1)

il,
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2)
(1) (1)

(1) (1)

1457.0 6801.8 4292.6 2996.8 3152.5 2543.6 2918.6 3043.2 243.0 381.6 217.3 8.6 470.8 454.8 838.9 2161.3 2735. I

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction rHorizontal 0.0 0.0 31.8 Vertical ' 1438.2 1401.6 - 2880.0 Right `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 31.8 Reaction h Vertical ' 1438.2 1401.6 - 2880.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

75

SP : 38(!3&T)-1987

TABLE 29 STEEL Span Wind 1200.00 cm 150 kg/m2 LENGTH cm 120.00 240.00 240.00 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 40.00 120.00 60.00 200.00 144.22 121.66 144.22 156.20 156.20

ROOF TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg

600.00 cm 5 MOMENT kg.cm 3322. I 1787.0 1183.9 4043.9 3386.9 277.3 2578.6 4321.2 892.0 268.2 1222.8 0.0 571.8 403.6 953.7 722.7 1475.6

1 in 3
at 126.49 cm MOMENT kg.cm 4378.2 2298.1 3327.9 3100.6 2716.9 158.0 2242.7 3899.7 581.3 243.6 1120.4 0.0 497.0 483.6 1188.2 837.2 1668.6

MEM~WR

TENSION kg

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 1'1

(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

5567. I 4961.8 2731.9 7870.7 7892.0 6282.2 6781.1 6704.5 519.0 821.7 467.6 7.9 1006.8 404.8 760.5 1917.8 2426.9

(1)
(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (21 (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)

7457.0 6801.8 4292.6 5990.0 6227.5 5008.5 5662.0 5838. I 463.1 728.5 414.7 8.6 897.4 454.8 838.9 2161.3 2735. I

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction tHorizontal 0.0 0.0 47.7 Vertical' 1438.2 1401.6 - 4320.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 47.7 Reaction A Vertical \ 1438.2 1401.6 - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

76

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 30 STEEL ROOF
Span Wind force
MEMBER

TRUSS(ANALYSI.5 600.00 cm
5
MOMENT

RESULTS)
Slope Purlins

1200.00 cm 200 kg/m*
LENGTH

Spacing Panels
IMPRESSION

1 in 3
at 126.49 cm
MOMENT

TENSION

cm 1 120.00 240.00 240.00 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 126.49 40.00 120.00 60.00 200.00 144.22 121.66 144.22 156.20 156.20 (2) (2) (2) (I) 0) (1) (I) (I) (I) (1) (1) (2) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 8366.9 7476.9 4186. I 7870.7 7892.0 6282.2 6761.1 6704.5 519.0 821.7 467.6 11.6 1006.8 597.3 1120.2 2830.6 3582. I

kgcm 4983.8 2673.7 1746.7 4043.9 3386.9 277.3 2578.6 4321.2 892.0 268.2 1222.8 0.0 571.8 599.4 1422. I 1069.6 2178.7 (1) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1)

kg 7451.0 6801.8 4292.6 8983. I 9302.5 7473.4 8405.3 8633.0 683.1 1075.3 612.2 8.6 1324.0 454.8 838.9 2161.3 2735. I

kg.cm 4378.2 2298.1 1327.9 4646.2 4051.4 245.7 3316.8 5746.7 888.0 358.7 1648.7 0.0 735.1 483.6 1188.2 837.2 1668.6

2 3 4 5 6 I 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 17

(1)
(1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction rHorizontal 0.0 0.0 63.6 Vertical' 1438.2 1401.6 - 5760.0 Right Reaction Vertical' 1438.2 1401.6 - 5760.0

I Horizontal
0.0 0.0 63.6

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

77

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 31 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS) Span Wind force
MEMBER

1200.00 cm 100 kg/m*
LENGTH

Spacing Panels
COiUPRESSlON

600.08 cm 5
MOMENT

Slope Purlins at
TENSION

1 in 4 123.69 cm
A40tdENT

cm
1

kg

kg.cm 2906.8 1443.2 861.7 7435.I 5605.4 769.9 4185.2 6622.I 1992.9 490.3 1977.4 0.0 860. I 383.5 798.3 582.7 1204.3

kg

kg.cm 7968.5 3883.8 2089.8 2726.I 2132.2 250.3 1685.6 2766.9 665.3 170.5 840.5 0.0 359.6 975.7 2091.9 1455.3 2937.0

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 I2 13 14 I5 I6 I7

120.00 240.08 240.00 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 30.00 90.80 45.00 150.00 134.16 120.93 134.16 141.51 141.51

(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

3737.0 3414.9 1969.3 10693.2 10799.0 8709.8 9275.5 9183.1 ,530.5 862. I 443.7 5.5 1307.5 224.5 409.6 1128.0 1376.4

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)

10359.8 9625.I 6109.1 3913.0 4058.0 3298.I 3642.3 3714.3 218.8 353.2 181.9 12.9 539.9 544.5 970.5 2749.7 3355.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind lnao 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction) (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 35.5 Vertical ' 1406.4 1613.9 - 2880.0 Right Reaction A Vertical' fHorizontal 0.0 1406.4 0.0 1613.9 35.5 - 2880.0

78

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 32 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind force
MEMBER

1200.00 cm 150 kg/m*
LENGTH

Spacing Panels
~MPRESION

690.00 cm 5
M~MI~NT

Slope Purlins at
TENSION

1 in 4
123.69 cm
MOMENT

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (I) (I) (I) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) 1414.4 6803. I 4020.6 10693.2 10799.0 8709.8 9275.5 9183.1 530.5 862. I 443.7 10.5 1307.5 431.8 783.9 2172.1 2650.6

kg.cm 5751.7 2843.0 1657.5 7435.1 5605.4 769.9 4185.2 6622.I 1992.9 400.3 1917.4 0.0 860. I 745.5 1562.7 1128.2 -2319.3 (I) (I) (1)

kg 10359.8 9625.I 6109.I 7736.7 7972.6 6468.1 7083.I 7175.0 420.8 680.3 350.3 12.9 1038.2 544.5 970.5 2749.7 3355.8

kg.cm 7968.5 3883.8 2089.9 5387.4 4177.0 509.8 3259.2 5306.7 1345.9 325.6 1606.1 0.0 676.0 975.7 2091.9 1455.3 2937.0

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

120.00 240.00 240.00 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 30.00 90.00 45.00 150.00 134.16 120.93 134.16 141.51 141.51

(2)
(2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (I)

(2)
(1) (I) (I) (I)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction) `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 53.2 Vertical> 1406.4 1613.9 - 4320.0 Right Reaction `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 53.2 Vertical ' 1406.4 1613.9 - 4320.0

79

SP :38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 1200.00 cm 200 kg/m*
LENGTH

33 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 5

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I in 4 123.69 cm
MOMENT

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

at

MEMBER

MOMENT

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 120.00 240.00 240.00 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 123.69 30.00 90.00 45.00 150.00 134.16 120.93 134.16 141.51 141.51 (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 11091.9 10191.2 6072.0 10693.2 10799.0 8709.8 9275.5 9183.1 530.5 862. I 443.7 15.5 1307.5 639. I 1158.2 3216.3 3924.7

kg.cm 8596.5 4242.8 2453.3 7435. I 5605.4 769.9 4185.2 6622. I 1992.9 400.3 1977.4 0.0 860. I 1107.6 2327.2 1673.7 3434.3

kg (1) (1)
(1)
10359.8 9625. I 6109. I 11560.5 11887.3 9638.0 10523.9 10635.6 622.9 1007.4 518.7 12.9 1536.4 544.5 970.5 2749.7 3355.8

kg.cm 7968.5 3883.8 2089.9 8048.7 6221.9 769.4 4832.8 7846.4 2026.5 480.7 2371.6 0.0 1001.5 975.7 2091.9 1455.3 2937.0

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(1)

(2)
(1) (1) (1)

(1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates fotce from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 71.0 Vertical' 1406.4 1613.9 - 5760.0 Right `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 71.0 Reaction A Vertical ' 1406.4 1613.9 - 5760.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

80

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TARLE Span Wind 1200.00 cm 100 kg/m* LENGTH

34 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 5

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels ~MPRLWON

1 in 5
at 122.38 cm MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION

cm

ke (2) (2) (2) (1) (l) (1) Cl) (1) 0) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) 4620.5 4349.4 2623.5 13381.1 13648.4 11184.2 11756.6 11611.1 526.8 880.5 392.3 7.2 1601.2 212.7 400.9 1280.9 1488.9

kg.cm 4451.2 2102.1 1177.6 11787.I 8263.4 1459.4 6167.9 9462.7 3523.7 575.3 2965.2 0.0 1190.2 595.1 1166.7 843.9 1735.1 (1) (1) (1)

ko 131028 1246OJ 7966.1 47628 4939.9 4068.2 4376.6 4407.0 202.6 336.7 150.0 18.3 617.7 551.8 1014.9 3344.1 3888.4

ticm 12536.9 5848.6 3061.8 4195.3 3016.4 489.0 2330.4 3678.8 1182.4 228.8 1169.3 0.0 456.3 1597.5 3186.7 2242.0 4526.2

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1Q II 12 13 14 I5 16 17

120.00 240.00 240.00 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 24.00 72.00 36.00 120.00 129.24 120.60 129.24 134.16 134.16

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (l) (1) 0)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind. load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction ' Hhizontal
Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction 0.0 0.0 57.8

Right Reaction ' Horizontal
0.0 0.0 57.8 Vertical ' 1391.4 1745.5 - 2880.0

Vertical '
1391.4 1745.5 - 2880.0

(without

25 percent

reduction)

81

SP :38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind -__ 1200.00 cm IS0 kg*& LENGTH

35 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
G~MPRE~~IoN

600.00 cm 5
MOMENT

1 in 5
at 122.38 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

TENSION

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 1 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 17 120.00 240.06 240.00 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 24.00 72.00 36.00 120.00 129.24 120.60 129.24 134.16 134.16

kg

kg.cm 8762.1 4126.0 2275.6

kg

kg.cm 12536.9 5848.6 3061.8 8253.6 5899.0 976.3 4521.6 7092.2 2356.0 438.9 2247. I

(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

9110.2 8596.8 5260.2 13381.1 13648.4 11184.2 I 1756.6 11611.1 526.8 880.5 392.3 13.9 1601.2 410.9 770.2 2477.6 2880. I

11787. I
8263.4 1459.4 6167.9 9462.7 3523.7 575.3 2965.2 0.0 1190.2 1158.3 2280.1 1638.8 3355.6

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)

13102.8 12460.7 7966. I 9369.9 9686. I 7962.6 8520.4 8541.9 391.5 651.5 290.3 18.3 1193.0 551.8 1014.9 3344.1 3888.4

0.0
882.4 1597.5 3186.7 2242.0 4526.2

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination

a> Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction 0.0 0.0 86.7 1391.4 1745.5 - 4320.0

( HorizZI
0.0 0.0 86.7

yZtica* 1391.4 1745.5 - 4320.0

>

(without

25 percent

reduction)

82

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE

36 STEEL

ROOF

TRI'SS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION

bOO.00 cm

5
MEMBER
LESGTH

at

I in 5 122.38 cm
MOMENT

COMPWESSIOS kg

MO\lFI'I kg.cm 13073.0 6149.9 3373.7 11787. I 8263.4 1459.4 6167.9 9462.7 3523.7 575.3 2965.2 0.0 1190.2 1721.6 3393.5 2433.7 4976.0

kg
(0 (1) 0) (2) (2) (2)
13102.8 12460.7 7966. I 13977.0 14420.2 11857.0 12664.3 12676.7 580.4 966.3 430.5 18.3 1768.2 551.8 1014.9 3344. I 3888.4

kgcm 12536 9 5848.6 3061.8 1231 I.8 8781.7 1463.5 6712.7 10505.6 3530. I 649.0 3325.0 0.0 1308.5 1597.5 3186.7 2242.0 4526.2

120.00 240.00 240.00 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 122.38 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 I7 24.00 72.00 36.00 120.00 129.24

(2)

(7-I
(2) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1)
(1) (1) Cl) (2) 0)

I20.00
129.24 134. I6 134.16

(2)
(2) (2) (2)

13599.9 12844. I 7897.0 13381.1 13648.4 11184.2 11756.6 11611.1 526.8 880.5 392.3 20.5 1601.2 609. I 1139.5 3674.2 4271.4

(2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2) 0) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction f Horuontal 0.0 0.0 115.6 Vcrtxal' 1391.4 1745.5 - 5760.0 Right r Horirontdi 0.i) 0.0 115.6 Reacrion h Verttca! 3 13Yl.4 1745.5 - 5760.0

~lnd

load

reactIon

(\\ithout

25 percent

reduction)

83

SP : 38(S&Tb1987

TABLE 37 STEEL ROOF TRUSS Span Wind 1800.00 cm 100 kg/m2 LENGTH cm 128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107.14 300.00 154.52 214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56 (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (I) (I) (I) (1) (1) (I) (1) (I) (1) (2) (I) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) Spacing Panels
~MPIWSSION

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

450.00 7

at

1 in 3 135.53 cm
hdOM@NT

MEMBER

bfOUENT

TENSION kg (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (2) (2) (I) (1) (I) (1) (I) 8740.3 81%.7 6835.4 4800.4 3524.5 3646.4 3150.5 3267.7 2722.7 2961.7 3071.1 196.4 205.2 309.9 186.5 6.3 383. I 531.3 262.2 682.6 1121.8 2069.4 2431.4

kg 3283. I 3018.4 2381.9 1431.6 9220.2 9228.2 7922.4 7912.3 6484.2 6735.1 6708.8 417.8 439.9 664.8 399.9 3.0 817.9 1136.7 122.3 326.4 523.8 965.8 1134.7

kg.cm 1267.3 710.9 197. I 431.2 3020. I 2644.9 603.3 961.6 123.5 1512.7 2874.1 529.2 358.3 171.9 721.3 0.0 370. I 255.9 99.1 407.7 74. I 236.7 398.3

kg.cm 3310.9 1781.2 475.9 920.9 1167.0 1083.1 270.3 431.8 23.4 700.6 1372.7 148.6 161.5 83.1 345.1

I
3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

0.0
156.7 123.4 202.7 1000.5 191.0 510.0 849.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is. applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 35.8 Vertical ' 1613.7 1576.9 - 3240.0 Right Grizontal 0.0 0.0 35.8 Reaction Vertical ' 1613.7 1576.9 - 3240.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

84

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE

38 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS

RESULTS)
Slope I

Span
Wind force

1800.00 cm -_-----_
I50 kg/m2 LENGTH cm

_.".

Spacing Panels
IMPRESSION

450.00 cm 7
MOMENT

Purlins at
TENSION kg Cl) (1) (1) (1) (2) E (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) Cl) (1) (1) (1) (1) 8740.3 8196.7 6835.4 4800.4 7035.5 6228.3 7219.9 6402.3 5313.9 5719.9 5879.0 373.8 391.2 590.9 355.5 6.3 729.8 1012.5 262.2 682.6 1121.8 2069.4 243 I .4

in 3 135.53 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

kg 12) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) II) (1) fli 6482.4 6082.2 4869.3 3057.9 9220.2 9228.2 1922.4 1912.3 6484.2
6735. I

kg.cm 2528.8 1404.3 385.8 821.4 3020. ! 2644.9 603.3 961.6 123.5

kg.cm 3310.9 1781.2 475.9 920.9 2323.3 2126.2 519.9 830.1 58.5 1337.8 2604.2 323.3 310.2 1S7.2 654.5 0.0 305.2 233.6 202.7 1ooo.5 191.0 SiO.0 849.8

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

,28.57
257.14 X7.14 257.14 IX.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 i 35.53 135.53

II 12
13 i4 tS 16 17

! 35.53
42.66 228.5'7 214.29 107.14 3oo.f@ 154.52

(11
(1) (1) li) (0 (21 (1)

6708.8
417.8 439.9 664.8 399.9 5.7 817.9

1512.7 2874.1
529.2 358.3 171.9 721.3 0.0

18 19 20
2i

22 23 2 In bracket

214.29 143.7s 154.52 214.29 397.56 197.56

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

11.36.7 233.3 619.1 998.5 1841.2 2163.1

370.1 255.9 187.2 801.3 147.4 451.8 x58.7

I In bracket
25 Percent

indicates force due lo wind load combination indicates force from combination other than wind load reduction 1s applied to force from wind load combination Left fiorizontal 0.0 0.0 53.7 Reaction * Vertical > 1613.7 1576.9 - 4860.0 Right <Horizontal 0.0 0.0 53.7 Reaction h Vertical A 1613.7 I S?69 - 4860.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

85

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 39 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 1800.00 cm 200 kg/m* LENGTH cm 128.57 257.14 257.14 251.14 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107.14 300.00 154.52 214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56 Spacing Panels 450.00 7 cm Slope Purlins

I in 3
at 135.53 cm
MOMENT

force

MEMBER

COMPRESSION ks

MOMENT kg.\;m 3790.4 2097.6 574.6 1211.7 3020.1 2644.9 603.3 961.6 123.5 1512.7 2874.1 529.2 358.2 171.9 721.3 0.0 370.1 255.9 275.2 1194.9 220.7 666.9 I1 19.0

TENSION kg

kg.cm 3310.9 1781.2 475.9 920.9 3479.6 3169.4 769.5 1228.5 93.6 1975.0 3835.7 497.9 458.9 231.4 963.8 0.0 453.1 343.8 202.7 1000.5 191.0 510.0 849.8

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

(2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (2) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

9881.7 9146.0 7356.7 4684.2 9220.2 9228.2 7922.4 7912.3 6484.2 6735.1 6708.8 417.8 439.9 664.8 399.9 8.4 817.9 1136.7 344.2 911.7 1473.2 2716.6 3191.6

(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2)

id
(1) (1) (1) (1)

`2

8740.3 8196.7 6835.4 4800.4 10546.5 10793.4 9306.2 9536.9 7905. I 8478.2 8687.0 551.2 571.2 871.9 524.6 6.3 1076.4 1493.7 262.2 682.6 1121.8 2069.4 243 1.4

2 In bracket inaicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction m Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction 0.0 0.0 71.6 Vertical3 1613.7 1576.9 - 6480.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 71.6 Reaction A Vertical> 1613.7 1576.9 - 6480.0

(without

25 percent

reduction)

86

Sl' : 38(S&T)_1987

TABLE 40 STEEL ROOF __
Span Wind force 1800.00 cm 100 kg/m?
LENGTH Cm

TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
450.00 7 cm Slope Purlins
TENSION

Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) 4453.5 4178.6 3385.9 2200.6 12630.1 12692.5 10983.0 10967.7 8991.8 93!6.8 9280.0 428.0 467. I 703.8 406. I 3.5 1067.9 1363.6 137.1 337.8 554.5 1041.7 1210.5

I in 4
at 132.53 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT kg.cm

kg
(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(1) 2)

kg.cm 6045. I 2995.3 743.6 1282.7 2053.5 1659.5 318.0 536. I 131.9 880.7 161X.4 420.0 222.3 95.2 455.2 0.0 217.4 145.6 302.9 l7hX.3 301.0 755.7 1451.2

9 10 II 12 13 14 IS 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32.14 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 181.83 137.31 143.75 181.83 170.84 170.84

(2! (1) (1)

(2)
(2) (2)

(2) (2)

2219.5 1125.3 281.6 530.9 5576.9 4353.7 794. I 1334.0 405.9 2153.5 3x47.1 1281.4 555.6 222.5 1078.8 0.0 558.0 340.x 119.2 674.2 107.8 309.4 600.6

12243.6
I lb1 I.2 9690.5 6814.3 4639.0 4747.6 4123.3 4206.5 3481.5 3704.6 3778.6 177.3 192.1 2X9.4 167.1 x.2 441.6 562.5 333. I 199.6 1345.9 2529.2 2939.8

(2) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combinatton I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination I eft Reactton A Vertical' `Honzontal 1578.0 0.0 1815.7 0.0 - 3240.0 39.9 Right Reactton

<

I
0.0 0.0 39.9

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

VertGay 1578.0' 1815.7 - 3240.0

87

SP:38(S&T)-1987
TABLE 41 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 1800.00 cm 150 kg/m2
LENGTH

force

Spacing Panels
COMPilEWON

450.00 cm
7
MOMENT

Slope Purlins

I in 4
at 132.53 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

TENSION kg (1)

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 18 I9 20 21 22 23 128.57 257.14 257. I4 257. I4 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32. I4 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.06 143.75 181.83 137.31 143.75 181.83 170.84 170.84 (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 8815.1 8292.5 6768.6 4489. I 12630.7 12692.5 10983.0 10967.7 8991.8 9316.8 9280.0 428.0 467. I 703.8 406. I 6.7 1067.9 1363.6 263.8 646. I 1066.5 .2003.6 2328.3,

kg.cm 4383.3 2210.3 552.0 1020. I 5576.9 4353.7 794. I 1334.0 405.9 2153.5 3847. I 1281.4 555.6 222.5 1078.8 0.0 558.0 340.8 231.6 1319.6 214.2 595.8 1153.9

kg.cm 6045. I 2995.3 743.6 1282.7 4052.7 3248.4 615.5 1036.7 268.6 1696.5 3098.4 853.4 430.3 181.6 871.0 0.0 423.3 277.8 302.9 1768.3 301.0 755.7 1451.2

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

12243.6 11611.2 9690.5 6814.3 9160.9 9334.6 8100.0 8222. I 6790. I 7181.5 7286.0 340.6 369.6 556.9 321.4 8.2 848.7 1081.5 333. I 799.6 1345.9 2529.2 2939.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction rHorizontal 0.0 0.0 59.9 Vertical' 1578.0 1815.7 - 4860.0 Right `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 59.9 Reaction Vertical ' 1578.0 1815.7 - 4860.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

88

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 42 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 1800.00 cm 200 kg/m' Sparing Panel,

450.00 cm
?

force

Slope Purlins

at

I in 4 132.53 cm

MEMBER

LENGTH

COMPRESSION

MOMENT

TENSION kg (1)

MOMENT

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 I3 I4 15 I6 17 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32. I4 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 181.83 137.31 143.75 181.83 170.84 170.84 (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 13176.6 12406.4 lOl51.3 6777.6 12630.7 12692.5 10983.0 10967.7 8991.8 9316.8 9280.0 428.0 467.1 703.8 406. I 9.8 1067.9 1363.6 390.4 954.4 1578.4 2965.4 3446.2

kgxm 6547. I 3295.2 822.5 1509.2 5576.9 4353.7 794. I 1334.0 405.9 2153.5 3847.1 1281.4 555.6 222.5 1078.8 0.0 558.0 340.8 344.0 1965.0 320.6 882.3 1707.2

kgcm 6045. I 2995.3 743.6 1282.7 6051.9 4837.3 913.0 1537.4 405.3 2512.3 4578.4 1286.9 638.3 268.0 1286.7 0.0 629.3 410.0 302.9 1768.3 301.0 755.7 1451.2

(I) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2) (I) (2) (2) (I)

(1)
(I) (I) (I)

12243.6 11611.2 9690.5 6814.3 13682.9 13921.6 12076.8 12237.8 10098.7 10658.4 10793.4 503.8 547. I 824.3 475.7 8.2 1255.7 1600.5 333. I 799.6 1345.9 2529.2 2939.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combinaiion other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction ' Horizontal Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (wthout 25 percent reduction) 0.0 0.0 79.9 Vertical ' 1578.0 1815.7 - 6480.0 Right CHoriTontal 0.0 0.0 79.9 Reaction Vertical' 1578.0 1815.7 - 6480.0

89

.

SP :38(S&T~1987
TABLE 43 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 1800.00 cm 100 kg/m* LENGTH cm 128.57 251. I4 257.14 257. I4 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 77. I4 128.57 64.29 180.00 138.48 164.65 134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94 156.94 indicates indicates reduction force force (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) due to wind load from combination to force from Spacing Panels
tiMPRESSlON

force

450.00 7

cm

Slope Putlins

I in 5
at 131.12 cm
MOMENT

MEMEtltB

MOMENT

TENSION kg (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) 15646.8 15051.4 12575.5 8858.0 5704.4 5831.6 5107.6 5168.9 4266.7 4483.2 4533.0 164.5 185.6 278.5 151.7 10.8 508.6 615.3 384.7 851.0 1574.8 3002.2 3437.6

kg 5554.2 5307.3 4353.3 2922.1 15969.9 16139.6 14101.6 14076.6 11549.1 11928.3 11874.6 425.9 483.6 125.3 394.9 4.3 1316.5 1597.0 147.9 336.4 605.8 1154.6 1321.6 combination other than wind

kg.cm 3417.6 1633.4 402.6 678.3 8914.8 6418.4 1044.1 1831.5 74?,7 2990. I 5126.8 2496.4 870.2 287.2 1554.7 9.0 774.4 450.5 221.0 991.6 154.4 415.6 865.7

k&cm 9574.8 4514.4

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 13 I4 IS I6 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket I In bracket 25 Percent

1110.7 1755. I
3183.8 2347. S 393.8 693. I 251.8 1143.0 2007.1 838.3 328.3 114.6 610.8 0.0 287.6 179.1 589.3 2708.4 445.5 1087.0 2241.2

wind load

is applied

load combination Left Reaction Horirontai 0.0 0.0 65.0 Vertical ' 1561.2 1963.7 - 3240.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 65.0 Reaction h Vertical' 1561.2 1963.7 - 3240.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

90

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 44 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 1800.00 cm 150 kg/m2
LENGTH

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

450.00 I

cm

Slope Purlins
TENSION kg (1)

1 in-5
at 131.12 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 10930. I 10461.2 8618.6 5855.3 15969.9 16139.6 14101.6 14076.6 11549.1 11928.3 11874.6 425.9 483.6 725.3 394.9 8.2 1316.5 1597.0 285.7 645.9 1170.2 2230.5 2553.4

kg.cm 6716.8 -3202.9 788.4 1309.0 8914.8 6418.4 1044. I 1831.5 747.7 2990. I 5126.8 2496.4 870.2 287.2 1554.7 0.0 774.4 450.5 429.4 1937.3 305.6 804.0 1670.7

kg.cm 9574.8 4514.4 I 110.7 1755.1 6259.4 4587.3 764.0 1343.8 501.9 2211.1 3862.1 1672.1 636.9 219.6 1174.4 0.0 560.0 343.5 589.3 2708.4 445.5 1087.0 2241.2

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

II
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 77.14 128.57 64.29 180.00 138.48 164.65 134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94 156.94

(1) (I) (I) (2)

15646.8 15051.4 12575.5 8858.0

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

11209.0 11428.0
10003.6 10091.3 8318.3 8706.0 8771.7 317.6 358.8 538.3 293. I 10.8 981.5 1188.1 384.7 851.0 1574.8 3002.2 3437.6

(1)
(2) (2) (I) (1) (I) (1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction `Horizontal 0.0 0.0 97.6 Vertical > 1561.2 1963.7 - 4860.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 97.6 Reaction Verticap 1561.2 1963.7 - 4860.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

91

SP : 3b(S&T)-1987

TABLE 45 STEEL ROOF TRUSS(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 1800.00 cm 200 kg/m'
LENGTH

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

450.00 cm 7
MOMENT

Slope Purlins

1 in 5
at 131.12 cm
MOMENT

MEMBfiR

TENSION kg (1)

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 128.57 257.14 251. I4 257. I4 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 77.14 128.57 64.29 180.00 138.48 164.65 134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94 156.94 (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 16306.0 15614.9 12883.9 8787.9 15969.9 16139.6 14101.6 14076.6 11549.1 11928.3 11874.6 425.9 483.6 725.3 394.9 12. I 1316.5 1597.0 423.6 955.5 1734.7 3306.5 3785.2

kg.cm 10015.9 4770.4 1174.1 1939.7 8914.8 6418.4 1044.1 1831.5 741.7 2990. I 5126.8 2496.4 870.2 287.2 1554.7 0.0 774.4 450.5 637.8 2682.9 456.8 1192.3 2475.8

kg.cm 9574.8 4514.4 II 10.7 1755.1 9332.9 6827.1 1134.3 1994.5 752.1 3279.2 5717.2 2505.8 945.6 324.6 1738.0 0.0 832.4 507.9 589.3 2708.4 445.5 1087.0 2241.2

II
12 I3 I4 15 I6 I7 18 19 20 21 22 23

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) & (21 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

15646.8 15051.4 12575.5 8858.0 16713.7 17024.4 14899.5 15013.7 12369.8 12928.8 13010.5 470.6 531.9 798.0 434.5 10.8 1454.5 1761.0 384.7 851.0 1574.8 3002.2 3437.6

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Vertical(Horizontal 0.0 1561.2 0.0 1963.7 130.1 - 6480.0 Right CiZGZ?M 0.0 0.0 130.1 Reaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

1561.2 1963.7 - 6480.0

92

SP : 38(s&T)_1987

TABLE Span Wind 1800.00 cm 100 kg/m2
LENGTH

46 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 1

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins 1 in 3 135.53 cm
MOMENT

force

Spacing Par.els
~MPREWON

at

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (1) (I) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (2) (I) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 4131.9 3794.2 2983.8 1773.9 12639.0 12650.0 10860.0 10846. I 8888.5 9232.5 9196.3 572.1 603. I 911.3 548.2 3.8 1121.1 1558.2 155.8 416.0 666.9 1229.6 1444.6

kg.cm 1596.6 897.9 249.4 549.0 4 139.9 3625.6 827.0 1318.2 169.3 2073.6 3939.8 125.4 491.2 235.6 988.7 0.0 507.3 350.7 126.5 515.5 93.5 301.3 507.2

4vm
4538.5 2441.7 652.3 1262.4 1471.2 1369.8 343.5 548.8 28.9 891.6 1749.5 183.3 205.3 106.0 439.9 0.0 198.5 157.3 271.9 1371.5 261.8 699. I 1164.9

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 IS 16 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107.14 300.00 154.52 214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56

(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

11981.2

11236.0 9370.0 6580.4 4440.2 4602.6 3978.0 4134.7 3448.1 3759.6 3906.3 250.1 261.2 394.5 237.4 8.6 481.8 676.4 359.5 935.7 1537.7 2836.7 3333.0

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A ( Horizontal Vertical \ 0.0 2271.1 0.0 2102.5 47.7 - 4320.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 41.7 Reaction A Vertical > 2271. I 2102.5 - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

93

SP : 38(S&T)_1987 -TABLE Span Wind 1800.00 cm I50 kg/m*
LENGTH

47 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 I

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I in 3 135.53 cm
MOMENT

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

at

MEMilER

MOMENT

TENSION kg (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) 11981.2 11236.0 9370.0 6580.4 9121.6 9367.2 808 I .9 8314.1 6903.0 7437.3 7650.2 486.7 509.2 769.2 462.8 8.6 950.0 1318.1 359.5 935.7 1537.7 2836.7 3333.0

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 128.57 257.14 257. I4 257. I4 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107. I4 300.08 154.52 214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56 (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (`I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 8531.0 ?879.3 6300.4 3942.3 12639.0 12650.0 10860.0 10846. I 8888.5 9232.5 9196.3 572.7 603.1 91!.3 548.2 7.4 1121.1 1558.2 303.6 806.2 1299.8 2396.8 2815.9

kgcm 3278.8 1822.3 501.1 1069.3 4 139.9 3625.6 827.0 1318.2 169.3 2073.6 3939.8 725.4 491.2 235.6 988.7 0.0 507.3 350.7 243.8 1040.3 191.2 588. I 987.1

kg.cm 4538.5 2441.7 652.3 1262.4 3012.9 2760.7 676.3 1079.8 74.5 1741.2 3391.5 416.2 403.6 204.8 852.4 0.0 396.5 304.2 271.9 1371.5 261.8 699. I 1164.9

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left 6 Horizontal 0.0 0.0 71.6 Reaction A Vertical 3 227 I. I 2102.5 - 6480.0 Right f-Horizontal 0.0 0.0 71.6 Reaction A Vertical > 2271.1 2102.5 - 6480.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

94

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind force 1800.00 cm 200 kg/m*
LENGTH

48 STEEL

ROOF TRUSS 600.00 7

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

Spacing Panels
tiMPREWON

1 in 3
at 135.53 cm
MOMENT

MEMRER

MOMENT

TENSION k8 (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (1) (!) (1) (1) (I) 11981.2 11236.0 9370.0 6580.4 13802.9 14131.9 12185.7 12493.5 10357.9 11115.0 11394.2 723.3 757.2 1143.9 688.3 8.6 1412.2 1959.7 359.5 935.7 1537.7 2836.7 3333.0

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (2)
(1)

kg.cm 4960.9 2146.1 * 752.8 1589.7 4139.9 3625.6 827.0 1318.2 169.3 2073.6 3939.8 725.4 491.2 235.6 988.7 0.0 507.3 350.7 361.2 1565. I 288.9 874.9 1468.1

kg.cm 4538.5 2441.7 652.3 1262.4 4554.7 4151.5 1009.1 1610.9 121.4 2590.8 5033.4 649.0 601.8 303.7 1264.8 0.0 594.5 451.2 277.9 137E.5 261.8 699.1 1164.9

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16
17,

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107.14 300.00
154.52

18 19 20 21 22 23

214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

12930.0 11964.3 9616.9 6110.7 12639.0 12650.0 10860.0 10846.1 8888.5' 9232.5 9196.3 572.7 603.1 911.3 548.2 11.0 1121.1 1558.2 451.5 1196.5 1932.7 3564.1 4187.2

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination othw than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Right Reaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 95.5

2271.1 2102.5 - 8640.0

0.0 0.0 95.5

2271.1 2102.5 - 8640.0

95

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 49 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS
Span Wind 1800.00 cm 100 kg/m* LENGTH cm 128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32.14 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 181.83 137.3 I 143.75 181.83 170.84 170.84 Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

RESULTS)
Slope Purlins

force

600.00 7

cm

I in 4
at 132.53 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg (I) (1) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) 16746.5 15881.5 13254.4 9320.4 5859. I 6002.3 5214.0 5325.3 4409.7 4698.8 4798.4 225.3 244.1 367.7 212.3 11.2 561.3 714.8 455.6 1093.7 1840.9 3459.4 4021.0

kg.cm 2803.2 1423.1 356.2 674.8 7627.9 5954.9 1086.2 1824.6 555.2 2945.5 5262.0 1752.7 760.0 304.4 1475.5 0.0 763.2 466.2 151.1 853.2 136.0 393.0 763.3

kgcm 8268.3 4096.9 1017.0 1754.5 2594.0 2100.2 403.5 680.3 165.4 1118.6 2058.5 526.9 282.0 121.2 579. I

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

(2) (2) (2) (2) (].I (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(I) (I) (1) (1) (2) (I) (1)

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2)

5621.7 5271.5 4264.2 2758.1 17275.9 17360.5 15022.3 15001.4 12298.8 12743.3 12692.9 585.4 628.9 962.6 555.5 4.4 1460.7 1865. I 174.2 429.7 704.6 1323.6 1538.0

0.0
275.4 185.3 414.3 2418.7 411.6 1033.7 1984.9

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction
A

Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 53.2

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 (without 25 percent reduction) 53.2

Vertical \ 2220.9 2420.9 - 4320.0

Reaction A Vcrncan 2220.9 2420.9 - 4320.0

%

SP : 38(S&T~l!M

TABLE Span Wind 1800.00 cm I50 kg/m*
LENGTH

SO STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 7

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I in 4 332.53 cm
MOMENT

force

Spacing Panels t%`APRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (1) (I) (I) (1) (I) (I) (2) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 11437.2 10756.7 8774.5 5809,4 17275.9 17360.5 15022.3 15001.4 12298.8 12743.3 12692.9 585.4 628.9 962.6 555.5 8.7 1460.7 1865. I 343. I 840.8 1387.2 2606. I 3028.5
load combination other wind than

at

MEMBER

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket 128.57 257. I4 257. I4 257.14 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32.14 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 181.83 137.31 143.75 181.83 170.84 170.x4 indicates
indicates reduction

MOMENT kg.cm 5688.2 2869.7 116.8 1327.0 7627.9 5954.9 1086.2 1824.6 555.2 2945.5 5262.0 1752.7 760.0 304.4 1475.5 0.0 763.2 466.2 301.0 1713.8 277.8 774.9 1501.1 (I) (1) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (1) (1) (I) (I) (1)

TENSION kg 16746.5 15881.5 13254.4 9320.4 11888.3 12118.2 10516.3 10679.5 8821.1 9334.6 9474.9 443.0 480.7 724.3 418.0 11.2 1104.0 1406.8 455.6 1093.7 1840.9 3459.4 4021.0

kg.cm 8268.3 4096.9 1017.0 1754.5 5259.6 4218.7 800. I 1347.9 347.7 2206.4 4031.9 1104.8 559.4 236.4

1133.4
0.0 550.0 361.6 414.3 2418.7 .411.6 1033.7 1984.9

force due to wind force from is applied

I

In bracket

combination

wind

load

25 Percent

to force from

load combination Left f Horizontal Reaction A Vertical> 2220.9 2420.9 - 6480.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 79.9 Reaction A Vertical 2220.9 2420.9 - 6480.0

A

Dead Live Wind

load load load

reaction reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

0.0 0.0 19.9

97

SP:38(!S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind force
MEMBER

51 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Puriins at

1800.00 cm 200 kg/m2
i_.ENGTH cm

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (i) (i) (i) (i) (i) (1) (1) (2) Ci) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 11252.7 16241.9 13284.7 8860.8 17275.9 17360.5 15022.3 15001.4 12298.8 12743.3 I2692 9 585.4 636.9 962.6 555.5 12.9 1460.7 1865.1 512.0 1251.9 2069.8 3888.6 45 19.0 wind force load from combination other wind than load

600.00 cm, 7
MOMENT kg.cm 8573.3 4316.3 1077.4 1979. 7621.9 5954.9 1086.2 1824.6. 555.2 2945.5 5262.0 1752.7 760.0 304.4 1475.5 0.0 763.2 466.2 450.x 2574.4 419.7 1156.8 2238.8

! in 4
132.53 cm
MO~IENT kg.cm 8268.3 4096.9 1017.0 1754.5 7925.2 6337.3 1196.8 2015.4 530.0 3294. 6005.2 1682.7 X36.7 351.6 1687.7 0.0 824.7 537.9 414.3 2418.7 41 1.6 1033.7 1984.9

TENSION

kg
(1)
fi) (1) 16746.5 15881.5 13254.4 9320.4 17917.5 18234.2 15818.6 16033.7 13232.6 13970.5 14151.5 660.7 717.4 1080.9 623.8

I
2 3 4

128.57 257. I4 257.14 257.14 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32 I4 96 43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 181.83 137.31 143.75 181.83 170.84 170.84 indrcates indicates reduction force force due from to

I

(i) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) 0) (1) Cl) Cl) (1)

5
6 7 8 9 IO ii !2 13 14 is I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket bracket

I

I I.2
1646.7 2098.8 455.6 1093.7 1840 9 3459.4 402 I .O

to

t In
25

combination

wind

load

Percent

is applied

combinatron Left /Horirontal 0 0 0.0 Reactron A Vertrcal 2220.9 2420.9 - 8640.0 Right > fHorvontal 0.0 0.0 106.5 Reaction L Vertical 2220.9 2420.9 - 8640.0

3

Lead Lwe Wind

ioad load load

reaction rextion reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

106.5

98

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 1800.00 cm IO@ kg/m2
LENGTH

52 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 7

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

1 in 5
at 131.12 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg (1)

cm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 I4 15 16 17 18 19 20 2i 22 128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 131.12 131.12 131 12 131.12 131.12 131 12 131.12 25.71 77.14 128.57 64.29 180.00 138.48 164.65 134.23 13X.48 164.65 156.94 156.94 (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (11 (2) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 7020.7 6706.4 5495.0 3679.0 21817.1 22048.9 19264.8 19230.6 15777.7 16295.7 16222.4 581.9 660.7 990.9 539.5 5.4 1798.5 2181.7 187.7 427.6 769.0 1465.6 1677.6

kg.cm 4321.3 2069.4 `509.4 861.3 12178.9 8768.4 1426.4 2502. I 1021.4 4084.9 7003.9 3410.4 1188.8 392.4 2124.0 0.0 1058.0 615.5 280.2 1255.5 194.9 527.4 1099.1

kg.cm 13080.6 6167.3 I5 17.4 2397.7 4028.4 2972. I 499.3 879.0 317.4 1450.4 2549.9 1056.3 416.3 145.7 776. I 0.0 364.4 227.8 805. I 3700.0
608.6

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2.1 (2) (2) (21

(2)
(21 (2) (21 (2) (11 (2) (2) (11 (11 (1) (1) (1)

23

21375.7 20562.3 17179.9 12101.3 7212.9 7378.3 6463.2 6545.4 5404.8 5684. I 5751.8 208.9 235.6 353.7 192.5 i4.7 645.7 78 1.0 525.5 1162.5 2151.4 4101.5 4696.3

1484.9 3061.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load' 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Gorizontal 0.0 0.0 86.7 Vertical 3 2197.3 2618.3 - 4320.0 Right <Horizontal 0.0 0.0 86.7 Reaction A Vertical > 2197.3 2618.3 - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

99

SP : 38&&TH987

TABLE 53 STEEL ROOF TRUSS(ANALYSIS RESC'LTS)
Span Wind 1800.00 cm 150 kg/ mz
LENGTH

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

600.00 7

cm

SioFe

Purlin& dt
TEISiON

MEMBER

MOMENT

MOMEXT

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) 0) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 14188.5 13577.9 I1 182.0 7589. I 21817.1 22048.9 19264.8 19230.6 15777.7 16295.7 16222.4 581.9 660.7 990.9 539.5 10.6 1798.5 2181.7 371.5 840.3 1521.6 2900.2 3320.0

kg.cm 8720. I 4159.4 1023.8 1702.2 12178.9 8768.4 1426.4 2502. I 1021.4 4084.9 7003.9 3410.4 1188.8 392.4 2124.0 0.0 1058.0 615.5 558.0 2516.4 396.5 1045.2 2172.5

kg (1)
(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) 21375.7 20562.3 17179.9 12101.3 14552.4 14840.2 12991.1 13108.7 10806.9 11314.5 11403.4 412.9 466.5 699.9 381.1 14.7 1276.3 1544.9 525.5 1162.5 2151.4 4101.5 4696.3

kg.cm 13080.6 6167.3 1517.4 2397.7 8126.5 5958.5 993.0 1746.6 650.9 2874.5 5023.3 2168.0 827.8 285.7 I521.6 0.0 727.6 447.0 805.1 3700.0 608.6 1484.9 3061.8

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23

128.57 257.14 257.14 257. I4 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 77. I4 128.57 64.29 180.00 138.48 164.65 134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94 156.94

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 130.1 Vertical 2197.3 2618.3 - 6480.0 Right A f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 130. I Reaction h Vertical `\ 2197.3 2618.3 - 6480.0

Dead toad reaction Live load `reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

100

SP :38(S&Tl-1987

TABLE Span Wind force 1800.00 200 cm

54 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
600.00 7 cm Slope Purlins at

Spacing Panels

I

in 5 cm

kg/m2

131.12

MEMBER

LENGTH
cm

COMPRESSION
kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (1) (I) (I) (1) (I) 0) (I) (I) (1) 21356.4 20449.5 16869.A 11499.2 21817.1 22048.9 19264.8 19230.6

MOMENT
.kg.cm 13118.9 6249.4 1538.2 2543.

TENSION kg

MOMENT

kg.cm

1 2 3 4

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 77.14 128.57 64.29

I

5
6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket

12178.9

8768.4
1426.4 2502. 4084.9 7003.9 3410.4 1188.8 392.4 2124.0 0.0 1058.0 615.5 835.8 3777.2 598. 3245.9

I

15777.7
16295.7 16222.4 581.9 660.7 990.9 539.5 15.9 1798.5 2181.7 555.3 1253.0 2274.2 4334.7 4962.3 load combination other wind than wind

1021.4

(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) 0) (2)
(2)

21375.7 20562.3 17179.9 12101.3 21891.9 22302.1 19519.0 19671.9 16209.0 16944.9 17055.1
617.0 697.3
1046.2 569.6

I 3080.6
6167.3
1517.4 2397.7 12224.5 8944.8

1486.8
2614.3 984.3 4298.7 7496.7 3279.7 1239.4 425.7 2279.

(2) (2) (2)
(2)
iJ) (2) (2) (I) 0) (I) 0) (1)

180.00
I?".48

(2)
(1)

164.65
134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94

(1)
(2) (2) (2) (2)

I

1563.0

156.94
indicates indicates reduction

0)

14.7 1906.9 230X.7 525.5 1162.5 2151.4 4101.5 4696.3

I 0.0 I I

1090.9 666. 805. 3700.0 608.6

14x4.9 3061.ti

force due to wind force from is applied to force

I

In bracket

combination from

load

25 Percent

load combination Left ( Horizontal Reactron A Vertical > 2197.3 2618.3 - 8640.0 Right rHorizontal 0.0 0.0 173.4 Reactron A Verticai7 2197.3 2618.3 - 8640.0

Dead Live Wind

load load load

reaction reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

0.0 0.0 173.4

101

SP:38(s&T)1987

TABLE Span Wind 2400.00 cm 100 kg/m2
LENGTH

55 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 9

(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
cm Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

at

I in 3 126.49 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) 0) 0) 0) 0) 0) 0) 0) (1) 0) (1) (I) (1) 0) (2) (1) 0) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 4251.5 3991.1 3357.7 2723.5 1777.6 12905.2 12905.3 11550.6 11550.6 10046.2 10055.8 8543.6 8752.4 8746.7 430.9 467.9 472.9 704. I 426. I 2.8 869.7 1216.8 1629.8 99.5 315.8 518.3 703.3 1129.3 1274. k

kgsm 1407.9 901.1 287.1 198.7 387. I 5073.6 6256.6 6329.0 7881.8 7433. I 7173.9 7006.3 6101.9 4185.0 491.2 852.0 222.1 113.4 255.2 0.0 627.6 299.9 199.4 270.8 412.3 104.0 29.7 277.2 293.8

kg.cm
4867.7 2431.4 734.7 509.2 882.4 5867.8 5191.4 7564.6 8530.1 8997.6 8690.3 6911.2 4971.5 4272.1 287. I 361.8 93.3 49.8 117.2 0.0 251.5 128.3 90.2 613.0 1133.1 280.8 66.9 634.9 650.2

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 E 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.67 266.61 266.67 266.67 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 311.YI 155.56 400.90 160.25 222.22 298.14 173.56 160.25 222.22 298.14 240.37 240.37

(1) (1)
(1) (1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(1)

(2) (2) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(1)

12229.4 11649.0 10195.9 8739.3 6565.9 4550.2 4659.7 4173.4 4287.4 3746. I 3864.0 3319.8 3524.3 3635.5 189.4 203.5 205.3 305.9 185.2 6.2 379.9 530.1 709.7 229.0 702.4 1190.6 1616.4 2595.8 2928.9

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Vertical 3 rHorizontal 0.0 2265.5 0.0 2102.5 41.7 - 4320.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 47.7 Reaction 8 & Vertical\ 2265.5 2102.5 - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

102

SP : 38(!S&THB87
TABLE Span Wind 2400.00 cm IS0 kg/m' LENGTH cm 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.5! 14rJ.55 140.55 140.55 !40.55 44.44 13:;.33 L 22'.22 3lf.11 15?i.S6 400.00 16x1.25 222.22 29h. I4 173.56 16Ci.25 222.22 298.14 240.37 240.37 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) !I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) il, (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 56 STEEL ROOF TRUSS 450.00 9 (ANALYSIS cm RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels COMPREWON

I in 3
at 126.49 cm MOMENT kg.cm 4067.7 2437.4 734.7 509.2 882.4 78 15.0 6958.2 10129.6 11422.5 12050.? 11640.2 9255.6 6660.5 5724.2 509.2 708.4 183. I 96.8 225.4 0.0 496. I 250.8 174.1 613.0 1133.1 280.8 66.9 636.9 650.2

MEMBER

MOMENT
kg.cm

TENSION kg (I) (I) 0) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (21 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) 12229.4 11649.0 10195.9 8739.3 6565.9 9335.3 9499.6 8506.6 8677.6 1573.2 7751.8 6641.4 6988.7 7154.4 367.9 396.3 399.9 595.9 360.6 6.2 739.0 1031.8 1381.6 229,.0 702.4 1190.6 1616.4 2595.8 2928.9

kg
8764.8 8252.5 7019.6 5785. I 3943.5 12905.2 12905.3 II550 6 I 1550.6 10046.2 10055.8 8543.6 8752.4 8746.7 430.9 467.9 472.9 704. I 426. I 5.4 869.7 1216.8 1629.8 193.8 610.3 1009. I 1369.4 2198.9 2480.8

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 14 I5 I6 I7 18' I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

2903. I 1825.8 -573.6 397.0 752.2 5073.6 6256.6 6329.0 7881.8 7433. I 7 173.9 7006.3 6101.9 4185.0 497.2 852.0 222. I 113.4 255.2 0.0 627.6 299.9 193.4 525.5 838.8 210.6 57.6 539.7 567.2

2 In bracket indicates Lxce due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reductian is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction h Vertical\ f Horizontal 0.0 2265.5 0.0 2102.5 71.6 - 6480.0 Right fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 71.6 Reaction
h

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Vertical 3 2265.5 2102.5 - 6480.0

103

SR : 38(S&T)-1987
TABLE 57 STEEL ROOF ----___ Spacing 2400.00 cm
200 kg/m2
LENGTH

Span Wind force
MEMBER

TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS) ____
450.00 9 cm Slope Purlins

_~

I in 3
at !40.55 cm

Panels
COMPRESSION k (2)

MOMENT

-I-FNSION

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 R 9 10 II 12 13 I4 I5 L6 I7 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 140.55 140.55 I40 55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 311.:1 155.56 400.00 I bO.:!5 222.22 298 14 173.56 160.25 222.22 298. I4 240.17 240.37

kg.cm 439X.2 2750.4 860.0 595.4 I 117.4
5073.6

kg
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) 12229.4 11649.0 10195.9 8739.3 6565.9 14120.4 14339.5 12839.9 13067.8 11400.2 11639.7
9962.9

MOMENT kg.cm 4067.7 3437.4 734.7 509.2 X82.4 9762. I 8725.0 12694.5 14315.0 15103.8 14590.0

(2)
(2) (2) (2)

iI)
(1) (1) (1) (1) II) ;li (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

13272. I 12513.5 10681.5 8846.6 6109.3 12905.2 12905.3 I 1550.6 11550.6 10046.2 10055.8 8543.6 X752.4 8746.7 430.9 467.9 472.9 704. I 426. I 7.9 869.7 1216.X 1629.8 28X. I 904.8 1499.8 2035.4 3268.4
3687.4

6256.6 6329.0 7881.8 7433. I 7173.9
7006.3

6101.9 4185.0 497.2 852.0 222. I 113.4 255.2 0.0
627.6

(2) (2)

1I600.0
X349.5 7175.7 731.3 1055.0 `72.9 143.7 333.5 0.0 742.8 373.2 258.0
b13.0

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2) (2) !a (1) (2) (2) (2) (1)
(1) (1)

10453.2 10673.4 54b.4 589. I
594.6

299.9 199.4 780. I 1265.4 3.17.2 85.4 802.2 840.5

885.8 536. I 6.2 lOY8. I 1533.5 2053.4 229.0 702 4 ! 190.h
1616.4

(1) 0) 0)

2595.8 2928.9

1133.1 280.8 66.9 636.9 GO.2

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combina!ion I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction IS applied to force from wind load combination Left R_eaction Right Reactloo _ Vertical> 2265.5 2102.5 - 8640.0 --

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 95.5

22b5.5 2102.5 - 8640.0

0.0 0.0 95.5

104

SP : 38(S&T)-1983

TABLE Span Wind 2400.08 cm 100 kg/m*

58 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 9

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels

I in 4
at 137.44 cm

MEMBER

LENGTH

COMPRESSION

MOMENT

TENSION

MOMENT

cm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 33.33 100.00 166.67 233.33 116.67 300.00 149.07 188.56 248.37 157.23 149.07 188.56 248.37 200.69 200.69 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 5759.6 5511.7 4728.8 3938.5 2759.7 17587.2 17679.9 15913.7 15895.9 13799.0 13791.5

kg.cm 2749.0 1344.2 360.8 278.9 469.9 7438.0 5602.7 1075.6 1716.4 687.4 1110.9 351.2 2182.0 3842.6 1912.8 662.5 423.5 222.3 868.3 0.0 754.5 299.6 346.6 84.2 804.2 115.4 97.1 280.5 454.5

kg (`1 (`1
(1)
17049.3 16451.1 14416.9 12360.5 9291.9 5987.7 6108.6 5510.7 5596.7 4883.5 4973.3 4254.9 4445.6 4527.7 173.3 189.4 192.2 288.0 169.5 7.7 436.1 559.8 7i1.2 287.4 801.2 1424.2 1840.0 3061.8 3434.1

kg.cm 8076.9 3875.2 1022.8 782.3 1212.5 2537.7 1968.4 393. I 632.2 266.2 426.4 102.6 836.6 1513.2 6JJO.6 245.6 160.2 87.6 341.7 0.0 270.4 114.0 137.9 209.8 2288.9 350.8 280.5 730.5 1173.6

11680.0
11935.6 11908.2 447.5 493.8 501.9 751.1 442. I 3.1 1130.6 1455.7 1850.2 110.2 318.8 S47:2 706.6 1175.7 1318.4

(`1 (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

1 !
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2)
(2)

(2) (1) (1)
(1)

(2)
(2)

(1) (`1
(1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination

Left Reaction
A

Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 53.2

Reaction
A

m Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction 0.0 0.0 53.2

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Vertical3 2215.3 2420.9 - 4320.0

Vertical\ 2215.3 2420.9 - 4320.0

105

SPr 38(S&Tf19%7

TABLE Span Wind 2400.00 cm I50 kg/ mz
i_~bi(;IH

59 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 9

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
IMPRESSION kg

at

I in I 137.44 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

cm 133.33 266.61 266.6'7 266.67
266.61

MOMENT kg.cm 5570.7 2710.6 724.5 558.5 922.1 7438.0 5602.7 1075.6 1716.4 687.4 I 110.9 351.2 2182.0 3842.6 1912.8 662.5 123.5 222.3 b68.3 0.0 754.5 299.6 346.6 163.X 1616.5 236.0 !95.9 551.6 892. I

TENSION kg

kg.cm 8076.9 3875.2 1022.8 782.3 1212.5 5139.4 3956.5 782.4 1255 9 522.5 838.6 216.9 i:dti.P 2958 5 1243.6 487. I 316 I 171.2 668.2 00 540.4 224 6 269 r! 209 8 2288.Q 35O.h 280.5 730.5 ! r73.6

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO 11 12 13 14 I5 16 17
18

(21 (2)

(2)
(2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(0 (1)
(1)

137.4t 137.41 137.44 137.41 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 33.33 lOO.iiO
lb6 Cl

19 20 21 22 2.1 24 25 26 27 2x 29

.?33.?3 i 16.67 3OO.W i49.r I88.M 240. .7 157./3 139.117 IXX."`h 240..;7 ?OO.(J9 200. h9

(1) (1) (2) (i) (1)

11694.4 ii215.3 9676.5 8122.6 5804.5 17587.2 17679.9 15913.7 i5895.9 13799.0 13791.5 i1680.0 ! 1335.6 11908.2 447.5 493.8 501.9 751.1 442.1 tr.0 1130.6 1455.7 I xso.2 216.8 hZ1 8 iO7~.0 13X9.6 2312.3 2593.0

(11 !I) (1) (1) (1)

(2)
(2,

(2)
(2? (2) (2) (2) (21 (2

:a
(2)
(21 U? (2) (1) (2) (2)
(2)

17049.3 16451.1 14416.9 12360.5 9291.9 12133.0 12330.8 I I 117.5 I 1243.4 9797.9 993 I .2 8475.3 8807.1 8925.3 340. I 372.6 378.3 566.6 333.5 7.7 856.8

Il0o.e
1398.3 287.4 801.2 1424.2 1x40.0 306(.X 3134.1

(1)
(2) t 2) (21 (21 (2) (2)

(1) (1)
(I!

(ii
(1) (0

.' In brackL.1 tndbcarea Ior~e due to wind load combination I In bra&r! ubdxates force from combination other than wmd loa* 25 I'~rce!i! i~~du~tion is appiwd 10 force from wrtd load t.wr.b~r :ti:

SP : 38(s&T)-1Mf

TABLE 60 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTE
Span Wind

__--2400.00 cm
force 200 kg/m? _-..LBNC `H

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

450.00 cm
9

Slope Purlins

at

I in 4 137.44 cm

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

MOMENT

cnr

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) Cl) (1) (I) (1) (I) (1) (I) (1) Cl) (1) (1) Cl) (I) Cl) (2) (1) (1) Cl) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 17629.2 16919.0 14624.2 12306.7 8849.2 17587.2 17679.9 15913.7 15895.9 13799.0 13791.5 I 1680.0 11935.6 i 1908.2 447.5 493.6 501.9 751.1 442.1 8.9 1130.6 1455.7 1850.2 323.4 924.7 1604.8 2072.6 3448.8 3867.5

kg.cm 8392.5 4077.1 1088.2 838.2 1374.3 7438.0 5602.7 1075.6 1716.4 687.4 1110.9 351.2 2182.0 3842.6 19 12.8 662.5 423.5 222.3 86H.3 0.0 754.5 299.6 346.6 243.5 2428.7 356.6 294.7 822.7 1329.7 (1) (I) Cl) (I) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (2) (2) (2) (1) Cl) Cl) Cl) (I) Cl)

kg.cm 8076.9 3875.2 1022.8 782.3 1212.5 7741.0 5944.6 1171.7 1879.6 778.7 1250.8 331,l 2455. l 4403.5 18Sh.7 728.7 472. I 254.9 994.6 0.0 811.1 335.3 400.0 209.8 2288.9 350.8 280.5 730.5 1173.6

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.67 266 67 266 67 266.67 137.44 137.44 137.44 137 44 1.37 4`4 13744 137 44 63744 137.44 33.33 106.00 166.67 233.33 116.67 300.00 149.07 188.56 240.37 157.23 149.07 188.56 240.37 200.69 200.69

17049.3 16451.1 14416.9 12360.5 9291.9 18278.2 18553.1 16724.4 16890.1 14712.3 14889.1 12695.6 13168.6 13322.9 507.0 555.8 564.4 845.2 497.4 7.7 1277.5 1641.4 2085.4 287.4 801.2 1424.2 1840.0 3061.8 3434. I

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction fHorirontaI 0.0 0.0 106.5 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 106.5 Reaction A Vertical 1 2215.3 2420.9 - 8640.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

{without

25 percent

reduction)

3215.3 2420.9 - 8640.0

107

SP:38(S&T)-1987
TABLE Span Wind 2400.00 cm 100 kg/m2
LENGTH

61 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
CbblPRESSION

450.00 cm 9
MOMENT

I in 5
at 13597 cm

MEMEaeR

TENSION kg

MOMENT

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 7194.0 6998.0 6058.2 5102.4 3677.8 22235.9 22477.8 20408.6 20379.6 17701.2 17691.6 14985.4 15292.2 15256.9 442. I 509.8 522.3 775.9 439.6 3.5 1388.8 1704.2 2074.9 118.9 304.4 596.2 741.0 1269.8 1413.5

kg.cm 4246.0 1964.3 520.4 361.0 574.6 11914.5 8284.6 1464. I 2397.2 836.4 1390. I 667.2 2876.5 4783.4 3629.9 1039.8 553.7 259.7 1193.2 0.0 1061.3 401.5 431.2 139.5 1188.5 170.9 123.3 357.4 648.2

kgcm 12802.6 585 I .3 1539.8 1064.3 1588.5 3955.4 2804.5 507.0 835.8 302.6 499.2 206.7 1029.7 1754.5 I 150.8 364.3 196.6 95.8 437.9 0.0 364.1 143.6 160.3 398.9 3507.8 532.5 376.1 997.6 1794. I

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 14 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 is 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135,97 135.97 26.67 80.00 133.33 186.67 93.33 240.00 143.60 170.75 208.27 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38

(1)

(1)
(1) (1)

(1) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2) (2)

(2)
(2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (I! (1) (1) (1)

21787.3 21303.4 18689. i 16026.5 12056.0 7378.8 7528.5 6845.6 6908.8 6020.7 6090.6 5193.0 5376.2 5436.7 159.7 182.6 186.8 277.8 157.4 9.6 500.6 612.2 745.0 332. I 815.0 1661.6 2066. I 3540.7 3942.3

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination

f

Reaction A Vertical3 Horizontal

Left

Right f Horrzontal

Reaction A Vertical3

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 86.7

2191.8 2618.3 - 4320.0

0.0 0.0 86.7

2191.8 2618.3 - 4320.0

108

SP :38(s&T)l
I

TABLE 62 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind

2400.00 cm
force I50 kg,m* LENGTH cm 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.61 266.07 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.37 135.97 135.97 135.97 26.67 80.00 133.33 186.67 93.33 240.00 143.60 170.75 208.27 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

450.00 9

cm

Slope Purlins

I in 5
at 135.97 cm

MEMBER

MOMENT

PENSION

M0tbiE~T

kg.cm 8556.6 3946:3 1043.8 723.3 1133.4 11914.5 8284.6 1464.1 2397.2 836.4 1390.1 667.2 2876.5 4783.4 3629.9 1039.8 553.3 259.7 1193.2 0.0 1061.3 401.5 431.2 277.4 2382.1 347.3 249.3 706.6 1278.8

ke
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2)
(2)
21787.3 21303.4 18689.1 16026.5 12056.0 14867.7 15133.6 13755.7 13845.5 12055.7 12158.9 10350.1 10677.4 10762.1 315.0 361.0 369.4 549.4 311.2 9.6 988.2 1209.5 1472.0 332.1 815.0 1661.6 2066.1 3540.7 3942.3

kg.cm 12802.6 5851.3 1539.8 1064.3 1588.5 7968.9 5622.4 1010.7 1663.4 596.8 986.3 424.0 2036.0 3449.1 2346.5 724.1 389.5 188.0 860.8 0.0 727.5 283.9 314.1 398.9 3507.8 532.5 376.7 997.6 1794. I

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 lis 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

(2) 0) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) c-4 (2)

14513.8 14137.2 12280.7 10392.1 7576.8 22235.9 22477.8 20408.6 20379.6 17701.2 17691.6 14985.4 15292.2 15256.9 442. I 509.8 522.3 775.9 439.6 6.9 1318.8 1704.2 2074.9 235. I .595.9 1178.2 1464.5 2509.8 2793.9

(2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (11

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination

Left Reaction
h

Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 130.1

n

Reaction Vertical? 2191.8 2618.3 - 6480.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 130.1

Vertical3 2191.8 2618.3 - 6480.0

109

SP:38(S&T)-1987
TABLE Span Wind 2400.00 cm 200 kg/m' 63 STEEL ROOF Spacing Panels TRUSS 450.00 9 (ANALYSIS cm RESULTS) Slope Purlins

I in 5
a: 135.97 cm

force

MEMBER

LESGTH

COMPRESSIOT

MOMEXT

TEXSIOS kg

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I! (1) (1)
(1)

kgsm 12867.2 5928.3 1567. I 1085 6 1692. I 11914.5 X284.6 1464 I 2397.2 836.4 1390. I 667.2 2876.5 47x3.4 3629.9 1039.X 553.7 259.7 1193.2 0.0 1061.3 401.5 431.2 415.3 3575.8 523.8 375.3 1055.8 1909.5

MOMENT kg.cm 12802.6 585 I .3 1539.8 I 064.3 1588.5 11982.5 8440.3 1514.3 2490.9 X91.0 1473.4 641.4 3042.3 5143 7 3542.2 10x3.9 582.4 280.3 12X3.6 0.0 1090.9 424.3 467.9 39x.9 3507.8 532.5 376.7 997.6 1794. I

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.61 135.97 135.97 135.97 135 97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97
26.b7

80.00 133.33 186.67 93.33 240.00 143.60 170.75 208.27 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38

(1) (1) (I! (1) (2) (I) (1) (1) (2) (2! (2) (2) (2) (2)

21833.6 21276.4 18503.3 156X I .9 11475.7 22235.9 22471.8 20408.6 20379.6 17701.2 17691.6 14985.4 15292.2 15256.9 442. I 509.8 522.3 775.9 439.6 IO.3 1388.8 1704.2 2074.9 351.3 887.4 1760.2 2188. I 3149.7 4174.2

II) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (2)

(2) (2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) :I) (2) (2) (2) (1) !I) (1) (1) (!) (1)

21787.3 2 1303.4 18689. I 16026.5 12056.0 22356.7 22738.7 20665.8 207X2.2 18090.8 18227.2 15507.2 15978.5 160X7.4 470.4 539.4 552. ! 820.9 465.0 9.6 1475.8 1806.9 2199.1 332. I 815.0 1661.6 2066. I 3540.7 3942.3

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left 5eaction Vertical 3 2191.8 2618.3 - 8640.0 f Right Horizontal Reaction
A

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction'

0.0 0.0 173.4

-

0.0
0.0 173.4

Vertical 3 2191.8 s 2618.3 - 8640.0

SP : 38(S&Tk1987

TABLE 64 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS
Span Wind 2400.00 cm 100 kg/m* Spacing Panels 600.00 9 cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

I in 3
at 140.55 cm

force

MEMBER

LENGTH
CIT!

COMPRESSION

MOMENT

TEMIOS kg

MOMENT

kg
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (0 (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 5342.0 5002.6 4197.9 3392.2 2190.5 17677.8 17678.0 15822.3 15822.3 13761.5 13774.6 I 1703.2 11989.2 11981.5 590.3 641.0 647.8 964.5 583.7 3.5 1191.4 I 666.9 2232.6 126.4 401.8 658.6 893.5 1434.7 1618.6

kg.cm 1765.9 1134.8 362.7 251.0 491.9 6949.9 8570.4 8669.6 10796.7 10182.1 9826.9 9597.4 8358.5 5732.8 68 I. r1167. I 304.3 155.4 349.6 0.0 859.7 410.9 273. I 344.3 518.7 13i.o 37.8 352.2 373.9

kg.cm 5572. I 3338.8 1006.4 697.5 1208.7 7962.6 7038.5 10257.5
11566.6

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.47 266.67 266.47 266.67 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 311.11 155.56 400.00 160.25 222.22 298.14 173.56 160.25 222.22 298.14 240.37 240.37

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2) (2)
(2)

(2)
(2) (2) (1)

(7.) (2)
(2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

16752. I 15957.1 13966.6 11971.3 8994. I 5713.8 5859 8 5248.4 5400.4 4719.9 4876.8 4192.6 4459.5 4608.0 240.7 258.6 260.8 388.7 235.2 8.4 482.7 673.5 901.7 313.7 962.2 1630.9 2214.2 3555.8 4012.1

12200.3 I 1783.4 9371.3 6740.7 5793.3 371.8 459.0 118.3 63.3 149.2 0.0 319.9 162.8 114.8 839.7 1552.2 384.7 91.7 872.4 890.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction 1s applied to force from wind load combination

Left ReactIon h Vertical `\ fiorizontal Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction 0.0

Right f Horizontai

Reaction h Vertical>

0.0
(without 25 percent reduction) 63.6

3180.0 2803.3
- 5760.0

0.0 0.0
63.6

3180.0 2803.3
- 5760.0

111

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 2400.00 cm I56 kg'mLESGTH

65 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 9

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I in 3 140.55 cm
MOMENT

force

Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (.I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (I) (I) (I)
(2)

at

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 133.33
266.61 266.67

kg.cm 3759.5 2367.7 744.6 515.5 978.8
6949.9

kgxm 5572. I 3338.8 1006.4 697.5 1208.7 10558.8 9394.2 13677.4 15423.2 16271.0 U716.5 12497.2 8992.8 7728.1 667.9 921.2 238. I 125.9 293.5 0.0 644.3 326. I 226.7 839.7 1552.2 384.7 91.7 872.4 890.7

266.61 266.67 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 311.11 155.56 400.00 160.25 222.22 298. I4 173.56 160.25 222.22 298.14 240.37 240.37

11351.7 10684.3 9080.4 7474.2 5078.3 17677.8 17678.0 15822.3 15822.3 13761.5 13774.6 11703.2 11989.2 11981.5 590.3 641.0 647.8 964.5 583.7 7.0 1191.4 1666.9
2232.6

(1) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

8S70.4 8669.6 10796.7 10182.1
9826.9

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(3 (2)

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2)

252. I 794.5 1312.9 1781.6 2860.8 3221.5

9597.4 8358.5 5732.8 681.1 1167. I 304.3 155.4 349.6 0.0 859.7 410.9 273. I 683.8 1087.4 273. I 74.9 702.2 738.4

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2)
(2)

(2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

16752. I 15957. I 13966.6 11971.3 8994. I 12093.9 12313.0 11026. I I 1254.0 9822.6 10060.6 8621.3 9078.8 9299.9 478.7 515.6 520.3 775.2 469.2 8.4 961.5 1342.4 1797.5 313.7 962.2 1630.9 2214.2 3555.8 4012.1

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates futcc from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction /\ Vertical 3 f Horizontal 0.0 3180.0 0.0 2803.3 95.5 - 8640.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 95.5 Reaction A Vertical > 3 180.0 2803.3 - 8640.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind !oad reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

112

SY : 38(5&T)-1987

TABLE Span

66 STEEL

ROOF TRUSS 600.00 9

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

Wind -

force

2400.00 cm 200 kg/m>
LENGTH

Spacing Panels

I in 3
at 140.55 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

cOMPRESSION

MOMENT

TENSION kg

cm I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
133.33

ks (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)
17361.5 16365.9 13962.9 11556.3 7966. I 17671.8 17678.0 15822.3 15822.3 13761.5 13774.6 11703.2 11989.2 11981.5 590.3 641.0 647.8 964.5 583.7 10.4 1191.4 1666.9 2232.6 377.8 1187.2 1967.2 2669.6 4286.8 4836.4

kg.cm 5753.0 3600.5 1126.6 779.9 1465.7 6949.9 8570.4 8669.6 10796.7 101g2. I 9826.9 9597.4 8358.5 5732.8 681.1 1167.1 304.3 155.4 349.6 0.0 859.7 410.9 273. I 1023.4 1656.1 415.3 112.1 1052.2 1102.9

kgxm 5572.1 3338.8 1006.4 697.5 1208.7 13155.0 I 1749.9 17097.3 19279.7 20341.8 19649.7 lS@Z.I 11244.8 9664.0 964.0 1383.3 357.8 188.6 437.8 0.0 973.3 489.4 338.6 839.7 1552.2 384.7 91.7 872.4 890.7

266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 1'40.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 I33.?3 222.22 311.!1 155.56 400.00 160.25 222.22 298.14 173.56 160.25 222.22 298.14 240.37
240.?7

(1)
(1) (1)

(2)
(1)

(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(2)

16752. I 15957. I 13966.6 11971.3 8994.1 18474.0 18766.1 16803.8 17107.7 14925.3 15244.3 &MM. I 13698.0 13991.8 716.8 772.7 779.8 1161.8 703. I 8.4 1440.3 2011.4 2693.3 313.7 962.2 1630.9 2214.2 3555.8 4012.1

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Right Reaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 127.3

3180.0 2803.3 - 11520.0

0.0 0,o 127.3

3180.0 2803.3 - 11520.0

113

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE

67 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 9

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

span
Wind force

2400.00 cm 100 kg/m2

Spacing Panels

1 in 4
at 137.44 cm

MEMBER

LBNGTW

COMPREsSiOK kg

MOMENT

TENSION kg

MOMENT

cm
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO 11 12 13 14 15 16 I7 !R 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
2 In

kg.cm 3461.7 1694.5 455.3 352.2 596.0 10167.3 7658.6 1470.3 2346.2
939.6

kgxm 11040.7 5297.3 1398. I 1069.3 1657.4 3196.1 2483.2 497.0 799.7 337.6 540.5 128.0 1060.4 1920.7 752.6 310.8 202.9 I Il.2 433.8 0.0 341.5 144.4 175.1 286.8 3128.8 479.6 383.4 998.4 1604.3

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 137.44 137.44 ' 37.44 137.44 137.44 1'7.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 33.33 lOil.00 166.67 233.33
116.67

(2.1

(2) (2) (2) (2)
(1)

(1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I! (1)
(11 (11 (11 (11
(1)

300.00 149.07 iR8.56 240.37 157.23 149.07
!88.56

i2)
(11 ill (11 (21 (21
(2)

240.37 200.69
200.69

(21 (2)
(2)

7249.6 6934. I 5941.6 4939.7 3445.3 24043.8 24167.5 21753.3 21728.9 18862.6 18852.3 15966.0 16315.3 16278.0 611.7 675.0 686. I 1026.X 604.3 3.9 1545.5 1989.9 2529.1 139.7 404.9 693.7 895.8 1490.5 1671.3

(1) (1) (1) 0) (1)

(2) (2) (2)
(2) (2) (2) (2)

1518.6 480.1 2982.7 5252.6 2614.7 905.6 579.0 303.9 I lR6.9 0.0 1031.3 409.5 473.8 106.9 1014.6 145.1 122.4 355.5 576.5

(2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2)
(2) (1) (2) (2)

(2)
(1)

(1)
(1) (1) (1) (1)

23305.6 22487.9 19707.2 16896.2 12701.5 7540.2 7699.0 6946.4 7061.5 6163.5 6283.3 5378.7 5626.6 5736.1 219.8 240.1 243.7 365. I 214.9 10.6 553.0 709.8 901.6 392.9 1095. I 1946.8 2515.1 4185.4 4694.2

bracket indicates force due to wind ioad combination other than wind load 1 In bracket indicates force from combination 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction /\ (Horizontal Vertical\ 0.0 3109.6 0.0 3221.9 71.0 - 5760.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 71.0 Reaction * Vertical) 3109.6 3221.9 - 5760.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

SP : 38(S&T)_1987

TABLE span Wind 2400.00 cm 150 kg/m2 LENGTH

68 STEEL ROOF Spacing Panels

TRUSS 600.00 9

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

1 in 4
at 137.44 cm

force

MEMBER

COMPREMON kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) 15162.7 14539.0 12538.5 10518.5 7505.0 24040.8 24167.5 21753.3 21728.9 18862.6 18852.3 15966.0 16315.3 16278.0 611.7 675.0 686. I 1026.8 604.3 7.8 1545.5 1989.9 2529.1 281.8 808.8 1398.8 1806.4 3005.8 3370.7

MOMENT

cm I 2 3 4 133.33 2b6.67 2h6.67 266.67 it~6.67 137.44 137.44 iI.7.44

kg.cm 7224.0 3516.5 940.2 725 0 1198.9 10167.3 7658.6 1470.3 2346.2 939.6 j518.6 480. I 2982.7 5252.6 2614.7 905.6 579.0 303.9

TENSION kg

MOMENT
kg.cm 11040.7 5297.3 1398.1 1069.3 1657.4 6665.0 5134.0 1016.1 1631.3 679.3 1090.1 280.3 2139.4 3847.6 1609.9 632.8 410.9 222.7 869.0 0.0 702.0 292.0 349.9 286.8 3128.8 479.6 383.4 998.4 1604.3

5
6 7 S 9 IO 11 12 13 14 15
ib

! t7.44 I J7.44
1.47.44 1.37.44 1 ;7.44 ! .!7.44 s3.3:
100.00

(1)
(1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

lh6.67 233.33 116.67 3!K).OO I. ,a, 7 I:#.>6 240.37 Ii723 149.07 138.56 230.37 200.h9 200.09

(1) (I) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

1186.9
0.0 1031.3 409.5 473.8 213.2 2097.6 305.9 254. I 717.0 1159.9

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)

23305.6 22487.9 19707.2 16896.2 12701.5 15733.9 15995.4 14422.2 14590.4 12716.0 12893.9 11005.9 11441.9 11600.2 442.2 484.4 491.8 736.6 433.5 10.6 1113.9 1430.8 1817.8 392.9 1095. I 1946.8 2515.1 4185.4 4694.2

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Right A (Horizontal Vertical `\ IFHorizontal 0.0 3109.6 0.0 0.0 3227.9 0.0 106.5 - 8640.0 106.5 Reaction h Verticai 3109.6 3227.9 - 8640.0

Dead load reaction I.ive load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

115

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 2400.00 cm 200 kg, ml
LEYGl Ii

69 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

600.00 cm 9

at

I in 4 137.44 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) 0) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 23075.7 22143.8 19135.4 16097.3 11564.7 24040.8 24167.5 21753.3 21728.9 18862.6 18852.3 15966.0 16315.3 16278.0 611.7 675.0 686. I 1026.8 604.3 Il.7 1545.5 1989.9 2529.1 424.0 1212.8 2103.8 2717.1 4521.2 5070.1

kg.cm 10986.3 5338.4 1425. I 1097.8 1801.8 10167.3 7658.6 1470.3 2346.2 939.6 1518.6 480. I 2982.7 5252.6 2614.7 905.6 579.0 303.9 1186.9 0.0 1031.3 409.5 473.8 319.4 3180.6 466.6 385.8 1078.5 1743.3

kg (1)
(1) (1) (1)
23305.6 22487.9 19707.2 16896.2 12701.5 23927.5 24291.7 21898.0 22119.3 1.9268.4 19504.4 16633.0 17257.2 17463.7 664.7 728.7 739.9 1108.1 652. I 10.6 1674.8 2151.8 2733.9 392.9 1095.1 1946.8 2515.1 4185.4 4694.2

kg.cm 11040.7 5297.3 1398.1 1069.3 1657.4 10133.8 7784.8 1535.1 2462.9 1021.0 1639.8 432.6 3218.5 5774.5 2467.3 954.8 618.8 334.2 1304.3 0.0 1062.5 439.5 524.6 286.8 3128.8 479.6 383.4 998.4 1604.3

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 33.33 100.00 166.67 233.33 116.67 300.00 149.07 188.56 240.37 157.23 149.07 188.56 240.37 200.69 200.69

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (2)

(2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2) (1)

12) (2) (2)
(1) (1)

(1) (1) (1)
(1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction
A

Right fiorizontal 0.0 0.0 142.0

Reaction
A

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

fHorizonta1 0.0 0.0 142.0

Vertical 3 3109.6 3227.9 - 11520.0

Vertical 3 3109.6 3227.9 - 11520.0

116

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 70 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Spa-l Wind

cm 2400.00
force 100 kg m2
LYNGTH

Spacing Panels

600.00 9

cm

Slope Purlins

I in 5
at 135.97 cm MOMENT kg.cm 17480.6 7989.3 2102.5 1453. I 2168.9 4987.4 3540.2 640.8 1056.8 383.3 632. I 259.5 1303.7 2224.3 1447.2 460.7 248.8 121.5 555.2 0.0 459.9 181.8 203.3 544.7 4789.5 727.1 514.4 1362. I 2449.7

MEMBER

cm

COMPRESSION MOMENT kgcm kg (2)

TENSION k8

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.61 266.67

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (I) (1) (1) I) ( 1)

135.91
135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 i 35.97 135.97 l15.Q7 26.67 80.00 133..%3 I d6.67 93.33 240.00 143.60

9 IO 11 12 I? I4 I5 16 I7 I8 19 20 ?I 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

1)
1) 1) 1) I) (I) (1) (1) (1) (2) (I)

I TO.`?5
2x%:,.7 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38

(1)
(I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

9068. I 8818.5 7628.2 6417.9 4613.9 30360.6 3069 1.O 27865.6 27826.0 24169. I 24155.9 20460.9 20879.8 20831.6 603.6 696. I 713.1 1059.4 600.2 4.5 1896.2 2326.9 2833.1 150.6 386.3 755.0 938.3 1608.0 1789.9

5353.5 2478.4 656.9 455.7 728.0 16268.0 11311.7 1999.0 3213.2 1142.1 1898.0 911.0 .3927.5 6531.2 4956.3 1419.7 756.0 354.5 1629. I 0.0 1449.1 548.1 588.7 176.4 1500.3 215.0 155.3 452.6 821.1

(1) (1) (1) (1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (7-l (2) (2)
(1) (1) (II

(1) (1) (1)

29748. I 29087.4 25517.9 21882.4 16461.1 9303.8 9497.5 8636.8 8721.7 7602.0 7695.4 6563.7 6800.6 6882. I 202.2 231.2 236.5 351.8 199.3 13.1 634. I 775.3 943.4 453.4 1112.8 2268.8 2821.0 4834.5 5382.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction h CHorizontal Verticail 0.0 3076.5 0.0 3491.1 115.6 - 5760.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 115.6 Reaction A Vertical? 3076.5 3491.1 - 5760.0

Dead load reactIon Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

117

SP : 38(!?&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 2400.00 cm 150 kg/n12
LENGTH

71 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels

6OO.cKl cm 9
MOMENT

I in 5
at 135.97 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

COMPRE.SSJON kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (I) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 18827.9 18337.5 15925.0 13470.9 9812.5 30360.6 30691.0 27865.6 27826.0 24169. I 24155.9 20460.9 20879.8 20831.6 603.6 696. I 713.1 1059.4 600.2 9.0 1896.2 2326.9 2833. I 305.5 775.0 1531.0 1903. I 3261.3 3630.4

TENSJON kg

cm

kgsm 11101.0 5121.1 1354.7 938.8 1473.0 16268.0 11311.7 1999.0 3273.2 1142. I 1898.0 911.0 3927.5 6531.2 4956.3 1419.7 756.0 354.5 1629. I O.il 1449.1 548. I 588.7 360.2 3091.9 450.3 323.3 918.1 1662.0 (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg.cm 17480.6 7989.3 2102.5 1453. I 2168.9 10338.8 7297.4 13t2.4 2160.2 775.6 1281.6 549.4 2645.5 4483.8 3041.4 940.5 506. I 244.5 I 119.0 0.0 944.4 368.9 408.4 544.7 4789.5 727. I 514.4 1362. I `449.7

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 14 I5 I6 I7 I8 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 26.6-l 80.00 133.33 186.67 93.33 240.00 143.60 170.75 208.27 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (l) (2) (2) (2) (l) (1) (I) (I) (l) (I)

29748. I 29087.4 25517.9 21882.4 16461.1 19289. I 19637.7 17850.3 17970.7 15648.7 15786.5 13439.9 13868.8 13982.6 409.4 469. I 480.0 713.8 404.3 13. I 1284.2 1571.8 1912.8 453.4 I 112.8 2268.8 2821.0 4834.5 5382.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction _ n Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction fiorizontal 0.0 0.0 173.4 Vertical\ 3076.5 3491.1 - 8640.0 Right /Horizontal 0.0 0.0 173.4 Reac!lon h Leria 30'6.5 3491.1 - 8640.0

(without

25 percent

reduction)

118

SP : 38(s&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 2490.00 cm 200 kg/m*

72 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 690.00 9

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins lin5 135.97 cm

force

Spacing Panels

at

MEMBER

LENGTH

~hiPRESSION

MOMENT

TENSION kg (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) 29148. I 29087.4 25517.9 21882.4 16461.1 29274.3 29777.8 27063.8 27219.6 23695.4 23877.6 20316.0 20937.0 21083. I 616.6 706.9 723.6 1075.8 609.4 13.1 1934.3 2368.2 2882.2 453.4 II 12.8 2268.8 2821.0 4834.5 5382.7

MOMENT

cm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 I3 I4 IS 16 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 133.33 266.61 266.67 266.61 266.67 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 26.67 80.00 133.33 186.67 93.33 240.00 143.60 170.75 208.27 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 28J87.? 27856.4 24221.7 20523.8 15011.1 30360.6 30691.0 21865.6 27826.0 24169. I 24155.9 20460.9 20879.8 20831.6 603.6 696.1 713.1 1059.4 600.2 13.6 1896.2 2326.9 2833. I 460.4 1163.6 2307.0 2867.8 4914.5 5470.9

kgcm 16848.5 1763.7 2052.4 1421.9 2218.0 16268.0 11311.7 1999.0 3273.2 I 142. I 1898.0 911.0 3927.5 6531.2 4956.3 1419.7 756.0 354.5 1629. I 0.0 1449.1 548. I 588.7 544. I 4683.4 685.5 491.3 1383.7 2502.9

kgxm 17480.6 7989.3 2102.5 1453. I 2168.9 15690.2 11054.6 1983.9 3263.6 1167.9 1931.1 839.2 3987.3 6743.3 4635.6 1420.3 763.3 367.5 1682.8 0.0 1429.0 556. I 613.5 544.1 4789.5 727. I 514.4 1362. I 2449.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction
A

Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 231.3

Reaction
A

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 231.3

Vertical> 3076.5 3491.1 - 11520.0

Vertical \ 3076.5 3491.1 - 11520.0

119

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm 100 kg/m* LERGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143,74 45.45 136.36 227.27 318.IR 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 209.54 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 284.77 284.77

73 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 II

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
IMPRESSION kg

! in 3
at 143.74 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION

kg.cm 2100.6 1057.5 433.3 300.0 269.5 459.6 3317.6 6364.8 6424.4 8410.8 8031.5 8588.5 8172.1 7332.5 6955.4 6102.2 4525.6 564.7 1791.4 798.5 320.0 131.1 420.9 0.0 1198.5 648.0 458.4 261.7 408.6 963.9 284.6 88.8 14.7 493.4 494.8

kg (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)
15808.5 15270.8 13752.4 12225.7 10697.7 8416.5 5415.6 5525.6 5084.3 5198.5 4680.5 4800.6 4276.7 4397.9 3873.0 4059.3 4173.4 178.1 197.7 209.6 199.5 294.9 178.6 7.5 367.4 515.0 693.9 862.3 209.8 657.5 1234. I 1688.8 2161.1 3152.1 3469.7

kg.cm 6550.0 3114.8 1209.6 819.7 718.2 1119.3 4401.3 3865.2 7255.7 8361.5 9623.1 9781.5 9363. I 8800.2 6554.2 4269.0 4504.6 318.6 704.3 312.6 127.2 54.4 180.1 0.0 430.0 253.2 184.5 III.9 992.4 2870.6 8 10.8 227.0 51.9 1215.5 1164.1

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

5076.1 4838.3 4221.6 3602.8 2983.7 2059.7 16679.9 16673.2 15330.0 15338.5 13748.9 13753.1 12167.1 12174.0 10585.3 10752.9 10742.4 433.0 488.2 496.5 493.9 729.5 441.8 3.2 902.2 1269.5 1711.6 2176.9 84.7 281.4 500.6 684. I 875.3 1276.4 1404.8

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than 25 P&cent reduction is applied to force from wind lo&d

wind

load

combination

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Left Reactton A (Horizontal Vertical? 0.0 2974. I 0.0 2628.1 59.7 - 5400.0

Right f Horizontal 0.0

0.0
59.7

Reaction A Vertical > 2974. I 2628. I - 5400.0

120

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm 150 kg/m2 LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 45.45 136.36 227.21 318.18 409.09 284.55 5OO.00 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 209.54 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 284.11 284.77 force force

74 STEEL ROOF Spacing Panels
C~PRESSION b

TRUSS

(AVLYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins 1 in 3 143.74 cm MOMENT kg.cm 6550.0 3114.8 1209.6 819.7 718.2 1119.3 5941.4 5174.0 9614.2 11149.6 12835.8 13047.5 12489.3 11740.5 8741.3 5696.4 6011.4 551.5 1413.0 627.9 254.5 107.7 353.9 0.0 883.6 508.8 368.0 220.0 992.4 2870.6 810.8 227.0 51.9 1215.5 1:64.1

force

45Cl.00 cm 11 MOMENT kg.cm 4454.8 2206.4 890.7 613.2 547.3 912.3 3317.6 6364.8 6424.4 8410.8 8031.5 8585.5 8172.1 7332.5 6955.4 6102.2 4525.6 564.7 1791.4 798.5 320.0 131.1 420.9 0.0 1198.5 648.0 458.4 261.7 810.5 2017.3 588.3 178.4 28.0 982.0 978.9

at

MEMBER

TENSION kg 15808.5 15270.8 13752.4 12225.7 10697.7 8416.5 11444.0 11607.8 10678.4 10847.4 9757.9 9938.9 8837.3 9020.5 7916.9 8229.7 8398.7 353.3 393.7 399.8 397.5 587.5 355.8 7.5 730.8 1025.3 1381.6 1756.8 209.8 657.5 1234.1 1688.8 2161.1 3152.1 3469.7

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
due to wind load from combination to force from

10761.3 10291.6 9070.3 7838.2 6605.3 4765.1 16679.9 16673.2 15330.0 15318.5 13748.9 13753.1 12167.1 12174.0 10585.3 10752.9 10742.4 433.0 488.2 496.5 493.9 129.5 441.8 6.2 902.2 1269.5 1711.6 2176.9 168.8 553.0 996.5 1362.3 1743.1 2542.2 2798.0 combination other than wind

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) G9 (2) (2) (2)
(1) (2)

(2) (2) (2)
(1) (1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

2 In bracket. indicates 1 In bracket indicates 25 Percent reducoon

wind

tnad

is applied

load combination Left Reaction A fHorizonta1 Vertical'> 0.0 2974. I 0.0 2628.1 89.5 - 8100.0 Right f Horizontal Reaction
h

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

0.0
0.0 89.5

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Vertical 3 2974. I 2628. I T 8100.0

121

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE

75 STEEL ROOF

TRZJSS (ANALYSIS

RESULTS)

-~~~~
Span Wind force
MEMBER

3000.00 cm 200 kg/m2
LENGTH cm 136.36 212.73 212.13 212.13 272.73 212.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 45.45 136.36 221.27 318.18 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 209.54 163.89 227.21 304.92 388.36 284.17 284.17

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

450.00 cm I1
MOMENT kg.cm 6809. I 3355.3 1348. I 926.4 825.0 1364.9 3317.6 6364.8 6424.4 8410.M YO31.5 8588.5 8172.1 7332.5 6955.4 6102.2 4525.6 564.7 1741.4 798.5 320.0 131.1 420.9 0.0 1198.5 648.0 458.4 261.7 1212.4 3070.7 892.0 268.0 41.3 1470.7 1453.0

Slope
Purlins at

L in 3
143.74 cm
MOMENT

TENSION kg

kg.cm 6550.0 3114.8 1209.6 819.`1 718.2 1119.3 74gl.6 7743.4 !2092.7 13937.7 !6048.4 16313.:; 156iS.S 14680.9 10928.3 7369.4 7518.2 784.3 2121.e 043.2 381.9 161.0 527.7 0.0 1337.2 764.4 551.5 329. I 992.4 2870.6 810.8 227.0 51.9 1215.5 1164.1

I

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 I1 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)
(Ii (1)

(1) (2)
(!)

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

16446.5 15756.9 13919.0 12073.5 10226.9 7470.5 16679.9 16673.2 15330,o 15318.5 13748.9 13753.1 12167.1 12174.0 10585.3 10752.9 10742.4 433.0 488.2 496.5 493.9 729.5 441.8 9.3 902.2 1269.5 1711.6 2176.9 252.9 824.6 1492.5 2040.6 2611.0 3807.9 4191.1

(1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

(2
(3 (2)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

(7-j
(2) (2)

m
(2)

0)

(2) (2)
(1) (2)

(2) (2) (2)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(1)
(1) (1) (1)

15808.5 15270.8 13752.4 12225.7 10697.7 R416.5 17472.4 1769C.0 16272.5 16496.2 14835.3 15077.2 13397.9 13643.1 I 1963,s 12400.0 12624.0 528.5 589.8 598.9 595.6 880.2 533. I 7.5 1094. I 1535.5 2069.3 2631.3 209.8 657.5 1234. I 1688.8 2161.1 3152.1 3469.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination

I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination
Left Reaction

*

Right f Horizontal 0.0

Reaction
h

f

Dead load reaction
Live load reaction

Horizontal 0.0 0.0

Vertwal 3 2974. I 2628. I

0.0
119.3

Vertical h. 2974. I 2628. i

Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

119.3

- 10800.0

- 10800.0

122

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm !OO kg/m'
LEN07

76 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 11

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION

_--

force

Spacing Panels
@MPRESStON

at

I in 4 140.56 cm
MOMENT

MEMIER

N

MOMENT

cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 140.56 140.56 I40.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 L40.56 140.5t1 34&J 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.4s 373.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 132.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 231.84 231.84

kg (2) (2)
7502.5 7312.8 6553.2 3783.6 3012.3 3862.1 24722.9 24811.3 23180.8 23150.3 20989.6 20988.2 19791.1 18796.4 16392.5 16802.1 16787.8 424.4 513.4 528.0 327.1 768.3 433. I 3.2 1161.9 1516.0 1946.2 2411.3 86.7 246.3 523.7 686.3 837.1 1293.8 1417.9

kg.cm 4122.0 1777.7 636.6 404.9 316.5 313.6 7298.8 6262.1 6921.3 8366.8 8821.0 8997.2 8507.4 7932.8 7110.1 6596.9 5207.9 1895.7 2434.7 1065.4 379.3 293.4 580.4 0.0 1989.2 970.4 626.3 302.0 368.3 1834.8 415.0 197.2 80.9 593.9 727.2

kg (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
23962.7 23510.5 21393.0 19242.2 17085.6 13868.5 7?84. I 7892.2 7376.2 7452.5 6765.9 6852.3 6153.6 6242.3 5541.3 5703.0 3784.7 154.0 183.3 168.2 187.8 274.1 162.5 8.5 418.2 543.0 696.5 862.7 243.0 638.4 1463.0 1919.7 2398.0 3619.9 3967.1

kg.cm 13138.5 3538.6 1944.8 1226.0 948.9 1422.9 2111.1 3538.0 7322.8 8637.2 9609. I 9804.0 9269.8 8678.4 6517.8 4087.3 4935.6 309.5 852.3 371.8 133.5 105.8 218.6 0.0 658.2 337.6 223.3 115.0 to1 1.0 5704.2 1302.6 365.8 219.6 1667.4 2026.6

2 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 I1 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2)
(2)

(2) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

i2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (3 (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1) (1)

(1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (21 (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

2 In bracket' indicates farce due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 23 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction
A

Right (ZZGGZ?m 0.0 0.0 66.6

teaction

Dead load reaciion Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(wIthoot

25 percent

reduction)

f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 66.6

Vertical1 2908.3 3026.2 - 5400.0

2908.3 3026.2 - 5400.0

123

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 77 STEEL ROOF
Span Wind 3000.00 cm 150 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 212.13 212.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170:45 238.64 306.82 153.41 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 231.84 231.84
(2)

TRUSS(ANALYSIS
450.00 II
MOMENT

RESULTS)
Slope Purlins
TENSION kg

force

Spacing Panels
IMPRESSION 4

cm

I in 4
at 140.56 cm
MOMENT

MeMsall

kg.cm 8597.6 3684.5 1312.3 832.7 649.2 1031.9 7298.8 6262. I 6927.5 8566.8 8821.0 8997.2 8507.4 7952.8 7110.1 6596.9 5207.9 1895.7 2434.7 1065.4 379.3 295.4 580.4 0.0 1989.2 970.4 626.3 302.0 738.3 3800.6 862.0 399.8 161.8 1197.3 1463.3

kg.cm 13138.5 5538.6 1944.8 1226.0 948.9 1422.9 4508.1 4712.9 10011.1 11494.8 12792.6 13052.5 12341.3 11556.1 8675.9 5443.7 6600.0 1112.6 1725.9 753.4 269.9 213.1 434.5 0.0 1352.9 684.7 450.0 228.0 1011.0 5704.2 1302.6 565.8 219.6 1667.4 2026.6

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1)

(1)
(1) (1) (1) (1)

(1)
(1)

(2)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

15657.5 15290.0 13761.4 12211.7 10658.5 8341.8 24722.9 24811.3 23180.8 23150.3 20989.6 20988.2 18791.1 18796.4 16592.5 16802. I 16787.8 424.4 513.4 528.0 527. I 768.3 455. I 6.3 1161.9 1516.0 194-6.2 2411.5 374.7 486.8 1054.3 1382.2 1726.4 2605.9 2856.1

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(0

23962.7 235 10.5 21393.0 19242.2 17085.6 13868.5 16219.7 16398.0 15324.4 15433.3 14006.3 14135.6 12683.7 12817.8 11361.3 11642.4 11762.2 309.0 369.4 379.3 378.6 552.3 327.3 8.5 840.9 1093.2 1402.4 1737.3 243.0 638.4 1463.0 1919.7 2398.0 3619.9 3961.7

(1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combin;tion Left Reaction Right h r . f Horizontal Vertical 1 fHorizonta1 0.0 2908.3 0.0 0.0 3026.2 0.0 99.8 - 8100.0 99.8 Reaction
A

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Vertical 2908.3 3026.2 - 8100.0

1'24

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm 200 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 212.73 272.73 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.41 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 1.84 23 I .84

78 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 II

(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
cm Slope Purlins
TENSION I;B

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION 4

at

I in 4 140.56 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

IU~MENT

kg.cm
13073.2 5591.2 1988. I 1260.5 981.8 1550.2 7298.8 6262. I 6927.5 8566.8 8821.0 8997.2 8507.4 7952.8 7110.1 6596.9 5207.9 1895.7 2434.7 1065.4 379.3 295.4 580.4 0.0 1989.2 970.4 626.3 302.0 1108.8 5766.3 1308.9 602.3 242.6 1800.7 2199.4

kg.cm 13138.5 5538.6 1944.8 1226.0 948.9 1422.9 6h5.0 6876.8 12499.4 14352.4 15976. I 16301.0 15412.7 14433.7 10834. I 7135.0 8244.3 1715.7 2599.6 1135.1 406.4 320.3 650.5 0.0 2041.6 1031.8 676.8 341.0 1011.0 5704.2 1302.6 565.8 219.6 1667.4 2026.6

2 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 I6 I? 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1)
(1) (1)

(2)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

238 L2.6 23267. I 20969.6 18639.8 16304.6 12821.6 24722.9 2481 I.3 23180.8 23150.3 20989.6 20988.2 18791.1 18796.4 16592.5 16802. I 16787.8 424.4 513.4 528.0 527. I 768.3 455. I 9.5 1161.9 1516.0 1946.2 2411.5 262.8 727.3 1585.0 2078. I 2595.7 3918. I 4294.3

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

23962.7 23510.5 21393.0 19242.2 17085.6 13868.5 24655.3 24903.8 23272.6 23414.1 21246.7 21418.9 19213.9 19393.3 17181.3 17581.8 17739.8 464.0 555.4 570.5 569.3 830.6 492.2 8.5 1263.5 1643.3 2108.3 261 I.8 243.0 638.4 1463.0 1919.7 2398.0 3619.9 3967.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A VerticaD rHorizontal 0.0 2908.3 0.0 3026.2 133. I - 10800.0 Right f HorizontalReaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

0.0
0.0 133.1

(without

25 percent

reduction)

2908.3 3026.2 - 10800.0

125

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 3080.00 cm 100 kg/m2 LENGTH cm 136.36 272.13 272.73 272.13 272.73 272.73 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 27.27 81.82 136.36 i90.9 I 245.45 122.73 3OO.OfJ 146.87 114.63 213.01 257.29 166.45 146.87' 174.63 213.01 251.29 202.72 202.72

79 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 450.00 II

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION kg

force

Spacing Panels

at

1 in 5 139.06 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT kgcm

kg.cm 19413.4 7515.3 2395.0 1587.8 1309.0 1794.3 5283.4 3460.5 586.3 1078.2 362.0 673.9 249.0 537.0 244.8 916.6 1695.8 1822.9 492.0 336.4 288.0 72.4 556.6 0.0 778. I 339.5 236.5 199.0 830.3 8609. I 1775.2 788.8 726.5 1875.2 3145.6

1

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (U (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)
(1)

(2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2)

(3
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

8580.5 8488. I 7583.7 6656.0 5723.9 4335.0 28589.7 28904.1 21021.5 26986.0 24212.8 24197.1 21373. I 21362.7 18529. I 18767.5 18732.3 432.5 531.6 543.7 545.2 802.5 463.7 3.6 1424.3 1773.8 2176.6 2622.2 93.8 214.0 572.5 717.6 872.4 1366.6 1487.6

5968.4 2334.3 748. I 501.4 417.8 607.5 17194.6 11048.3 1944.8 3354.2 1260.7 2043.2 784.5 1594.9 841.0 2750.4 4935. I 6146.4 1513.2 1025.7 871.4 208.4 1621.3 0.0 2455.0 1033.5 701.4 567.5 272.8 2698.2 570.6 253.7 221.0 626.5 1061.0

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) 12) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(1) (2)

(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

2801 I.2 27828.6 25129.8 22353.9 19563.6 15404.8 8795.2 8961.6 8389. I 8450.6 7598.4 7668.2 6800.0 6871.6 6000.4 6154.7 6217.7 146.1 177.2 181.0 181.4 267.3 154.4 10.2 479. I 593.6 727.6 876.2 281.9 586.8 1713.2 2149.6 2613.3 4094.0 4457.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 108.4 Reaction
h

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Left Reaction A Vertical3 fHorizonta1 0.0 2877.4 0.0 3272.9 108.4 - 5400.0

Vertical 3 2877.4 3272.9 - 5400.0

126

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 80 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind force
MEMLIER

3000.00 cm 150 kg/m2
LENGTH

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

450.00 cm 11
MOMENT

Slope Purlins at
TENSION kg 28011.2 27828.6 25129.8 22353.9 19563.6 15404.8 18208.7 18513.3 17325.4 17410.4 15645.6 15747.6 13949.8 14055.3 12251.4 12524.7 12613.0 295.0 359.0 366.8 367.7 541.8 313.0 10.2 968.6 1201.5 1473.2 1774.4 281.9 586.8 1713.2 2149.6 2613.3 4094.0 4457.8

I in 5 139.06 cm
MOMENT

cm 1

kg.cm 12358.5 4820.0 1542.3 1030.7 856.3 1226.! 17194.6 11048.3 1944.8 3354.2 1260.7 2043.2 784.5 1594.9 841.0 2750.4 4935.1 6146.4 1513.2 1025.7 871.4 208.4 1621.3 0.0 2455.0 1033.5 701.4 567.5 554.9 5557.7 1167.3 515.5 458.9 1268.8 2148.4

kg.cm 19413.4 7515.3 2395.0 1587.8 1309.0 1794.3 10941.8 7129.1 1202.4 2205.8 764.`1 1369.3 500.5 1085.3 514.7 1857.5 3409.6 3812.7 1003.4 684.5 584.8 145. I I 119.3 0.0 1597.9

2 3
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18

!C
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 212.73 272.73 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.08 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 27.27 81.82 136,36 190.91 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 166.45 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 202.72 202.72

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) 0) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

.17785.0 17614.5 15784.4 13905.8 12018.1 9205.2 28589.7 28904.1 27027.5 26986.0 24212.8 24191.1 21373.1 21362.7 18529.1 18767.5 18732.3 432.5 531.6 543.7 545.2 802.5 463.7 7.1 1424.3 1773.8 21?6.6 2622.2 190.1 423.9 1159.3 i453.6 1767.1 2768.2 3013.5

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

690.6
477.8 398. I 830.3 8609. I 1775.2 788.8 726.5 1875.2 3145.6

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination

I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combinatton Left Reaction A (Horizontal Vertical > 0.0 2877.4 0.0 3212.9 162.6 - 8100.0 Right Reaction A (.Horizontal Vertical 3 0.0 2877.4 . 0.0 3212.9 162.6 - 8 100.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

127

SP : 38(S&T)_1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm 200 kg/m' LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 212.13 272.73 272.73 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 27.27 81.82 136.36 190.91 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.63 213.01 251.29 166.45 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 202.72 202.72

81 STEEL ROOF TRUSS Spacing Panels
IMPRESSION b

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION

force

450.00 11

I in 5
at 139.06 cm
MOMENT

MEMIIID~

MOMENT kg.cm 18748.6 7305.6 2336.6 1559.9 1294.9 1844.7 17194.6 11048.3 1944.8 3354.2 1260.7 2043.2 784.5 1594.9 841.0 2750.4 4935.1 6146.4 1513.2 1025.7 871.4 208.4 1621.3 0.0 2455.0 1033.4 701.4 567.5 837.0 8417.3 1764.1 777.4 696.8 1911.0 3225.9

kg (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
28011.2 27828.6 25129.8 22353.9 19563.6 15404.8 27622.2 28065.1 26261.8 26370.2 23692.8 23826.9 21099.6 21239.0 18502.3 18894.7 19008.3 443.9 540.9 552.7 554.1 816.2 471.6 10.2 1458.1 1809.5 2218.9 2672.5 281.9 586.8 1713.2 2149.6 2613.3 4094.0 4457.8

kg.cm 19413.4 7515.3 2395.0 1587.8 1309.0 1794.3 16600.1 10797.7 1821.7 3333.4 1166.3 2064.7 751.9 1633.6 784.6 2798.4 5123.3 5802.4 1514.9 1032.7 881.7 217.8 1682.1 0.0 2417.6 1041.7 719.1 597.2 830.3 8609: 1 1115.2 788.8 126.5 1875.2 3145.6

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (29 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

26989.6 26740.9 23985.2 21155.6 18312.4 14075.4 28589.7 28904.1 27027.5 26986.0 24212.8 24197.1 21373.1 21362.7 18529.1 18767.5 18732.3 432.5 531.6 543.7 545.2 802.5 463.7 10.7 1424.3 1773.8 2176.6 2622.2 286.5 633.9 1746.1 2189.5 2661.8 4169.8 4539.4

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction c Vertical ) (Horiiontal 0.0 2877.4 0.0 3212.9 216.8 - 10800.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 216.8 Reaction h Vertical > 2877.4 3272.9 - 10800.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

128

SP : 38(S&T)1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm 100 kg/m2 LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 45.45 136.36 227.27 318.18 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.89 221.27 304.92 388.36 209.54 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 284.77 284.77

82 STEEL ROOF Spacing Panels COMPRESSION hx

TRUSS 600.00 II

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I in 3 143.74 cm MOMENT kgcm 8966.3 4263.8 1655.9 1122.0 983.1 1532.2 5956.8 5238.9 9836.2 11335.2 13045. I 13259.7 J2692.6 11929.2 8885.0 5786.7 6106.1 415.0 891.2 395.5 161.1 69.0 228.9 0.0 5441.4 320.3 233.8 142.3 1358.5 3929.5 I1 10.0 310.8 71.0 1663.9 1593.5

force

at

MEMBER

MOMENT kg.cm 2626.1 1327.0 545.4 378.1 340.2 583.0 45441.5 8712.8 8794.3 ll5l3.5 10994.3 11756.7 I1 186.8 10037.4 9521.2 6353.3 6195.1 773.0 2452.3 1093.1 438.0 179.5 576.2 0.0 1640.6 887.0 627.5 358.2 518.4 1208.6 357.8 112.4 18.8 625.4 628.6

TENSION ke

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 `7 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 21 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

6346.5 6343.8 5262.1 4477.7 3693.0 2521.7 22833.0 22823.9 20985.2 20969.5 18820.8 18826.5 16655.5 16665.0 14490.2 14719.7 14705.3 592.7 668.2 679.7 676. I 998.6 604.8 4.0 1235. I 1737.8 2343. I 2979.9 107.3 357.7 634.5 867. I 1109.4 1617.8 1780.5

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (0 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

21640.2 20904.2 18825.6 16735.7 14644.1 11521.4 6775.9 6922.8 6370.2 6522.8 5873.9 6034.0 5377.8 5539.2 4881.7 5.125.6 5278.0 225.9 250.6 254.2 252.8 373.7 226.3 10.3 465.8 652.9 879.5 1118.3 287.2 900.0 1689.4 2311.8 2958.4 4314.9 4749.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Vertical 3 f Horizontal 0.0 4164.7 0.0 3504. I 79.6 - 7200.0 Right ( Horizontal 0.0 Reaction A Vertical) 4164.7 3504. I - 7200.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

0.0
79.6

(without

25 percent

reduction)

129

SP : 38(S&T)-1987 TABLE 83 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 3000.00 cm 150 kg/m*
LENGTH

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

600.00 11

cm

Slope Purlins

1 in 3
at 143.74 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSIGN kg

cm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 2s 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 3s 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 212.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 45.45 136.36 227.21 318.18 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 209.54 163.89 227.27 394.92 388.36 2g4.77 284.77

kgcm 5765.1 2858.8 1155.3 795.7 710.6 1186.5 4541.5 8712.8 8794.3 11513.5 10994.3 I 1756.7

kg.cm 8966.3 4263.8 1655.9 1122.0 983. I 1532.2 8010.4 6967.5 13060.9 15052.7 17328.6 17614.4 16860.8 15849.6 11801.1 7689.9 8115.1 725.4 1836.2 8 IS.9 330.9 140. I 460.6 0.0 1146.1 661.1 478.4 286.4 1358.5 3929.5

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)
(1) (1)

(2)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

13926.8 13322.9 11726.9 10124.8 8521.7 6128.9 22833.0 22823.9 20985.2 20969.5 18820.8 18826.5 16655.5 16665.0 14490.2 14719.7 14705.3 592.7 668.2 679.7 676.1 998.6 604.8 8.1 1235. I 1737.8 2343.1 2979.9 219.5 719.8 1295.8 1771.4 2266.5 3305.5 3638. I

(1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (2) (2)
(2) (2)

11186.8
10037.4 9521.2 8353.3 6195.1 773.0 2452.3 1093.1 438.0 179.5 576.2 0.0 1640.6 887.0 627.5 358.2 1054.2 2613.2 762.8 231.9 36.6 1276.9 1267.5

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (0 (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)

21640.2 20904.2 18825.6 16735.7 14644.1 11521.4 14813.8 15032.4 13829.0 14054.6 12643.8 12885.1 11458.6 11702.7 10273.6 10686. I 1091 I.8 459.5 512.0 519.8 516.9 763.9 462.7 10.3 950.3 1333.2 1796.5 2284.3 287.2 900.0 1689.4 2311.8 2958.4 4314.9 4749.7

1110.0
310.8 71.0 1663.9 1593.5

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction
A

Right f Horizontal 0.0

Reaction
A

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 119.3

Vertical3 4164.7 3504. I - 10800.0

0.0
119.3

Vertical 1 4164.7 3504.1 - 10800.0

130

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 84 STEEL ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 3000.09 cm 200 kg/m*
LBNGTH
CIIi

force

Spacing Panels

600.00 II

cm

Slope Purlins

at

I in 3 143.74 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MQMENT

TENSION kg

kgsm

kg.cm 8966.3 4263.8 1655.9 I 122.0 983.1 1532.2 10063.9 10154.8 16285.6 18770.1 21612.1 21969.0 21029.1 19770.1 14717.1 9663.1 10124.2 1035.9 2781.3 1236.2 500.6 211.2 692.4 0.0 1750.9 1001.9 723.1 430.4 1358.5 3929.5 1110.0 310.8 71.0 1663.9 1593.5

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 :6 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

136.36 272.U 272.73 272.r3 272.73 2?2:r3 143.?4 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 45.45 136.36 227.27 318.18 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 209.54 163.89 221.21 304.92
388.35

12) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

284.77 284.17

(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

21507.1 20601.9 18191.8 15771.9 13350.5 9736.2 22833.0 22823.9 20985.2 20969.5 18820.8 18826.5 16655.5 16665.0 14490.2 14719.7 14705.3 592.7 668.2 679.7 676.1 998.6 604.8 12.2 1235.1 1737.8 2343.1 2979.9 331.6 1081.9 195"/. 1 2675.7 3423.7 4993. I 5495.6

8904.1 4390.6 1765.3 :213.3 1ogo.9 1790.0 4541.5 8712.8 8794.3 1!513.5 10994.3 11756.7 11186.8 10037.4 9521.2 8353.3 6195.1 773.0 2452.3 1093. I 438.0 179.5 576.2 0.0 1640.6 887.0 627.5 358.2 1590.1 4017.8 1167.7 351.3 54.3 1928.5 1906.3

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) `(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

ia

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) iI) (2) (2)

ia

(2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

iI)

21640.2 20904.2 18825.6 16735.7 i4644.1 11521.4 22851.7 23141.9 21287.8 21586.4 19413.6 19736.1 17539.4 17866.1 15665.4 16246.6 16545.5 693.2 173.3 785.3 781.0 1154.1 699.0 10.3 1434.1 2013.5 2713.4 3450.3 287.2 900.0 1689.4 2311.8 2958.4 4314.9 4149.1

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination

Left Reaction A A Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction fHorizonta1 0.0 0.0 159.1

Right

teaction
R

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Vertical > <Horizontal 4164.7 0.0 3504.1 0.0 - 14400.0 159.1

Vertical> 4164.7 3504.1 - 14400.0

131

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm 100 kn/m*

85 STEEL ROOF TRUSS Spacing Panels 600.00 11

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

1 in 4
at 140.56 cm

force

MEMBER

LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 212.73 140.56 la.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.41 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 231.84 231.84

COMPRESSION kg

MOMENT kg.cm 5172.6 2234.0 800.9 509.7 398.7 649.8 997 I .4 8555.0 9464.1 11703.7 12050.9 12291.6 11622.4 10864.8 9713.5 9012.4 7114.8 2589.8 3326.2 1455.5 518.1 403.6 792.9 0.0 2717.5 1325.7 855.6 412.6 466.2 2306.0 521.3 249.0 102.5 750.8 919.8

TENSION kg

MOMENT

kg.cm 17949.3 7566.6 2656.9 1674.9 1296.4 1943.9 2635.2 4796.9 10201.0 11712.0 13029.3 13293.5 12569.2 11767.0 8837.8 5541.7 6719.2 632.6 1076.5 469.5 168.6 133.9 277.1 0.0 828.7 426.2 282.3 145.9 1381.2 7792.9 1779.6 773.0 300. I 2271.9 2768.6

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(1) (2)
(1) (1)

(1)
(1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

9413.3 9171.6 8210.9 7237.7 6262.5 4808.0 33775.4 33896.2 31668.7 31627.1 28675.2 28673.2 25671.6 25678.9 22668.1 22954.4 22934.8 579.8 701.4 721.3 720. I 1049.7 621.8 4.0 1587.3 2071.1 2658.9 3294.5 109.6 312.7 662.2 867.8 1083.8 1635.9 1792.9

(1) (1)

(1)
(1) (1)

(1) (2) Co
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (1) (2)

32136.9 32119.2 29226.3 26287.9 23341.7 18946.7 9770. I 9912.0 9264.2 9366.7 8504.4 8619.7 7742. I 7860.3 6979.9 7190.4 7299.6 194.9 231.8 237.9 237.4 346.5 205.4 11.7 529. I 686.7 880.7 1090.9 332.0 872. I 1998.6 2622.6 3276.0 4945.3 5420.6

(2) (2) (2) (1) (1)
(1) (1)

(1) (1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Vertical3 Horizontal 0.0 4072.6 0.0 4034.9 38.7 - 7200.0 Right <iTGGiZ-`.Xn 0.0 0.0 38.7 5eaction

f Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

4072.6 4034.9 - 7200.0

132

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm 150 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.41 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 231.84 231.84

I36 STEEL ROOF Spacing Panels COMPREXION kg

TRUSS 600.00 II

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

1 in 4
at 140.56 cm MOMENT kg.cm 17949.3 7566.6 2656.9 1674.9 1296.4 1943.9 5831.1 6363.4 13518.7 I ss22.2 17274.0 17624.8 16664.5 15603.9 11715.4 7350.4 8911.6 1436.8 2241.3 978.4 350.6 276.8 565. I 0.0 1754.9 889. I 584.6 296.6 1381.2 7792.9 1779.6 773.0 300. I 2277.9 2768.6

force

MOMENT kg.cm II 140.0 4776.3 1701.9 1080. I 842.2 1340.8 9971.4 8555.0 9464. I 11703.7 12050.9 12291.6 11622.4 10864.8 9713.5 9012.4 7114.8 2589.8 3326.2 1455.5 518.1 403.6 792.9 0.0 2717.5 132S.7 855.6 412.6 959.6 4927.0 I 117.2 519.1 210.3 1555.3 1901.2

TENSION kg

2 3 4 S 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 I3 14 IS 16 I7 IS I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 3s

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

20286.7 19807.8 17821.8 15808.5 13790.6 10781.0 33775.4 33896.2 31668.7 31627.1 28675.2 28673.2 25671.6 25678.9 22668. I 22954.4 22934.8 579.8 701.4 721.3 720. I 1049.7 621.8 8.2 1587.3 2071.1 2658.9 3294.5 227.0 633.3 1369.8 1795.7 2242.8 3385.4 3710.4

(1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

32736.9 32119.2 29226.3 26287.9 23341.7 18946.7 21017.6 21253.1 19861 20007.,c 18158.3 18330.7 16449.0 !6627.6 14739.9 15109.5 15269.6 401.6 479.9 492.8 491.8 717.5 425.2 11.7 1092.6 1420.2 1821.9 2257.0 332.0 872. I 1998.6 2622.6 3276.0 4945.3 5420.6

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Right Reaction

Left Reaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 133.1

4072.6 4034.9 - 10800.0

0.0 0.0 133.1

4072% 4034.9 -MflOO.o

133

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm 200 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.% 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.41 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 231.84 231.84

87 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 I1

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION kg

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

I in 4
at 140.56 cm MOMENT kg.cm 17949.3 7566.6 2656.9 1674.9 1296.4 1943.9 9027.0 9014.9 16836.4 19332.3 21518.6 21956.2 20759.8 19440.8 14593.0 9350.9 11104.1 2240.9 3406. I 1487.3 532.5 419.8 853.0 0.0 2681.1 1351.9 886.9 447.3 1381.2 7792.9 lJJ9.6 773.0 300. I 2271.9 2768.6

M~htaea

MOMENT

kg.cm 17107.5 7318.6 2602.9 1650.5 1285.8 203 I .9 9971.4 8555.0 9464. I I 1703.7 12050.9 12291.6 11622.4 10864.8 9713.5 9012.4 ?I 14.8 2589.8 3326.2 1455.5 518.1 403.6 792.9 0.0 2717.5 1325.7 855.6 412.6 1452.8 7548.0 1718.1 789.2 318.1 2359.8 2882.6

8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)
(1) (1) (1)

iI) (1) (1)
(1)

(2)
(1) (1)

(1) (1)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

31160.1 30444.0 27432.7 24379.3 21318.8 16754.0 33775.4 33896.2 31668.7 31627. I 28675.2 28673.2 25671.6 25678.9 22668. I 22954.4 22934.8 579.8 701.4 721.3 720. I 1049.7 621.8 12.4 1587.3 2071.1 2658.9 3294.5 344.4 954.0 2077.4 2723.6 3401.9 5135.0 5628.0

(1) (1) il)
(1) (1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(1)

(2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(1) (1) (1) (1)

(1)
(1)

(1)

32736.9 32119.2 29226.3 26287.9 23341.7 I 8946.7 32265.0 32594.2 30459.5 30648.8 27812.1 28041.8 25155.9 25395.0 22499.9 23028.7 23239.7 608.3 727.9 747.6 746.1 1088.5 645.1 11.7 1656.1 2153.7 2763.2 3423.0 332.0 872. I 1998.6 2622.6 3276.0 4945.3 5420.6

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination

Dead load rehction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Left Reaction A Verticaa (Horizontal 0.0 4012.6 0.0 4034.9 177.5 - 14400.0

Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 177.5

Reaction A Vertical> 4072.6 4034.9 - 14400.0

134

SP : 38(S&TH%7

TABLE span Wind `force MEMBER 3000.00 cm 100 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.13 212.13 272.73 272.73 272.13 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139 06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 21.27 HI.H2 136.36 190.91 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 166.45 146.87 174.63 213.01 251.29 202.72 202.72

88 STEEL

ROOF

TRUSS 600.00 II

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
-fENSlOk

Spacing Panels

al

I in 5 139.06 cm MOMENT kg.cm 26493.0 10255.9 3268.4 2166.8 1786.3 2448.7 6640.4 4354.3 738.4 1358.8 453.0 850.5 315.0 678.5 306.6 1157.5 2145.1 2286.0 620.4 424.4 363.5 91.6 704.0 0.0 979.8 428.4 298.8 252.0 1133.: 11748.6 2422.6 1076.4 991.4 2559. I 4292.8

MOMENT kg.cm

kg
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) 38226.1 37976.9 34294.0 30505.7 26697.9 21022.5 11055.0 I 1269.4 10550.2 10633.2 9562. I 9655.6 8564.4 8660.0 7565.0 7765.2 7850.0 184.6 223.7 228.5 229.0 337.6 195.0 14.0 605.4 749.7 919.0 1106.7 384.7 800.8 2338.0 2933.5 3566.4 5587.0 6083.4

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2? 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(2) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

10782.2 10663.4 9521.0 8349.2 7172.0 5418.0 39015.6 39444.6 36883:6 36827.0 33042.5 33021.2 29167.3 29153. I 25286.2 25611.5 25563.5 590.2 725.5 742.0 144.0 1095. I 632.9 4.5 1943.8 2420.7 2970.3 3578.4 118.4 211.5 723.0 906.3 1101.8 1725.9 1878.7

7501.5 2985.8 941.2 631.2 526.3 767.9 23465.0 15077.3 2654.0 4577.4 1720.5 2788.3 1070.6 2176.6 1141.7 3 153.4 6734.8 8387.8 2065. I 1399.7 1189.2 284.4 2212.6 0.0 3350.3 1410.4 957.2 774.5 344.2 3395.8 719.1 320.2 277.5 791.3 1340.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination ! In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left fHorizonta1 0.0 0.0 144.5 Reaction
A

Right fiorizontal 0.0 0.0 144.5

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

VerticCD 4029.2 4368.8 - 72c0.0

Reaction A Vertical) 4029.2 4368.8 - 7200.0

135

SP : 38(S&T)_1987 -TABLE 89 STEEL ROOF TRUSS Span Wind 3000.00 cm 150 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 27.27 81.82 136.36 190.91 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 166.45 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 202.72 202.72 Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

(ANALYSES cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

600.00 11

at

I in 5 139.06 cm
MOMENT kg.cm 26493.0 10255.9 3268.4 2166.8 1786.3 2448.7 14184.9 9245.8 i 5s9.9 2862.2 939.2 1771.7 6.50.3 S409.6 666.5 2412.0 4430.1 4939.1 1302.3 888.6 759.3 188.6 1454.3 0.0 2072.8 896.5 620.5 517.5 1133. I 11748.6 2422.6 1076.4 991.4 2559. I 4292.8

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

kg.cm 16021.7 6250.0 2000.2 1336.9 1111.0 1592.6 234650 15077.3 2654.0 4577.4 1720.5 2788.3 1070.6 2176.6 1147.7 3753.4 6734.8 8387.8 2065.1 1399.7 1189.2 284.4 2212.6 0.0 3350.3 1410.4 957.2 774.5 720.3 7208.0 1514.7 669.3 594.8 1647.6 2784.0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 I2 I3 14 IS 16 I7 I8 19 20 2s 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1) (1)

(2)
(1)

(1)
(1) (1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

23055.0 22831.9 20455.3 18015.6 15564.3 11911.5 39015.6 39444.6 36683.6 36827.0 33042.5 33021.2 29167.3 29153. I 25286.2 25611.5 25563.5 590.2 725.5 742.0 744.0 1095.1 632.9 9.3 1943.8 2420.7 2970.3 3578.4 246.9 551.4 1505.5 1887.5 2294.7 3594.7 3913.2

(1)
(1) (1) (1)

(1) (1)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2)
0)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2)

C-3 (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1)

38226. I 37976.9 34294.0 30505.7 26697.9 21022.5 23606.3 24005. I 22465.3 22579.5 20291.7 20428.0 18097.4 18238.2 15899.6 16258.5 16377.1 383. I 466.2 476.3 477.5 703.5 406.4 14.0 1258.0 1560.4 1913.2 2304.2 384.7 800.8 2338.0 2933.5 3566.4 5587.0 6083.4

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left A r Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction Horizantal 0.0 0.0 216.8 4029.2 4368.8 - 10800.0 0.0 0.0 216.8 4029.2 4368.8 - 10800.0 Reaction Right Rection

(without

25 percent

reduction)

136

SP : 38(!%T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 3000.00 cm 200 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 212.13 212.13 212.13 212.13 212.13 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 27.27 81.82 136.36 190.91 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 166.45 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 202.72 202.72

90 STEEL ROOF Spacing Panels
IMPRESSION kg

TRUSS 600.06 11

(ANALYSIS cm

RESULTS) Slope Purlins 1 in 5 139.06 cm
MOMENT

force

at

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

kg.cm 2454 1.9 9564.2 3059. i 2042.6 1695.7 2417.4 23465.0 15077.3 2654.0 4517.4 1720.5 2788.3 1070.6 2176.6 1147.7 3753.4 6734.8 8387.8 2065.1 1399.7 1189.2 284.4 2212.6 0.0 3350.3 1410.4 957.2 774.5 1096.4 11020.7 2310.4 1018.4 912.0 2503.9 4227.2

kg.cm 26493.0 10255.9 3268.4 2166.8 1786.3 2448.7 21729.3 14137.2 2383.2 4365.7 1525.4 2704.9 985.5 2140.6 1026.4 3666.5 6115.1 7592.1 1984.3 1352.8 1155.1 285.5 2204.6 0.0 3 165.8 1364.7 942.3 782.9 1133.1 11748.6 2422.6 1076.4 991.4 2559.1 4292.8

1 2 3 4 5 6 1 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18. 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

35327.8 35000.5 31389.5 27682.0 23956.7 18405.1 39015.6 39444.6 36883.6 36827.0 33042.5 33021.2 29167.3 29153.1 25286.2 25611.5 25563.5 590.2 125.5 742.0 744.0 1095.1 632.9 14.0 1943.8 2420.7 2970.3 3578.4 375.3 831.4 2287.9 2868.8 3487.7 5463.5 5947.7

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 12) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

38226.1 37976.9 34294.b 30505.7 26697.9 21022.5 36157.6 36740.8 34380.4 34925.9 31021.3 31290.5 27630.4 27816.5 24234.3 24751.8 24904.2 581.7 708.7 724.1 726.0 1069.4 617.8 14.0 1910.6 2371.0 2907.4 3501.7 384.7 800.8 2338.0 2933.5 3566.4 5587.0 6083.4

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Rzaction Right R-action

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 289.1

4029.2 4368.8 - 14400.0

0.0 0.0 289.1

4029.2 4368.8 - 14400.0

137

SP : 38(SgbTbP9?37 TABLE 91 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS) Span Wind force _~_I___~
MEMBER

900.00 cm 100 kg/m2
LENGTH cm

Spacing Panels
tiMPRESSION kg

450.00 cm 7 -.__
MOMENT

Slope Purlins at TENSION

1 ir, 3
135.53 cm
MOMENT

k&cm 502.4 366.7 107.4 363.4 1416.8 1462.7 359.0 641.4 10Q.5 677.3 1021.0 45.9 282.4 203.6 343.R 542.3 190.4 lR9.6 124.8 216.1 33. I 170.2 151.3

kg
3869.2 3279.9 1969.4 3.3 1333.1 1447.2 883.3 1001.1 411.1 669.9 786.8 215.3 219.6 334.9 216.9 790.5 409.9 567.5 219.7 710.2 1080.4 2093.4 2388.9

kg.cm 1508.8 941.6 254.7 709.6 490.5 605.5 174.5 315.0 86.9 340.7 523.4 115.0 140.5 107.4 182.7 289.9 82.6 101.0 232.7 532.1 93.0 333.4 296.9

i
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 I1 la I3 14 I5 16 I7 I8 19 20 21 22 23

1128.57
257.14 257.84 257.14 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107.14 3oO.Otl 154.52 214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56 (2) (2) (1) ,(l) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

iI)

0) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

1205.7 889.6 210.1 808.2 4081.9 4074.0 2765.3 2757.1 1382.6 1646.9 1637.2 413.2 424.5 647.5 418.7 1526.8 789.2 1094.9 145.0 375.5 559.5 1037.3 1237.0

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction
&_ Dead load reaction 0.0 742.8 r Her izlZI 0.0 RrZrtical 742.8 )

Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

0.0 675.0

788.4 - 1620.0 ------

0.0 675.0

788.4 - 1620.0

138

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

'TABLE92 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS) ~---.--Span Wind force

900.00 cm
I50 kg/n+

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

450.00 cm
7
MOMENT

Slope Purlins at

I

ir

3 cm

135.53

MEMBER

LE?GGlf, tm

TENSION kg (1)

v OMENT k&ClD i `08.8

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 2512.4 1931.0 673.4 1211.8 4081.9 4074.0 2765.3 2757.1 1382.6 1646.9 1637.2 413.2 424.5 647.5 418.7 1526.8 789.2 1094.9 268.3 692.4 1035.7 1920.4 2290.0

kg.cm 1028.4 721.4 207.5 674.5 1416.8 1462.7 359.0 641.4 loo.5 677.3 1021.0 45.9 282.4 203.6 343.8 542.3 190.4 189.6 229.6 421.0 66.6 315.9. 280.9

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 17 IS 19 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket

12d.5'? 257. I4 257. I4 257. I4 135.53 135.53 f35.5.3 135.53 135.53 135.5.3 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107.14 300.00 154.52 214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56 indicates indicates

3869.2 3279.9 1969.4 3.3 2742.2 2911.9 1828.0 2003.

(1) (I! It! (2) (2) (2) (2)

941.6 254.7 709.6 993.5

6174.3 32 !. t
589.2 148.6 634.2 970.R 180.8 262. I 198.1 336.6 533.4 158.6 185.0 232.7 532.

!a (2) cb (1, (2)
(2)

I I 1304.5 1478. I 398. I
868. 406.6 620.

I

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

401.4 1463.6 758.4 1050.4 279.1 710.2 1080.4 2003.4 2388.9

I

93.0 333.4 296.9

force due to wind load combination
force from is applied combination from other wind than wind load to force load combination Left Reaction Vertical 3 742.8 788.4 - 2430.0 Right fHorizonta! 0.0 0.0 1012.5 Reaction

I

In bracket

25 Percent

reduction

f Horizontal
Dead Live Wind load load load reaction reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction) 0.0 0.0 1012.5

A

Vertical 742.8 788.4 - 2430.0

)

139

TABLE Span Wind 900.00 cm 200 kg/m2 LENGTH cm 128.57 237.14 257.14 257.14 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107.14 300.00 154.52 214.29 143.75 15452 214.29 197.56 197.56

93 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins 1 in 3 135.53 cm
MOMENT

force

450.00 7

at

MeMBEa

IMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (1) (1) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (1) (1) (I) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 3819.1 2912.4 1136.7 1615.3 4081.9 4074.0 2765.3 2157. I 1382.6 1646.9 1637.2 413.2 424.5 647.5 418.7 1526.8 789.2 1094.9 391.7 1009.3 1512.0 2803.5 3343. I

MOMENT kg.cm 1554.1 1076.0 307.5 985.4 1416.8 1462.7 359.0 641.4 100.5 677.3 1021.0 45.9 282.4 203.6 343.8 542.3 190.4 189.6 334.3 625.8 100.1 461.7 410.6 (1) 0) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) 0) (I) (I) (1)

TENSION kg 3869.2 3279.9 1969.4 3.3 4151.3 4376.6 2772.7 3005.2 1325.2 1939.1 2169.3 580.9 593.6 905.3 586.0 2136.6 1106.8 1533.3 279.1 710.2 1080.4 2003.4 2388.9

kg.cm
1508.8 941.6 254.7 709.6 1496.5 1743.2 479.7 863.4 210.3 927.8 1418.3 246.7 383.7 288.9 490.5 717.0 234.6 210.9 232.7 532.1 93.0 333.4 296.9

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1350.0 Reaction A Vertical 3 742.8 788.4 - 3240.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 1350.0

742.8 788.4 - 3240.0

140

SI' : 38(S%T)-1987

TABLE ._-- ..-_ -----SW,1 Wilti . _ force
bfEh1Ht.R

94 STEEL -

LEAN-TO Spacing

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope
Purlins
TENSION

900 $0 cm

450.00

I in 4
. at 132.53 .cm MOMENI

`Ml Lg,d
t I!\<;`,1

Panels
C~l~ilWtWO~

7
M~MENr kgcm 984.4 607.7 135.9 411.4 2568.5 2365.3 381.0 807.0 3.4 883.5 1400.7 238.9 436.0 297.3 517.2 846. I 264.4 228.5 109.2 375.7 41.7 189.0 240.0

i`llI

i.&!

kg
(1) (1) (I) (1) (2)
5437.6 4662.2 2801.2 6.5 1995.9 2081.0 1354.4 1438.4 654.7 909.0 991.8 197.6 206.4 315.1 201.4 143.4 476.0 603.5 374.8 885.5 1302.9 2462.8 2926.2

k&cm
2750.5

I
2 3 4 5 tl 7 x 9

t:x.s
2."7 If 257. I3 Pli7.14 132.53 132.53

(2)
(21 (`1

1891.2
1522.8 672.0 604.4 5609.7 5614 2 3847.4 3835.7 1923.5 2284.5 2270 2 430.7 452.x 690.9 441.1
16iX.3

(11 i E b
II!

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2)

I0
II I? I3 14 !? 16 17 I.): I9 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket f In bracket 25 Percent

1:2.53 ! .:2.53 I :2.:3 I I2.53 [ :2.:;3
I_. `_ `4 12643

(11
II) 0) (1)

(II
(1) (1)

(2) (2)
(2) (2) (2)

! IhI.- I
do.36 ;1?5.1)0
143.75

(1)
II) (1)
(1)

0)
(2) (2)

I<`.93 i`, `37.31 t43.75 !Rl.d3 ! 70.84 171) K4 indiutea indicates reduction force force

(1) (2) I!) (21 (2) 12,

1039.0 1320.4 171.3 412.6 594.8 1124.3 1335.9

(1)
(1) (1) (1)

(1)

1569.6 350.8 905.6 928.3 945.5 164.7 354.9 35.0 392.7 635. I 17.2 192.6 138.4 242.4 398.0 108.3 108.5 230.9 942.0 126.8 420.5 529.8

due to ulnd load combination from combination other than :t) f~xce from wind load

wind

load

is applied

combination
Left Reaction

Right

A /Horizontal Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

0.0
(without 25 percent reduction) 0.0 506.3

Vertical 1 (Horizontai 126.4 0.0 907.8 0.0 - 1620.0 506.3

Reaction A Vertical 1 126.4 907.8 - 1620.0

141

YP : 38(S&T)-I987

TABLE 95 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF
Span Wind 900.00 cm 150 kg/m?
LESGTH cm

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope I in 4

Spacing

force

Panels
COMPRESSION kg

450.00 I

Purlins at
TENSION

132.53 cm
MOMENT

MEMHER

MOMEW

kgxm 1935. I 1113.2 262.3 768.0 2568.5 2365.3 381.0 807.0 3.4 883.5 1400.7 238.9 436.0 297.3 517.2 846. I 264.4 228.5 202.2 720.5 83.8 353.5 448.2

kg
(1)
(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 5437.6 4662.2 2801.2 6.5 3928.8 4057.4 2672.9 2796.8 1302.6 1744.3 1866. I 368. I 385.0 587.7 375.7 1386.5 887. I 1125.3 374.8 885.5 1302.9 2462.8 2926.2

kg.cm 2750.5 1569.6 350.8 905.6 1820.6 1812.5 310.6 666.8 52.2 736.3 1186.1 41.5 361.5 257. I 449.8 738.0 206.5 200.8 230.9 942.0 126.8 420.5 529.8

I
2 3 4 5 h 7 8 9 IO II I2 13 IJ IS I (1 I7 IX I9 20 21 22 23

128.57 .257.14 257.14 257.14 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32. I4 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 1111.83 137.31 143.72 181.83 170.84 170.84

(2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

3743.2 3061.3 1474.9 905.5 5609. I 5614.2 3847.4 3835.3 1923.5 2284.5 2210.2 430.7 452.8 690.9 441.1 i 628.3 1039.0 1320.4 319.5 766.5 1109.4 2096.9 2491.6

2 In bracket indicate\ force due to wind load combination I In bracket 1ndiLates force from combination other than wind load 25 &cent reduction 1s applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A f Horizontal Vertical > 0.0 726.4 0.0 907.8 159.4 - 2430.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 759.4 Reaction A Vertical 1 726.4 907.8 - 2430.0

I)cad load reactton I.l\c load reaction Wind load reactIon

(without

25 percent

reduction)

142

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind force
MEMBER

96 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

kOOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins at
TENSION kg

900.00 cm 200 kn/m*
LENGTH

450.00 7

I

in 4 132.53. cm
MOMEST

COMPRESSION

MOMFNT

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) force lorce due from to to wind force load from 5595. 4599.9 2277.7 1206.6 5609.7 5614.2 3x47.4 3835f3 1923.5 2284.5 2270.2 430.7 452.8 690.9 441.1 1628.3 1039.0 1320.4 467.6 1120.4 1623.9 3069.6 3647.4 combination other wind than load

kg.cm

kg.cm 2750.5 1569.6 350.8 905.6 2712.9 2679.5 456.5 978.8 69.4 1079.9 1737.2 Xl.H 530.5 375.x 657.3 1078.0 304.7 293.2 230.9 942.0 126.8 420.5 529.8

1
2 3 4 5 6 7

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32.14 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 181.83 137.31 143.75 181.93 170.84 I70.1(4 indicates indicates reductton

I

2885.8 1738.6 388.7 1124.7 2568.5 236S.3 38

(1) II) (1) II) 17) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

5431.6 4662.2 2801.2 6.5 5Rbl.8 6033.7 3991.4 4155.2 1950.5 2579.5 2740.4 538.7 563.7 860.4 549.9 2029.6 1298.3 1647.1 374.8 885.5 1302.9 2462.8 2926.2

I .o
3.4

8
9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23 2 In I In 25 bracket bracket

807.0 883.5 1400.7 238.9 436.0 297.3 517.2 846. 264.4 228.5 295.3 1065.4 125.8 518.1 656.5

I

(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

combination

wind

load

Percent

is applied

combination Left CHorizontal Reaction h Vertical 726.4 907.8 3240.0 Right J (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1012.5 Reaction A Vertical 726.4 907.8 3240.0

1

Dead Live Wind

load load load

reaction reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

0.0 0.0 1012.5

143

SB : 38(S&T~1987

TABLE 97 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF
Span Wind force

TRlJSS(ANALYSIS
cm

RESULTS)
Slope Purlins
TENSION kg

900.00 cm
100 kg/m2

Spacing Panels 110MP~~sstoN

450.00 7

I
at

in

5
cm

131.12 MOMES? kg.cm 4349. 2358.7 486.6 I 180.0 1490 I 1354.3 169.2 431.2 32.8 482.2 811.9 135.x 281.6 18X.0 I

MEMEIER

LENGTH

%!OMEF;T kgcm 1586.8 903.4 183.0 501.9 4070.3 3464.X 416.0 1039.2

cm

kg
(2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (0 (1) (1) 2499.8 2096.3 1066.4 480.7 7104.4 7138.4 4950.6 4931.0 2475. 2927.5 2905.2 435.8 470.0 717.x 450.5 1692.5 1292.2 1553.0 199.0 446. x 652. I 1251.4 1479.7 wind force load from comblnatlon other wind than load I

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO I I I2 13 I4 I5 I6 I7 IX I9 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket bracket Percent

12R.57 251.14 257.14 257.14 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 71.14 128.57 64.29

114.2 1157 8 1913.x 605.6 675 H 433.8 756. I 1281.9 343.0 279.3 105.4 566.2 56 5 224.X 356.7

I no.00
138.4X 164.65 134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94 156.94 ~ndlcates indlcatrr reductton lorce forcr due from tl

(1)
(1) (1) (2) (2) (2! (2) (2) to

(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2 (2) i:)
(2)

6960.5 6054.9 3641.7 12.0 2586.9 2663.3 1791.3 1853.X 877.7 1141.4 1202.5 186.4 199.x 305.5 192.0 721.2 552.7 662.5 466. ? 1027.1 1530.7 2931 1473.0 3

.

329 7 560. I 135.x 123.9 239.0 1447 2 I69 4 535.1 840 7

(2)
(II

(1) (0
(1)

(1)

I
25

In

combtnatlon

wind

load

IS applvzd

combination I.eft Reaction Rqht Reacrl<>n

Dead 1 IY~ Wtnd

load load load

reaction reactlon rcactlon (without 25 percent reduction)

0.0 0.0 405.0 -

718.7 9Hl.9 1761.7

0.0 0.0 405.0 -

71x.7 9x1 9 1761.7

144

SP : 38(S&T)-l!I87

TABLE 98 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind

900.00 cm
force 150 kg/m2
LENGTH

Spacing Panels
COMPRFSSION

450.00 7

cm

Slope Purlins, at TENSION kg (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (0 (0 (1) (1) (1) 6960.5 6054.9 3641.7 12.0 5006.3 5126.3 3471.5 3562. I 1708.8 2176.1 2264.2 348.6 374.2 572.0 359.4 1350.0 1033.8 1239.9 466.3 1027.4 1530.7 2937.3 3473.0

I in 5
131.12 cm
MOMENT

'

MEMBER

MOMENT

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) due to wind load from combination to force from 4852.8 4104.0 2176.8 719.2 7104.4 7138.4 4950.6 493i.o 2475. I 2921.5 2905.2 435.8 470.0 717.8 450.5 1692.5 1292.2 1553.0 312.3 832.9 1220.7 2342.6 2769.9 combination other than wind

kgsm 3069.4 1728.9 351.7 939.8 4070.3 3464.b 416.0 1039.2 114.2 1157.8 1913.8 605.6 675.8 433.8 756. I 1281.9 343.0 279.3 196.0 1078.6 109.6 422.0 668.3

kg.cm 4349. I 2358.7 486.6 1180.0 2880.2 2580.5 319.8 811.5 64.2 906.9 1521.2 299.7 529.5 350.8 614.4 1043.4 258. I 230. I 239.0 1447.2 169.4 535.7 840.7

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 14 IS I6 17, I8 I9 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket I In bracket 25 Percent

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 77. I4 128.57 64.29 180.00 138.48 164.65 134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94 156.94 indicates indicates reduction force force

wind

load

is. applied

load combination Left fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 601.5 Reaction A Vertical 1 i18.7 98 I .9 - 2642.6 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 607.5 Reaction h Vertical 3 718.7 981.9 - 2642.6

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reactlon

(without

25 percent

reduction)

145

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE

99 STEEL LEAN-TO

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS)

Span Wind force MEht~ett I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23

900.00 cm 200 kg/m* LEN&? cm 128.57 257. I4 257.14 257. I4 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 77.14 128.57 64.29 180.00 138.48 164.65 134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94 156.94 (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

Spacing Panels
COMPREWON

450.00 cm 7
MOMENT

Slope Purlins at TENSION kg (1) 0) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 6960.5 6054.9 3641.7 12.0 7425.7 7589.3 5151.7 5270.5 2540.0 3210.7 3325.8 510.9 548.6 838.4 526.8 1978.8 1514.9 1817.3 466.3 1027.4 1530.7 2937.3 3473.0

I in 5
131.12 cm
MOMENT

kg 7205.8 6111.8 3287. I 957.7 7104.4 7138.4 4950.6 493 I-.0 2475.1 2927.5 2905.2 435.8 470.0 717.8 450.5 1692.5 1292.2 1553.0 545.7 1219.I 1789.3 3433.8 4060.2

kgcm 4552.0 2554.4 520.3 1377.8 4070.3 3464.8 416.0 1039.2 114.2 1157.8 1913.8 605.6 675.8 433.8 756. I 1281.9 343.0 279.3 286.5 1591.1 164.1 619.3 979.8

kg.cm 4349. : 2358.7 486.6 I 180.0 4270.3 3806.8 470.3 1191.7 95.7 1331.5 2230.5 463.5 777.3 513.5 899.0 1526.6 380.4 336.4 239.0 1447.2 169.4 535.7 840.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction h f Horizontal Vertical \ 0.0 718.7 0.0 981.9 810.0 - 3523.5 Right Reaction A Vertical > f Horizontal 0.0 718.7 0.0 981.9 810.0 - 3523.5

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

146

SP : 3S(S&T)-1987

TABLE 100STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 900.00 cm 100 kg/m2 _LENGTH

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION

600.00 I

cm

SlOjU

Purlins

at

I in 3 135.53 cm MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION b

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (I) (I) (I) (1) (1) (1) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 1494.3 1090.1 222.5 1077.8 5601.9 5591.0 3795.0 3783.8' 1897.4 2260.2 2246.8 567.0 582.6 888.6 574.6 2095.3 1083.0 1502.6 185.1 479.8 714.3 1324.4 1579.4

kg.cm 626.0 461.4 135.8 464.1 1944.3 2007.3 492.7 880.2 I3719 929.5 1401.2 63.0 387.5 219.4 471.8 744.2 261.3 260.1 159.6 272.6 41.5 217.2 193.0

kg.cm .2070.6 1292.2 349.6 913.8 612.6 764.5 222.2 401.3 112.9 434.4 668.0 152.0 179.0 137.2 233.6 370.6 104.6 129.1 319.4 730.3 127.6 457.5 407.4

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

128.57 251.14 257.14 257.14 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107.14 300.00 154.52 214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56

(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

5310.0 45001.2 2702.7 4.5 1657.9 1810.3 1096.8 1254.0 507.6 845.0 1001.2 274.9 280.3 427.6 276.9 1009.4 523.4 724.6 383.8 974.7 1482.7 2749.4 3278.5

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction h fHorizontal Vertical3 0.0 1050.2 0.0 1051.2 900.0 - 2160.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 900.0 Reaction A Vertical) 1050.2 1051.2 - 2160.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

147

SP : 38(sbrT)-1987

TABLE Span Wind force
~MBEII

PO1 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

900.00 cm I50 ka/m*
LENGTH

600.00 7

at

I in 3 135.53 cm
MOMENT

COMPRESSION

MOMENT

TENSION kg (1)

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 3236.6 2478.6 840.2 1615.8 5601.9 5591.0 3795.0 3783.8 1897.4 2260.2 2246.8 567.0 582.6 888.6 574.6 2095.3 1083.0 1502.6 349.6 902.4 1349.4 2501.8 2983.5

kg.cm 1327.0 934.3 269.2 878.6 1944.3 2007.3 492.7 880.2 137.9 929.5 1401.2 63.0 387.5 279.4 471.8 744.2 261.3 260. I 299.3 545.7 86. I 411.5 365.9

kg.cm 2070.6 1292.2 349.6 973.8 1283.2 1523.0 425.7 766.8 195.2 825.8 1264.6 239.7 341.2 258.2 438.8 695.4 205.9 242.4 319.4 730.3 127.6 457.5 407.4

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 16 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 42.86 128.57 214.29 107. I4 300.00 154.52 214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

53 10.0 4501.2 2702.7 4.5 3536.7 3763.2 2356.4 2590.1 I I 17.0 1691.1 1922.8 518.6 529.7 807.9 523.0 1906.7 988.0 1368.5 383.8 974.7 1482.7 2749.4 3278.5

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates. force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Right Left Reaction A Vertical 3 fHorizontal (Horizontal 0.0 1050.2 0.0 0.0 1051.2 0.0 1350.0 - 3240.0 1350.0 Reaction A Vertical \ 1050.2 1051.2 - 3240.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

148

SF : 38(S&T~1987

TABLE Span Wind _. 900.00 cm 200 kg/m2
LENGTH

102 STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I'in 3 135.53 cm
MOMENT

force

600.00 I

ai

MEMBER

IMPRESSION

MOMENT

TENSION kg (1)

cm i 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 I4 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 128.57 257. i4 257.14 257.14 135.53 135.53 135.53 135.53 z35.53 135.53 i 35.53 42.K6 128.57 214.29 107.!4 300.00 154.52 214.29 143.75 154.52 214.29 197.56 197.56 (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) Cl) (1) (1) Cl) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 4978.9 3867.2 j458.0 2153.8 5601.9 5591.0 3795.0' 3783.8 1897.4 2260.2 2246.8 567.0 582.6 888.6 574.6 2095.3 1083.0 1502.6 514.1 1324.9 1984.4 3679.3 4387.6

kg.cm 2028.0 1407.2 402.6 1293.1 1944.3 2007.3 492.7 880.2 131.9 929.5 1401.2 63.0 387.5 279.4 471.8 144.2 261.3 260.1 438.9 818.9 130.7 605.8 538.7

kgsm 2070.6 1292.2 349.6 973.8 1953.9 2281.4 629. I 1132.4 277.5 1217.2 1861.2 327.5 503.3 379.2 643.9 1020.1 307.2 355.7 319.4 730.3 127.6 457.5 407.4

(1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) 12) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

c-3
(2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

5310.0 4501.2 2702.7 4.5 5415.6 5716.2 3616.0 3926.3 1726.4 2531.2 2844.5 762.4 779.0 1188.2 769. I 2804.1 1452.7 20 12.4 383.8 974.1 1482.7 2749.4 3278.5

? In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is aDplicd !o force from wind load combination Left Reaction fiorizontal 0.0 0.0 1800.0 Right Reaction A Vertical > 1050.2 1051.2 - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

I Vertical ) f Horizontal 1050.2 0.0 1051.2 0.0 - 4320.0 1800.0

149

SF : 38@&T~1987

TABLE 103STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 900.00 cm 100 kg/m* LENGTH cm 128.57 257. I4 257. I4 257. I4 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32.14 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 181.83 137.31 143.75 181.83 170.84 170.84 Spacing Panels
IMPRESSION kg

force

600.00 7

cm

Slope Purlins

at

I in 4 132.53 cm
M0htENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

kg.cm 1238.8 768.2 171.8 524.2 3516.5 3238.3 521.7 I104.8 4.7 1209.6. 1917.7 327. I 596.9 407. I 708. I I 158.4 362.0 312.9 139.4 475.6 52.3 240.7 305.7

kg.cm 3765.7 2148.9 480.3 1239.9 1168.9 1197.2 209.4 451.5 46.7 499.9 809.3 28.4 245. I 116.5 309.3 507.9 137.3 138.5 316.1 1289.7 173.6 575.7 725.4

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 IS I6 17 I8 I9 20 21 22 23

(2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

2375.8 1905.4 820.8 806. I 7680.2 7686.4 5267.5 52SO.9 2633.5 3127.6 3108. I 589.7 619.9 945.9 603.9 2229.3 1422.4 1807.7 218.4 526.4 758. I 1433.0 1702.8

(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

7444.6 6382.9 3835. I 9.0 2510.7 2624. I 1702.7 1814.9 821.3 1150.7 1261.5 251.9 263.0 401.5 256.8 947.5 606.8 769.2 513.1 1212.3 1783.8 3371.8 4006.3

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is. applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Vertical f Horizontal 0.0 1027.0 0.0 1210.5 675.0 - 2160.0 Right 1 ( Horizontal 0.0 0.0 675.0 Reaction A Vertical1027.0 1210.5 - 2160.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

150

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 900.00 cm 150 kg/m2
LENGTH cm

104 STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels
C0MPRFsi0N kg

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION

force

600.00 7

at

I in 4 132.53 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

kg.cm 2506.4 1522. I 340.4 999.8 3516.5 3238.3 521.7 1104.8 4.7 1209.6 1917.7 321. I 596.9 407.1 708. I 1158.4 362.0 312.9 263.5 935.4 108.3 460. I 583.5

kg (1)
(1)
(1)

kg.cm 3765.7 2148.9 480.3 1239.9 2358.5 2353.2 403.9 867.5 69.7 958. I 1544.0 48.9 470.3 334.8 585.9 961.3 268.2 261.6 316.1 1289.7 173.6 575.7 725.4

I 2

3
4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 I6 17 18, 19 20 21 22 23

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32.14 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 181.83 137.31 143.7s 181.83 170.84 170.84

(2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (1) (I) (I) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

4845.0 3956.7 1891.3 Im7.5 7680.2 7686.4 5267.5 5250.9 2633.5 3127.6 3108.1 589.7 619.9 945.9 603.9 2229.3 1422.4 1807.7 415.9 998.3 1444.2 2729.8 3243.7

7444.b
6382.9 3835. I 9.0 5088.0 5259.2 3460.7 3626.2 1685.2 2264.4 2427.2 479.3 501.2 765.1 489.1 1805.0 1155.0 1465.0 513.1 1212.3 1783.8 337 I .8 4006.3

(1)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (I) (1). (1) (1) (I)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind Load reactlon

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Left Reaction A Horizontal Vertical 0.0 1027.0 0.0 1210.5 1012.5 - 3240.0

Right j (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1012.5

Reaction A Vertical> 1027.0 1210.5 - 3240.0

151

51' : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 900.00 cm 200 kg/m*
LENGTH

105 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF-TRUSS 6OO.OtJ cm I
MOMEN.T

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION

force

at

I in 4 132.53 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

COMPRESSION

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (:) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 7314.3 6008. I 2961.9 1609.0 7680.2 7686.4 5267.5 5250.9 2633.5 3127.6 3108.1 589.7 619.9 945.9 603.9 2229.3 1422.4 1807.7 613.4 1470. I 2130.3 4026.7 4754.6

kg.cm 3774.0 2276. I 508.9 1475.3 3516.5 3238.3 521.7 1104.8 4.7 1209.7 1917.7 327. I 596.9 407. I 708. I I 158.4 362.0 312.9 387.5 1395.2 164.3 679.5 861.2

kg
(1)
(1) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 7444.6 6382.9 3835. I 9.0 7665.2 7894.3 5218.6 5437.5 2549. I 3378. I 3592.9 706.7 739.4 1128.7 721.4 2662.4 1703.2 ,2160.8 513.1 1212.3 1783.8 3371.8 4006.3

kg.cm 3765.7 2148.9 480.3 1239.9 3548.2 3509.2 598.4 1283.4 92.6 1416.2 2278.7 102.7 695.6 493.2 X62.5 1414.7 399. I 384.7 316.1 1289.7 173.6 575.7 725.4

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 17 I8 I9 20 21 22 23

128.57 257.14 257.14 257.14 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 132.53 32. I4 96.43 160.71 80.36 225.00 143.75 181.83 137.31 143.75 181.83 170.84 170.84

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (1) (1) (1) (I)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I in bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction f Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction r-forizontal 00 0.0 1350.0 Right Reaction A Vertical > 1027.0 1210.5 - 4320.0

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Vertical 1 (Horizontal 1027.0 0.0 1210.5 0.0 - 4320.0 1350.0

152

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 106 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF
Span Wind force

TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
cm Slope Purlins at

900.00 cm
100 kg/m*

Spacing Panels

600.00 7

I

in

5 cm

131.12

MEMRER

LESGI H cm

COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (I) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 3155.6 2640.7 1329.0 641.3 9714.2 9760.6 6769.2 6142.4 3384.4 4002.9 3972.4 595.9 642.6 981.5 616. 2314.2 1766.9 2123.4 253.4 569.5 830.4 1593.6 1884.4 wind force load from combination othei wind than load

MOWST kgsm 2004.8 1144.4 231.6 639. I 5565.5 4737.5 56X.8 1420.9 156.1 1583. I 2616.9 828.0 924.0 593.

TCUSION

MOMENT kg.cm 5946.7 3225. I 665.4 1613.0

kg
(1) (1) (1) (1) (2)
95 17.4 8279. I 4979.4 16.4 3268. 3369. 2262.1 2346.0 1107.2 1447.2 1529.3 237.4 254.4 3'89.0 244.5 918.4 703.9 843.7 637.6 1404.7 2093.0 4016.3 4748.8

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket bracket

128.57 257.14 257.14 257. I4 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 77. I4 128.57 64.29 I80.00 138.48 164.65 134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94 156.94 indicates indicates reduction force force due from to

(2) (2) (2)
(2)

I I

1883.0 1717.4 215.0 548.4 41.3 613.5 1033.8 165.6 358.2 239.6 420.3 714.2 172.4 158. 326.8 1978.8 231.6 732.5 1149.5

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

I

I

1033.8 1752.8 468.9 381.9 134.4 718.0 72.0 286.0 454. I

I

to

I In
25

combination

wind

load

Percent

ia applied

combination

Left f Horizontal Dead Live Wind load load load reaction reaction reattion (without 25 percent reduction) 0.0 0.0 540.0

Reaction A Vertical 1016.0 1309.1 2349.0

Right \ /Horizontal 0.0 0.0 540.0

Reaction A Vertical 1016.0 1309.1 - 2349.0

j

153

SP :38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind force 900.00 cm

107 STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels CoMPRESSloU kg

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins TFPSIOY kg at

600.00 7

I

in 5 cm

150 kg/m!

131.12 MOMENT kg.cm 5946.7

MEMHER

LENGTH

Moswu kgcm 398

cm 128.57 2 3 4 5 6 7 x Y IO 11 I? 13 14 I5 Ih
17

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

6292.9 5317.6 2809.5 959.2 9714.2 9760.6 6169.2 6742.4 3384.4 4002.9 3972.4 595.9 642.6 981.5 ,616.l 2314.2 1766.9 2123.4 484.6 IOR4.4 1588.6 3048.5 3604 7 load from combination other wnd than load

1.6

(I!

9517.4 8279. 4979.4 16.4 6493.9 6653.0 4502.4 4623.X 2215.3 2826.X 2Y44.X 453.7 4x7.0 744.3 467.7 I :56.X I3454 Ihl3.6 h17.h I304 :093 4Olh 474x ' II 7 i; I

257.14 257.14 257. I4 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 13l.I2 131 12 131 IL 25 71 77 .I3 28.57
h4

2245. I 456.5 1223.0 5565.5 4737.5 568.8 1420.9

(1) (1) (1) (2)
1, 2)

3225.

I

665.4 1613.5 3736.4 3352.3 415.8 1055.4 83.2 1179.6 1979.5 384. I 688.7 456.7 799.9 135x.4 335.4 23Y.7 326.X lY.78.X 23 I.6 732.5 1149.5

(2)
(2)

(1)
(1)

156. I
15x3.1 2616.9 XX.0 924.0 593. I 1033 8 1752.x 46X 9 3x1.3 255.2 1401.3 141.1) 549. I i(6Y 6

(1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) due to wind

0) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

2')

80 00 38.4X 164.65 134.23 13X.48 164.65 156.94 156.94 indicates lndlcates forw IS applied

IX 19 20 21 22 23 2 In bracket bracket

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (0 (1) (1)

I In

f~irce tram

comhlnation

ulnd

load

LS Percent

reduction

to forw

comhinclrlon lxft Reactton

lIead I.l\e Wind

load load load

reaction reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

00
0.0 c;lO.O

1016.0 1309. I - 3523.5

0.0 0.0 810.0

1016.0 1309. - 3523.5

I

154

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind force 900.00 cm 200 kg/m* LENGTH cm 128.57 257. I4 257. I4 157. I4 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 131.12 25.71 77. I4 128.57 64.29 I80.00 138.48 164.65 134.23 138.48 164.65 156.94 156 94

108 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Slope Purlins at TENSION kg 9517.4 8279. I 4919.4 16.4 9719.7 9937.0 6142.7 6901.6 3323.5 4206.3 4360.4 670.0 719.5 1099.6 691.0 2595.2 1986.9 2383.4 637.6 1404.7 2093.0 4016.3 4748.8 I in 5 131.12 cm

600.00 cm 7 MOMENT kgcm 5958.4 3345.1 681.3 1807.0 5565.5 4737.5 568.8 1420.9 156.1 1583. I 2616.9 828.0 924.0 593. I 1033.8 1752.8 468.9 3X1.9 376.0 2084.5 214.5 812.1 1285.0

MEMBER
I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 I3 14 I5 I6 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23

MOMENT
kg.cm 5946.7 3225.1 665.4 1613.0 5589.9 4987.3 616.5 1562.5 125.2 1745.8 2925.2 602.6 1019.2 673.7 1179.4 2002.7 498.5 441.4 326.8 1978.8 231.6 732.5 1149.5

(2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)
!I)

(1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

11)
(1)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

(2)

9430.2 7994.6 4290.0 1277.2 9714.2 9760.6 6569.2 6142.4 3384.4 4002.9 3972.4 595.9 642.6 981.5 616.1 23 14.2 1766.9 2 123.4 715.8 1599.3 2346.7 4503.5 5325.0

(1) (1) (1) (1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

2 In bracket Indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction Reaction 0.0 0.0 1080.0 1016.0 1309.1 - 4698.0

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 1080.0

1016.0 1309. I - 4698.0

155

YP : 38(S&T)_1987

TABLE 109STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS
Span Wind 1200.00 cm 100 kg/m?
LENGTH

RESULTS)
Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
COhlPRESSION kg

450.00 9

cm

I in 3
at 140.55 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

cm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 I5 I6 17 18 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.61 266.67 140.55 140.55 140 55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 3ll.ll 155.56 400.00 160.25 222.22 298. I4 .173.56 160.25 222.22 29X. 14 240.37 240.37

kg.cm 476.7 494.2 188.5 118.4 370.0 3057.6 5979.0 6300.4 7554.8 7176.2 6809.5 6863.2 5574.7 2705.4 909.7 719.4 181.9 121.7 147.2 621.5 513.9 212.1 154.7 314.3 192.9 67.9 40.0 235. I 153.3

kg.cm 1676.9 1306.6 442.2 280.7 744.4 3500.0 4665 0 6996.6 7998.9 8508.3 820 I .9 6568.7 4784.7 3018.4 566.6 350.9 89.8 61.8 70.9 319.2 262.2 III.7 79.8 620.5 513.6 172.3 61.5 468.0 310.4

(2) (2) (2)

(2) (2)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 1)
1) 1) 1) 1) 1) 1)

(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

1674.4 1342.7 649.8 41.7 1078.6 5779.4 5760.0 4406.2 4408.6 2978.0 2987.4 1552.6 1769.5 17x1.3 423.9 447.3 448.6 679.3 446.7 2065.5 829.4 1154.7 1548.8 122.4 378.0 561.7 767.4 1240.5 1416.6

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

54'4.1 4838.9 3456.2 2074.7 2.8 1825.8 1925.5 1351.4 1466.5 864.2 982.6 378.5 600.8 720.6 214.0 223.7 223.9 339.6 223.5 1033.5 416.4 578.3 775.4 244.4 735.3 1134.0 1533.9 2479.4 2831.2

indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket Indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Re_action I\ Vertica> CHorizontal 0.0 1018.9 0.0 1051.2 900.0 - 2160.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 900.0 Rpaction A Vertical > 1018.9 1051.2 - 2160.0

2 In bracket

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

156

SP :38(s&T)_19E7

TABLE 110STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS) -I--Span Wind -force

1200.00 cm
150 kg/m*

Spacmg Panels COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (I) (I) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) 0) (1) (1) (Ii (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 3522.0 2907. 1612.6 320.4 1617.3 5779.4 5760.0 4406.2 4408.6 2978.0 2987.4 1552.6 1769.5 1781.3 423.9 447.3 448.6 679.3 446.7 2065.5 X29.4 1154.7 1548.X 22X.6 702.8 10600.X 1434. I 231X.4 2647.5 wind load from combination other wind than load I

450.00 9 MIME\ kg.cm 1024.6 982.5 364.4 229.4 692.4 3057.6 5979.0 6300.4 7554.x 7176.2 6X09.5 6X63.2 5574.7 2705.4 909.7 719.4 1X1.9 121.7 147.2 621.5 513.9 212.! lS4.7 586.0 36X.X 133.7 71.4 439..l 2X7.3

cm

Slope

I

in

3
cm -

Purlins I TESS104 kg (I) (1) (I) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (I) 5474. 4H38.9 3456.2 2074.7 2.8 3805.3 3951.4 2X40.3 3013.4

a:

140.55 MOMENT kg.cm

MEMRER

LENGTH

cm

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 16 i7 I8 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 2h 27 28 29 2 In 1 In 25 bracket bracket

133.33 266.67 266.61 266.61 266.67 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 I JO. 55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 3ll.lI 155.56 400.00 160.25 222.22 298. I4 173.56 160.25 222.22 298. I4 240.37 240.37 Indicates indicates force force is applied due from to

I

1676.9 1306.6 442.2 2X0.7 744.4 4685.7 6293.2 9448.0 10801.6 11491.7 11078.7 8871.3 6464.3 4077.3 1017.X 659. I 168.2 I15.i 133.5 593.5 4X8.2 205.7 148.3 620.5 513.6 172.3 61.5 46X.0 310.4

I X45.9
2025.3 x54.3 1227.8 1409.7 399.2 41X.1 418.7 634.7 417.8 1931.5 777.7 1080.6 1449.0 244.4 735.3 I 134.0 1533.9 2479.4 2831.2

to

combination force

wind

load

Percent

reduction

combination Left Reaction Right Reaction _ 1018.9 1051.2 - 3240.0 _

Dead Love Wind

load load load

reaction reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

0.0 0.0 I350.0 -

1018.9 1051.2 3240.0

0.0 0.0 1350.0

157

SP : 38(S&T)4987

TABLE Span Wind `force MEMBER 1200.00 cm 200 kg/m* LENGTH cm 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.61 266.61 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 311.11 155.56 400.00 160.25 222.22 298. I4 `173.56 160.25 222.22 298. I4 240.37 240.37

111 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins 1 in 3 140.55 cm MOMENT kg.cm 1676.9 1306.6 442.2 280.7 744.4 5R71.3 R241.5 I 1899.4 13604.4 14475.0 13955.6 I 1173.9 8144.0 5 136. I 1469.0 967.3 246.7 168.5 196.1 867.7 714.2 299.6 216.7 620.5 513.6 172.3 61.5 468.0 310.4

450.00 cm 9 MOMENT kgcm 1572.5 1470.8 540.3 340.4 1014.8 3057.6 5979.0 6300.4 1554.8 7176.2 6109.5 6863.2 5574.7 2705.4 099.7 719.4 181.9 121.7 147.2 621.5 5 13.9 212.1 154.7 857.7 544.7 199.5 102.7 643.0 421.2 (I) (1) (I) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1)

at

COMPRESSION kg

TENSION kg 5474. I 4838.9 3456.2 2074.7 2.8 5784.9 5977.3 4329.2 4560.3 2827.6 3068.0 1330.1 1854.8 2098.7 584.4 612.5 613.5 929.9 612.0 2829.4 I 139.0 1582.8 2122.5 244.4 735.3 I 134.0 1533.9 2479.4 2831.2

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1)
(1) (1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 16 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

(1)

(1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1)
(1) (2)

(2) (2) (2)
(2) (2)

5369.5 4411.6 2515.4 682.4 2156. I 5719.4 5760.0 4406.2 4408.6 2978.0 2987.4 1552.6 1769.5 1781.3 423.9 447.3 448.6 679.3 446.7 2065.5 829.4 1154.7 i548.8 334.9 1027.5 1553.9 2100.9 3396.3 3878.3

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combinatton I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Rrght Left Reaction A (Horizontal Vertical 1 f Horrzontal 0.0 1018.9 0.0 0.0 IOSi.2 0.0 1800.0 - 4320.0 1800.0 Re_action A Vertical ' 1018.9 1051.2 - 4320.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

158

SP : I(S&T~lW7

TABLE 112STEEL
Span Wind 1200.00 cm IO0 kg/m*
LENGTH cm

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
450.00 9 cm Slope Purlins

I in 4
at 137.44 cm
MOMENT

force

MEMBER

tiMPRES.SION kg

MOMENT

TENSION kg

kg.cm 1270.9 725.4 193.2 158.9 389.7 3422.3 2940.4 504.2 971.4 386.8 728.0 35.8 888.0 1278.6 528.0 493.p 341.1 272.4 390.6 712.6 361.6 158.5 253.7 I IS.7 446.8 51.7 54.5 192.9 162.9 (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1)

kg.cm
3681.0 1970.8 510.7 407.3 885.2 1190.9 1113.9 202.4 404.3 172.8 321.0 48.8 384.9 561.3 98.8 208.9 I48 I 121.6 176.4 325.2 140.1 69.0 115.7 254.5 1182.2 161.1 147.7 440. I 371.6

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 IS I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 33.33 100.00 166.67 233.33 116.67 300.00 149.07 188.56 240.37 157.23 149.07 188.56 240.37 200.69 200.69

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2). (2) (2) (2)

2579.2 2217.2 1354.6 4yJ. I 808.0 7874.3 7893.8 6060.6 6047.5 4041.6 4035.0 2021.3 2295.0 2285.6 449.5 415.0 478.0 726.7 467.3 2201.3 1089. I 1388.6 1767.2 137.8 412.1 602.9 774. I 1296.2 1473.3

_

7633.3 6854.3 4903.0 2942.8 4.3 2707. I 2800.9 2072.4 2159.5 1366.5 1456.2 660.2 873.8 962.3 199.8 209.4 210.4 320.4 206.3 971.5 482.5 613.5 780.4 312.0 908.6 1365.8 1754.4 2937. I 3338.4

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left REaction A Vertical 3 Horizontal 0.0 996.3 0.0 1210.5 675.0 - 2160.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 675.0 R_eaction
A

f Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Vertical 7 996.3 121O.S - 2160.0

159

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

Span Wind

force

TABLE --1200.00 cm 150 kg m*
LENGTH
at!

113 STEEL

LEAN-T3 Spacing Panels
cQMPREssIoN

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION kg

450.(&I cm 9 MQMENT kgcm 2529.6 1421.7 376.3 307.3 734.3 3422.3 2940.4 504.2 977.4 386.8 728.0 35.8 888.0 1278.6 528.0 493.4 341.1 272.4 390.6 712.6 361.6 158.5 253.7 216.7 870.3 104.9 106.8 363.8 307.3

1 in 4
at 137.44 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

k8
(3
(21 (2) (2) 0) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 5E61.2 4486.4 2862.0 1231.9 1211.3 7874.3 7893.8 6060.6 6047.5 4041.6 4035.0 2021,3 2295.0 2285.6 449.5 475.0 478.0 726.7 467.3 2201.3 1089. I 13B3.6 1767.2 259.5 771.9 1135.6 1458.2 2441.5 2775.2

kg.cm 3681.0 1970.8 510.7 407.3 885.2 2363.8 2168.6 389.0 771.9 324.8 604.7 79.2 727.7 1058.4 237.6 396.9 279.9 228.5 330.7 608.4 271.4 130.3 216.5 254.5 1182.2 161.1 147.7 440.1 371.6

I 2 3 4 3 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 I3 I4 15 I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33

266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 33.33 100.00 166.67 233.33 116.67 300.00 149.07 188.56 240.37 `I57.23 149.07 168.56 240.37 200.69 200.69

(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

7633.3 6854.3 4903.0 2942.8 4.3 5393.8 5537.9 4134.7 4263. I 2734.0 2867.5 1332.6 1699.3 1830.5 375.8 394.5 396.6 603.6 388.5 1830.0 908. I I 155.4 1469.9 312.0 908.6 1365.8 1754.4 2937. I 3338.4

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left -Reaction
h

Right fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 1012.3

Reaction
I\

r Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1012.5

Vertical > 996.3 1210.5 - 3240.0

Vertical `r 996.3 1210.5 - 3240.0

160

SP :38(!3&T~1987
TABLE Span Wind 1200.00 cm 200 kg/ma 114 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels ROOF TRUSS cm (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Slope I

force

450.00 9

Purlins

at

in 4 137.44 cm
MOMIZNT

MEMBER

LENGTH
CTII

~MPR@S.SlON kg

MOMENT kg.cm 3788.3 2118.1 559.4 455.7 1079.1 3422.3 2940.4 504.2 977.4 386.8 728.0 35.8 888.0 1278.6 528.0 493.4 341.1 272.4 390.6 712.6 361.6 158.5 253.7 317.6 1293.8 158.0 159:1 534.8 451.7 (1) (1) (11 (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 0) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1)

TENSION kg 7633.3 6854.3 4903.0 2942.8 4.3 8080.6 8274.9 6197.0 6266.7 4101.6 4278.8 2094.9 2524.7 2698.6 551.8 579.7 582.7 886.8 570.7 2688.4 1333.8 1697.3 2159.3 312.0 908.6 1365.8 1754.4 2937. I 3338.4

k&cm
3681.0 1970.8 �10.7 407.3 885.2 3540.7 3223.4 575.6 1139.6 476.7 888.4 109.7 1070.5 1555.5 376.4 584.8 411.7 335.4 485.0 89 IQ 402.7 191.7 317.3 254.5 1182.2 161.1 147.7 440.1 371.6

I

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I? 13 14 15 16 I! 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.61 266.67 266.67 266.67 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 33.33 106.00 166.67 233.33 116.67 300.00 149.07 188.56 240.37 157.23 149.07 188.56 240.37 200.69 200.69

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

7743.2 6755.5 4369.4 1974.6 1614.6 7814.3 7893.8 6060.6 6047.5 4041.6 4035.0 2021.3 2295.0 2285.6 449.5 475.0 478.0 726.7 467.3 2201.3 1089. I 1388.6 1767.2 381.3 1131.8 1668.3 2142.2 3586.9 4077.0

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction ti . r Horirontal Vertical k 0.0 996.3 0.0 1210.5 1350.0 - 4320.0 Right Reaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

.

0.0 0.0 1350.0

996.3 1210.5 - 4320.0

161

.SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE

115 STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I in 5 135.97 cm
MOMENT

*an
Wind force MEMBER

1200.00 cm 100 kg/m*

450.00 9

at

LENGTH
cm 133.33 266.61 266.67 266.61 266.61 135.97 1.35.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.91 135.97 135.97 135.97 26.67 80.00 13x33 186.67 93.33 240.00 143.60 170.75 208.37 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (I) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

COMPRESSION

MOMENT

TENSIOS

kg 3404.8 3020.3 1977.5 928.0 644.9 9977.8 10046.4 7792.2 7770.9 5197.1 5188.7 2599.3 2945.9 2933.0 453.5 492.5 498.3 755.5 481.2 2288. I 1352.1 1631.7 1989.2 156.9 440.1 660.2 813.7 1404.8 1593.4

kg.cm 2056.0 1089.4 268.4 182.9 437. I 5.45 I .6 4328.2 600.3 1291.0 372.8 818.4 90.3 1061.4 1608.8 1123.3 766.6 445.6 359.6 547.5 993.6 484.6 178.9 286.2 109.4 678.9 73.9 56.1 210.5 238.7 (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

kg
9776.3 8897.2 6370.7 3824.3 7.3 351 I.8 3602.9 2733.7 2798.5 181 I.0 1880.9 887.4 1103.6 1171.6 187.9 202.6 204.7 310.9 198.3 942.6 559.4 673.0 820. I 380.5 1039.0 1602.4 1975.7 3410.2 3867.8

kg.cm 5833.5 297 I .9 729.4 493.2 1061.0 1926.6 1615.4 229. I 507.6 156.0 331.7 29. I 429.9 6600.4 311.3 307.0 181.6 149.9 230.5 422. I 182.9 73.4 122.5 257 8 1817.7 228.3

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 16 I7 I8 I9 20 51 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

I h6.4
515 I 5x1.1

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction /\ Vertical> 98517 1309.1 2349.0 Right CHorizontal 0.0 0.0 540.0

/\

Reaction Vertical > 985.7 I309.,l 2349.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

.

25 percent

reduction)

r Horizontal 0.0 0.0 540.0

162

SP :38(sEr)-1987
TABLE Span Wind 1200.00 cm 150 kg/m*
LENGTH

116 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

450.00 9

I in 5
at 135.97 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

COMPRESSION kg

MOMENT

TENSION

cm 133.33 266.6? 266.67 266.67 266.67 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 26.67 80.00 133.33 186.67 93.33 240.00 143.60 170.75 208.27 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38

kg.cm 4023.6 2112.8 520.1 353.8 826.6 5451.6 4328.2 600.3 1291.0 372.8 818.4 90.3 1061.4 1608.8 1123.3 766.6 445.6 359.6 547.5 993.6 484.6 178.9 286.2 205.7 1311.1 147.6 111.9 398.8 451.6

kg
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 12) (2) (2)
(2) (1) (1) (1)
9776.3 8897.2 6370.7 3824.3 7.3 6874.8 7022.5 5355.7 5449.5 3553.6 3657. I 1749.8 2129.9 2229.9 354.9 383.2 387.3 588.0 374.9 1782.5 1056.9 1272.4 1550.5 380.5 1039.0 1602.4 1975.7 3410.2 3867.8

kg.cm 5833.5 2971.9 729.4 493.2 1061.0 3768.1 3120.2 440.3 969.4 294.1 638.4 58.2 815.9 1249.8 647.8 584.0 344.2 282.8 433.9 793.2 352.4 138.9 229.9 257.8 1817.7 228.3 166.4 515.1 581.1

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)
(1) (1)

(`? (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

6682.0 5963.6 29924 2008.0 966.2 9977.5 10046.4 7792.2 7770.9 5197.1 5188.7 2599.3 2945.9 2933.0 453.5 492.5 498.3 755.5 481.2 2288. I 1352. I 1631.7 1989.2 296.6 827.5 1248.4 1538.8 2656.5 3013.1

(1)
(1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left l$eaction Right Reaction

Giizzz-vertical)=
Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction (without 25 percent reduction) 0.0 0.0 810.0 985.7 1309.1 3523.5 0.0 0.0 810.0 985.7 1309.1 3523.5

i63

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 12ooOO cm 200 kg/m2 LENOTH cm 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 135.97 i35.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 26,67 80.00 133.33 186.67 93.33 240.00 143.M) 170.75 208.27 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38

117 STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

450.00 9

I in 5
at 135.97 cm MOMENT kg.cm 5833.5 2971.9 729.4 493.2 1061.0 5609.5 4625.1 651.5 1431.1 432. I 939.0 87.3 1201.8 1839.2 984.4 861.0 506.9 415.7 637.4 1164.4 522.0 204.4 337.2 257.8 1817.7 228.3 166.4 515.1 581.1

MEME&

COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (1) (I) (I) (I) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 0) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 9959.2 8906.9 6007.4 3088.0 1287.4 9977.8 10046.4 7792.2 7770.9 5197.1 5188.7 2599.3 2945.9 2933.0 453.5 492.5 498.3 755.5 481.2 2288. I 1352. I 1631.7 1989.2 436.3 1214.9 1836.6 2263.9 3908.2 4432.8

MOMENT kgcm 5991.2 3136.2 771.7 524.7 1216.1 545 I .6 4328.2 600.3 1291.0 372.8 818.4 90.3 1061.4 1608.8 1123.3 766.6 445.6 359.6 547.5 993.6 484.6 178.9 286.2 301.9 1943.3 221.3 167.0 587.0 664.5

TENSION kg

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

(1) (1)

(1)
(1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2) (2)
(2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

9776.3 8897.2 6370.7 3824.3 7.3 10237.9 10442.2 7977.7 8100.4 5296.2 5433.3 2612.2 3156.3 3288.2 521.9 563.9 570.0 8b5.I 551.5 2622.4 1554.4 1871.7 2280.9 380.5 1039.0 1602.4 1975.7 3410.2 3867.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination

Left Reaction
A

Right Horizontal 0.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction #ind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

horizontal 0.0 0.0 1080.0

Vertical `r / 985.7 1309. I - 4698.0

0.0
1080,O

Reaction h Vertical J 985.7 1309.1 - 4698.0

164

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TARLE Span Wind 1200.00 cm 100 kg/m2 LENGTH em 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 140.55 14OSS 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 311.111 155.56 400.00 160.25 222.22 298.14 173.56 160.25 222.22 298.14 240.37 240.37

118 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins 1 in 3 140.55 cm MOMENT kg.cm 2300.4 1792.5 606.7 385.1 1021.2 4754.9 6330.2 9492.5 10852.3 11543.2

force

600.00 cm 9

at

MEMBER

MOMEN 1

TENSION kg

kg.cm

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 ,I4 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 2s 26 27 28 29

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (1) (I) (I) (I) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

2074.5 1650.5 166.6 115.5 1438.2 7928.3 7901.8 6044.5 6047.8 4085.3 4098.2 2129.9 2421.4 2443.7 581.5 613.6 615.4 931.9 612.7 2833.5 1137.8 1584.0 2124.1 156.1 482.8 724. I 978.9 1582.4 1807.1

587.2 621.2 238.6 149.7 471.8 4194.5 8202.2 8643.1 10363.9 9844.5 934 1.4 9415.2 7647.5 3711.3 1248.0 986.8 249.6 167.0 202.0 852.5 705.0 291.0 212.2 401.2 244.8 85.6 51.6 300.0 195.5

(1) (1)
(1)

(11 (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

7509.5 6638.1 4741.3 2846.1 3.8 2261.5 2401.1 1674.6 1828.0 1066.2 1223.9 459.8 750.0 909.3 273.0 285.4 285.6 433.1 285.2 1318.4 531.2 731.7 989.1 335.3 1008.8 1555.7 2104.2 3401.3 3883.9

11127.3
8911.9 6491.0 4095.0 129.2 441. I 114.4 78.9 90.3 407.6 334.8 143.0 102.0 851.3 704.6 236.3 84.3 642.0 4'25.8

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Right r Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1200.0 Reaction %tziY 1438.2 14016 - 2880.0

Left Reaction
A

f Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1200.0

Vertical > 1438.2 14p1.6 - 2880.0

165

SP : 38(33&T)-1987

TARLE Span Wind 1200.00 cm I50 kg/m* LENGTH cm 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.61 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 311.11 155.56 400.00 160.25 222.22 298.14 173.56 160.25 222.22 298.14 240.37 240.37

119 STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

600.00 9

1 in 3
at 140.55 cm MOMENT kg.cm 2300.4 1792.5 606.7 385. I 1021.2 6335.8 8501.1 L2761.1 14589.4 15521.0 14963. I 11982.0 8730.6 5506.8 1330.8 858.0 219.0 150.0 173.8 773.3 636. I 268.3 193.2 851.3 704.6 236.3 84.3 642.0 425.8

MEMBER

COMPRFSSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) 0) (1) (11 (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 4537.9 3736.5 2050.4 367.3 2156.5 7928.3 7901.8 6044.5 6047.8 4085.3 4098.2 2129.9 2427.4 2443.7 581.5 613.6 615.4 931.9 612.7 2833.5 1137.8 1584.0 2124.7 297.8 915.8 1381.6 1867.9 3019.6 3448.2

MOMENT

TENSION hz (1) (1) 7509.5 6638.1 4741.3 2846. I 3.8 4906.9 5 102.3 3659.8 3890.6 2375.2 2614. I 1094.2 1586.0 1828. I 520.0 544.6 545.3 826.7 544.1 2515.7 1013.0 1407.4 1887.2 335.3 1008.8 1555.7 2104.2 3401.3 3883.9

kg.cm 1317.7 1272.3 473. I 297.8 901.7 4194.5 8202.2 8643.1 10363.9 9844.5 9341.4 9415.2 7647.5 3711.3 1248.0 986.8 249.6 167.0 202.0 852.5 705.0 291.0 212.2 763.5 479.4 173.3 93.4 571.9 374. I

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 IS 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

(1)
(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

(1)

2 In bracket indicates force /due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left peaction
h

Right fiorizontal 0.0 0.0 1800.0

Reaction
*

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

fiorizontal 0.0 0.0 1800.0

Vertical> 1438.2 1401.6 - 4320.0

Vertical3 1438.2 1401.6 - 4320.0

166

TABLE Span Wind force
MEMBER

120 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins lin3 140.55 cm
MOMENT

1200.00 cm 200 kg/ml LENGTH cm 133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 140.55 140.55 i40.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 140.55 44.44 133.33 222.22 311.11 155.56 400.30 !50.25 222.22 298.14 173.56 160.25 222.22 298.14 240.37 240.37

600.00 9

et

ckX+tPRESSION b

h40hfE~~

TENSION kg

kg.cm 2048.2 1923.3 707.6 445.8 1331.6 4194.5 8202.2 8643. I 10363.9 9844.5 9341.4 9415.2 7647.5 3711.3 1248.0 986.8 249.6 167.0 202.0 852.5 705.0 291.0 212.2 1125.7 713.9 261.0 135.2 843.8 552.7

kg.cm 2300.4 1792.5 606.7 385. I 1021.2 7916.7 10816.1 16029.6 18326.4 19498.8 18798.9 15052.1 10970.2 6918.6 1932.4 1269.0 323.6 221.2 257.3 1139.0 937.4 393.6 284.5 851.3 704.6 236.3 84.3 642.0 425.8

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 a 9 10 11 12 13 14 IS 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 2s 26 27 28 29

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) ([I (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

7001.3 5822.4 3334.1 850.0 2874.9 7928.3 7901.8 6044.5 6047.8 4085.3 4098.2 2129.9 2427.4 2443.7 581.5 613.6 615.4 931.9 612.7 2833.5 1137.8 1584.0 2124.7 439.5 1348.8 2039.2 2757.0 4456.8 5089.4

(1) (1) (1) (1)

(1)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)

7509.5 6638. I 4741.3 2846. I 3.8 7546.4 7803.4 5645.1 5953.2 3684.2 4004.4 1728.7 2422.0 2746.9 767.0 803.7 805.0 1220.2 803.1 3713.0 1494.7 2077. I 2785.3 335.3 1008.8 1555.7 2104.2 3401.3 3883.9

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 2400.0

1438.2 1401.6 - 5760.0

0.0 0.0 2400.0

1438.2 1401.6 - 5760.0

167

TABLE Span Wind 1200.00 cm 100 kg/m2 _-1-1_
LENOTH CR-I

121 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels
coMPREx3ION kg (2)

ROOF

TRUSS (ANALYSIS cm -_-.-

RESULTS) Slope Furlins I in 4 137.44 cm
MOMENT

force

600.90 9

at

MEhlssR

MOMENT
kg.cm 1597.1 915.0 244. I 201.0 496. I 4683.9 4024.3 690.0 1337.7 529.4 996.3 49.0 1215.3 1749.9 722.6 675.3 466.9 372.8 534.6 975.3 494.9 216.9 347.2 147.5 564.4 64.7 68.8 245.5 207.4 (I! (II (II (II Ill (2) (2? (21 (21 (21 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (21 (21 (2) (21 (2) (2) (21 (2) (II (I) (II (II (II (I)

-i.ENSION kg

kgcm 5038.0 2697.4 699.0 557.3 I.21 I.5 1497.3 1407.3 256.6 513.2 220.2 408.7 64.1 489.7 714.5 117.8 265.4 188.5 154.9 224.8 414.7 177.2 87.8 147.5 348.3 1618.0 220.4 202.1 692.4 508.6

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 I3 I4 I5 16 I7 I8 I9 20 21. 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 33.33 IOO.00 166.67 233..!3 116.67 300.90 149.07 188.56 240.37 157.23 149.07 188.56 240.37 200.69 209.69

(2) (2) (2) (2) (II (II (II (I) (II (I) (II (II (II (II (I) (II (II (II (II (I) (I) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

3236.8 2774.8 1676.2 574.2 1077.5 10777.2 10803.8 8294.8 8276.8 5531.5 5522.4 2766.4 3141.1 3128.1 615.2 650. I 654.3 994.6 639.5 3012.8 1490.6 1900.5 2418.7 175.5 525.3 767.1 985.7 1650.4 1876.0

10447.3 9381.1 6710.5 4027.6 5.9 3403.9 3525.5 2602.7 ?Tl9.1 i715.0 1834.8 826.8 1104.3 0222.6 254.5 266.6 267.9 407.9 262 6 1.239. I 614,5 781.3 993.8 429. I 1243.5 1869.3 2401.1 4019.9 4569.0

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load iS Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left R_eaction Vertical (iTo';N';;;;l;Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction 0.0 0.0 9OO.lJ 1406.4 1613.9 - 2880.0 `r C?ZZZZTAT~> 0.0 0.0 990.0 1613:9 - 2880.0 Right Reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

168

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE
Span

122 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels
CCtMPRESSlON

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purl&s lin4 137.44 cm
MOMBNT

Wind

fop

1200.00 cm 150 kg/m2
LENGTH

600.00 cm 9
MOMENT

at

MEMBER

cm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18, 19 20 21 22 23 24 2s 26 27 28 29 133.33 266.61 266.61 266.67 266.67 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 33.33 100.00 166.67 233.33 116.67 300.00 149.07 188.56 240.37 157.23 149.07 188.56 240.37 200.69 200.69 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (21 (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg 6679.4 5800.3 3686.1 1564.6 1615.2 10777.2 10803.8 8294.8 8276.8 s31.5 5522.4 2766.4 3141.1 3128.1 615.2 650. I 654.3 994.6 639.5 3012.8 1490.6 1900.5 2418.7 337.8 1005. I 1478.0 1897.8 3177.6 3611.8

kg.cm 3275.3 1843.4 488.2 398.9 955.8 4683.9 4024.3 690.0 1337.7 529.4 996.3 49.0 1215.3 1749.9 722.6 675.3 466.9 372.8 534.6 975.3 494.9 216.9 347.2 282. I 1129.1 135.6 138.5 473.4 399.9

TENSION b

kgxm 5038.0 2697.4 699.0 557.5 1211.5 3063.8 2813.6 505.3 1003.4 422.8 787.0 104.7 946.1 i377.3 302.8 516.1 364.2 297.4 430.6 792.3 352.3 169.6 281.9 348.3 1618.0 220.4 202. I 602.4 508.6

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 12) 3) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

10447.3 9381.1 6710.5 4027.6 5.9 6983.2 7174.8 5352.4 5523.9 3538.3 3716.5 1723.2 2204.9 2380.1 489.1 513.5 516.1 785.5 505.6 2381.7 1182.0 1503.8 1913.0 427.1 1243.5 1869.3 2401.1 4019.9 4569.0

.' In hr.i<hcr ~nd~ca!cs force due to wnd load combination I In hrxkrt ~ndlcatc\ lorce from swmbination other than wind load ? !`cwn! reduction 15 applied to force irom wmd load combination Left R$action Right Faction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 1350.0

1406.4 1613.9 - 4320.0

0.0 0.0 1350.0

1406.4 1613.9 - 4320.0

169

_-Span Wind
MEMBER

TABLE r __--,?2OO.oO cm forix 200 kg/m;
LENGTH

123 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(AKALYSIS

RESULTS) SIQpe Furtins
TENSION kg

600.00 9
MOMENT kg.cm

at

I in 4 137.44 cm
MOMENT

cm

kgxm 5038.0 2697.4 699.0 557.5 1211.5 4630.3 4220.0 754 I lC93.5 625 3 1 165 3 145.3 1403.8 B40. I 487.9 766.7 540 0 440.0 636.3 11700 527.3 251.4 416 i 348.3 !SIR.O 220.4 202 I 602.4 508.6

i
2 3 4 5 4 7 b 9 x0 I* a2 13 I4 15 :6 IT I8 19 10 2:
y't

23 24 25 26 27 2x 29

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 137.44 !37.44 13744 137.44 13'7.44 33 33 lOO.aO 166.67 233.33 116.47 300.00 149.0: 188.56 24Q.37 157.23 149.07 188.56 240.37 200.69 200.69

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2; (1) (1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1)
(1) (1)

1)
1)

1)
1) I! I) I)

(1)
(1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

10122.1 8825.8 5696.0 2554.9 2152.9 10177.2 10803.8 8294.8 8276.8 5531.5 5522.4 2166.4 3141.1 3128.1 615.2 650.1 654.3 994.6 639.5 3012.8 1490.6 1900.5 2418.7 500.1 I484 9 2188.3 2809.9 4704.7 5347.6

4953.6 2771.9 132.3 596.8 1415.4 4683.9 4024.3 690.0 1337.7 529.4 996.3 49.0 1215.3 1749.9 722.6 675.3 466.9 372.8 534.6 975.3 494.9 216.9 347.: 416.7 1693.8 206.4 208.2 701.4 592.4

10447.3 9381.Z 6710.5 44l27.6 5.9 10565.5 10824.1 8102.1 8328.8 5361.7 5398.2 2619.7 3305.5 3537.6 723.8 `X0.3 764.3 1163.2 748.6 3526.3 1149.5 2226.3 ZZ832.2 4'7.1 124?..5 `PH.3 2/q 1 !

4ci%Y
456U 0

Z In bracket indicates force diie to wind load combinatlor, i In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Perce~ reduction is applied to force from wind load combmation bft I&action Right Keaction

Dead load reaction kivc load reaction Wind load reaction
m_l__

(without

25 percent

reductio?)

0.0 0.0 1800.0
.--.

,406.4 1613.21 - 5760.0
.__...-

6.0 3.0 !SOO.O
~

I4OS.4 1613.9 -- 5760.0
-_--~-

__-m--

170

TAIL& l-_-..-__ Spiul %rtd fortx
MEHRER

I24 STEEL

LEAN-TO
Spacing

ROOF

TRUSS
cm

(ANALYSIS

EWWfXSj Slopa RUIins lin5 135.97 cm
MOMENT

12oO.CCt cm 100 kg/m2
LENGTH cm

600.00

Panels
~OMPRESSlON ke

9
M~WENT

at

T~VJ~ICIN kg

kg.cm 2594.3 1377.6 339.5 231.5 556. I 7451.9 5916.4 820.6 17.64.6 509.5

kg.cm
7973.9 4062.3 997.0 674.2 1450.5 2431.5 2044.Y 290.3 644.3 198.6 429.6 36.5 546J 840. S 386,: 390.1 231.0 190.9 293 5 537.8 231.7 9x.2 156.; 452,4 2484.7 312.1 227.5 704.2 794.4

i
2 3 4 5 6 7 g 9 10 II 12

133.33 266;67 266.67 266.67 266.67 a35.97 135.9'7

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1)

135.97
135.97 IJ5.97 135.97 135.97 135.97

(1)
(1) (1) (f) (I) (1)

13
14 15 116 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

i x5.97
26.67 8O.CCl

(1)
(1) (1)

133.5'3
186.67 93.33 240.00 143.66 170.75 208.27 1149.07 143.60 130.75 208.27 179.38 t79.38

(1)
(1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

4293.5 3802.9 2416.2 1141.0 860.0 !3638.9 ! 3732.7 10651.4 00622.3 7104.0 7092.6 3553. I 4026.8 4009.2 619.9 673.3 681.2 1032.7 657.7 3127.6 1'848.3 2230.4 2719.0 199.6 560.6 839.9 1035.2 1787.2 2027.0

1118.7
123.4 1459.8 2199.2 1535.5 1047.8 609.2 491.6 748.4 1358.2 662.4 244.5 39f.2 139.4 859.4 92.8 71.4 267.7 303.6

(1) (1) (19 (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (29 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 62) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (19 (1) (1) (19 (19 (19

13363.5 12161.8 8708.3 5221.6 10.0 4430.9 4550.7 3448.6 3535.5 2283.7 2377. I 1117.7 1397.3 1488.3 239. I 2.51.7 260.4 395.5 252.2 1199.2 711.8 856.3 1043.3 520. I 1420.2 2190.3 2700.7 4661.5 5287.0

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination l In bracket indtcates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction IS applied to force from wind load combination Left R_eaction Right Reaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 720.0

1391.4 1745.5 - 3132.0

0.0 0.0 720.0 ---

139t .4 17455 - 3I32.0

171

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 125STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 0200.00 cm IS0 kg/m*
LENGTH

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRE.~~~~N

tXlO.00 cm 9
MOMENT

Slope

Purlins

at

I in 5 135.97 cm MOMENT

MEMBER

TENSION kg (1)

cm

kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (f) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) fl) (1) (1) (i) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 8663.0 7727.3 5162.7 258 I .O 1288.4 13638.9 13732.7 10651.4 10622.3 7104.0 7092.6 3553. I 4026.8 4009.2 619.9 673.3 681.2 1032.7 657.7 3127.6 1848.3 2230.4 2719.0 385.8 1077. I 1624.2 2002.0 3456. I 3920.0

kg.cm 5217.8 2742. I 675.0 459.3 1075.4 745 I .9 5916.4 82C.6 1764.6 509.5 1118.7 123.4 1450.8 2199.2 1535.5 1047.8 609.2 491.6 748.4 ! 358.2 662.4 244.5 391.2 267.7 1702.4 191.1 144.9 518.7 587.5

kgcm 7973.9 4062.3 997.0 674.2 1450.3 4886.8 wt.3 571.9 1260.0 382.7 830.5 75.3 1061.1 1625.9 835.5 759.4 447.8 368. I 564.8 1032.6 457.7 180.7 299.3 352.4 2484.7 312.1 227.5 704.2 794.4

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 I3 I4 IS I6 I7 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.67 266.67 266.67 266.67 135.97 135.97 $35.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 26.67 80.00 133.33 186.67 93.33 240.00 143.60 170.75 208.27 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38

(1) (1) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

12)
(2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

13363.5 12161.8 8708.3 5227.6 10.0 8915.0 9110.2 6944.7 7070.2 4607. I 4745.4 2267.5 2765.7 2899.3 461.8 498.6 503.9 765.0 487.7 2319.0 1375. I 1655.4 2017.2 520. I 1420.2 2190.3 2700.7 4661.5 5287.0

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Vertical Horizontal 0.0 1391.4 0.0 1745.5 1080.0 - 4698.0 Right {Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1080.0 Reaction Vertical 1391.4 1745.5 - 4698.0

f Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

172

SP:38(S&T)-1987

__"--_ Span Wind force
MEMBER

TABLE 126 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS -_- --_-_ 12xxFu cm Spacing 600.00 cm 2M La/m" Panels 9
COWPRESSION b MOMENT

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins
TENSION b

I in 5
at 135.97 cm
MOMENT

kgxm 7841.3 4106.7 1010.6 687.2 1594.7 745 I .9 5916.4 820.6 1764.6 509.5 I 118.7 123.4 1450.8 2199.2 1535.5 1047.8 609.2 491.6 748.4 13S8.2 662.4 244.5 39L2 396. I 2545.3 289.4 218.5 769.7 871.4 (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

kg.cm 7973.9 4062.3 997.0 674.2 1450.3 7342.0 6057.8 853.6 1875.6 566.8 1231.3 I14 I 1575.6 2411.7 1284.3 1128.7 664.6 545.2 836. I 1527.4 683.7 268.0 442.4 352.4 2484.7 312.1 227.5 704.2 794.4

I

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 I3 I4 IS I6 17 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

133.33 266.47 266.61 266.67 266.67 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135.97 135 99 26.67 80.00 133 33 186.67 93 33 24000 143 Ml 170 75 208 27 149.07 143.60 170.75 208.27 179.38 179.38

(2) (2) (2) (29 (2) (1)

(19 (19
(1) (1) (1) (1) Cl) (1)

(19
(1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1) (11 (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(29

13032.6 11651.7 7849.3 4021.0 1716.8 13638.9 13732.7 10651.4 10622.3 7104.0 7092.6 3553. I 4026.8 4009.2 619.9 673.3 681.2 1032.7 657.7 3127.6 1848.3 2230.4 2719.0 572. I 1593.7 2408.4 2968.8 5125.1 5812.9

(29
(2) (2) (2)

(29
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) Cl) (1) (1) (1) (1)

13363.5 12161.8 8708.3 5227.6 10.0 13399.1 13669.8 10440.7 10604.8 6930.6 7113.7 3417.4 4134.1 4310.3 684.5 739.4 747.4 1134.5 723.2 3438.9 2038.4 2454.5 2991.1 520. I 1420.2 2190.3 2700.7 4661.5 5287.0

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 `Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction
I\

Right fHorizontal 0.0 0.0 1440.0

R_eactlon
/\

4 &ad load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction _u--

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1440.0

Vertical 3 1391.4 1745.5 - 6264.0

Vertis;?p$ 1391.4 1745.5 - 6264.0 i__

173

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE
Span Wind 1500.00 cm 100 kg/m*

127 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF
Spacing Panels

TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
cm Slope Purlins

force

450.00 II

I in 3
at 143.74 cm

MEMBER

LENGTH Cm

COMPRESSION kg

MOMENT kg.cm 795.4 583.8 289.4 208.2 192.0 509.2 3453.8 5986. I 6396.6 1962.9 742X.7 X106.7 7X60.X 66X8.4 0774.4 5.55' 2 2457.0 1143.9 1484.9 623.4 264. I 187. i 180.9 946.4 821.4 544. I 314.6 214.4 515.3 437.0 217.1 45.5 54.0 435.9 184.9

TENSION kg

MOMENT kg.cm 2788.9 1630.2 716.0 497. I

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 I1 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 2-l 2x 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 212.73 272.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 4.5.45 136.36 227.27 31X IX 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.X') 227.21 ?fl4.Y? %X.36 ?0954 I63XY 221.21 304.92 388.36
284.77 284.77

(2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1) (1)

(1) (1) (1) (0 0) (1) (1) (1)

(2)
(2) (2)

(2) (2) (2) (2)

2089.6 1766.8 1073.9 381.5 310.6 1348.3 7460.9 7430.7 606X.3 6061. I 4583. I 458X.2 7iOO.5 3107 4 IhlX 4 1791.1 179x. I 427.6 461.9 466.6 462.8 696.5 454.2 2616.5 852.2 1191.2 I 604.5 2043.0 107.5 363. I 564.0 766.4 979.2 1435.9 1594.5

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

(2)
(2) (2) !2) 12)
(2)

(2)
(21
I?)

(2)

(2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 11) (1)

7069.2 6442.8 5012.6 3581.1 2149.7 3.4 2265.4 2363.6 1807.8 1923. I 1326.5 1447.4 846.: 96X.5 367.4 563.4 691.3 209.4 223.3 225. I 223. I 336.3 219.6 1264.8 413.9 576.6 776.2 988.0 222.3 719.9 1165.3 1585.5 2026.0 2970.8 3298.7

440.0
1052. I -3834.4 3978.5 6517.3 7722.2 8956.6 9153.3 8777.8 8231.2 6115.5 4087.2 3024.9 722.0 696.4 290.5 125.4 91.7 81.9 472.3 424.6 285.3 151.0 108.4 1052.3 1315.5 539.8 100.7 78.4 904.0 393. I

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination othy than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Vertical b <Horizontal 0.0 1309.2 0.0 1314.0 1125.0 - 2700.0 Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1125.0 R_eaction A Vertical > 1309.2 1314.0 - 2700.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

174

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 1500.00 cm 150 kg/m2 LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 45.45 136.36 227.27 318.18 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 209.54 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 284.77 284.77

128 STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

450.00 II
MOMENT

I in 3
at 143.74 cm
MOMENT

MEMtlER

TENSION kg

kgxm 1715.1 1180.8 568. I 405.4 370.3 960.7 3453.8 5986. I 6396.6 7962.9 7428.7 8 106.7 7860.8 6688.4 6774.4 5557.2 2457.0 1143.9 1484.9 623.4 264.1 187.1 180.9 946.4 821.4 544.1 314.6 214.4 969.9 901.7 426.6 87.2 95.7 823.0 350.9

kg.cm 2788.9 1630.2 716.0 497. I 440.0 1052. I 5 105.2 5500.3 8779.4 10403.7 12070.4 12335.9 11829.8 11095.0 8240.5 5510.3 4077.5 1297.1 1322.4 552.4 237.6 172.6 156.7 885.6 790.7 529.8 285.4 202.7 1052.3 1315.5 539.8 100.7 78.4 904.0 393. I

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 13 14 I5 16 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

4457.4 3856.0 2548.9 1242.4 63.6 2021.8 7460.9 7430.7 6068.3 6061.1 4583.1 4588.2 3100.5 3107.4 1618.4 1791.1 1798. I 427.6 461.9 466.6 462.8 696.5 454.2 2616.5 852.2 1191.2 1604.5 2043.0 202.8 679.4 1064.0 1446.3 1848.0 2709.9 3009. I

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

7069.2 6442.8 5012.6 3581.1 2149.7 3.4 4794.4 4936.0 3847.3 4019.0 2847.4 3029.8 1850.4 2034.3 854.0 1189.3 1373.5 394. I 421.3 424.9 421.3 634.8 414.3 2386.9 780.4 1087.9 1464.5 1864.4 222.3 719.9 1165.3 1585.5 2026.0 2970.8 3298.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination

Left Rzaction

Right

Reaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 1687.5

1309.2 1314.0 - 4050.0

0.0 0.0 1687.5

1309.2 1314.0 - 4Qnl.o

175

SP : 38(S&TH987

TABLE Span Wind 1500.00 cm 200 kg/m2
LENGTH

129 STEEL LEAN-TO tipacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

450.00 il

I in 3
at 143.74 cm MOMENT kg.cm 2788.9 1630.2 716.0 497. I 440.0 1052. I 6376. I 8080.7 11041.6 13085.2 15184.2 15518.5 14881.8 13958.8 10365.6 7445.5 5130.2 1872.2 1948.5 814.3 349.7 253.5 231.6 1298.9 I 156.7 774.3 419.8 297. I 1052.3 1315.5 539.8 100.7 78.4 904.0 393. I

MEMBER

COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 6825.2 5945.2 4024.0 2103.4 183.4 2695.3 7460.9 7430.7 6068.3 6061.1 4583. I 4588.2 3100.5 3107.4 1618.4 1791.1 1798. I 427.6 461.9 466.6 462.8 696.5 454.2 2616.5 852.2 1191.2 1604.5 2043.0 298. I 995.6 1564. I 2126.2 2716.7 3983.9 4423.7

MOMENT

TENSION kg

cm

kg.cm 2634.7 1777.8 R46.7 602.5 548.6 1412.2 3453.8 5986. I 6396.6 7962.9 7428.7 8106.7 7860.8 6688.4 6774.4 5557.2 2457.0 1143.9 1484.9 623.4 264. I 187.1 180.9 946.4 821.4 544. I 314.6 214.4 1424.5 1366.4 636.2 128.8 137.3 1210.1 516.9

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 45.45 136.36 227.27 318.18 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 209.54 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 284.77 284.77

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2)

(2) (2) (2) 12) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) .(I) (1) (1)
0)

7069.2 6442.8 5012.6 3581.1 2149.7 3.4 7323.4 7508.5 5886.9 6114.9 4368.4 4612.2 2854.0 3100.1 1340.6 1809.2 2055.7 578.8 619.4 624.8 619.5 933.2 609. I 3509.0 1146.8 1599.2 2152.9 2740.8 222.3 719.9 1165.3 I5855 2026.0 2970.8 3298.7

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from winb load combination Left I\eaction Right I$eaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 2250.0

1309.2 1314.0 - 5400.0

0.0 0.0 2250.0

1309.2 1314.0 - 5400.0

176

SP:38(S&T)l987 TABLE 130
Span Wind force 1500.00 cm 100 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.41 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 231.84 231.84

STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels
COMPREsSION kg

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

450.00 II

I in 4
at 140.56 cm MoHENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

kg.cm 1686.6 918.9 359.8 225.8 169.1 499. I 4136.2 6239. I 6813.0 8388.7 7979.4 8483.1 8266.0 7119.2 7190.8 5966.8 2656.9 578.2 1960.4 799.5 303.2 212.9 19f.1 1211.3 893.1 537.2 345.7 194.5 497.2 861.6 262.3 96.3 89.2 438.4 143.9

hw
5303.9 2629.5 981.2 607.9 448.7 1171.2 5062.8 3786.7 6350.4 7634.6 8670.9 8929.1 8483.7 7919.4 5911.2 3902. I 2952.9 468.6 817.9 331.8 127.4 93.1 76.4 533.7 371.5 264. I 146.9 88.8 1149.5 2499.9 733.9 237.8 161.1 1038.2 350.4

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 JO II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1)
(1) (1) (1)

(1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

3161.0 2802.8 1938.4 1071.7 204.9 1094.3 10224.9 10207.0 8405.5 8383.9 6330.1 6330.9 4256.6 4262.5 2184.4 2413.9 2420.2 439. I 490.4 499.2 .496.4 740.4 481.8 3251.1 I1 16.2 1432.9 1835.3 2277.6 116.5 383.3 596.6 773.8 964.1 1464.4 1624.7

(1) (1) (1) (1)

(1)
(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

9908.9 9134.8 7114.0 5083.3 3051.6 5.7 3305.6 3374.4 2673.0 2751.1, 1961.0 2048.2 1250.4 1339.7 540.4 725.3 814.8 189.6 209.0 212.3 211.1 315.3 205.6 1386.6 478.9 612.1 783.4 971.9 272.9 856.2 1397.3 1814.5 2261.0 3433.9 3809.5

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left _Reaction Right Horizontal 0.0 0.0 843.8 Reaction
A
1

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 843.8

1280.2 1513;1 - 2700.0

Vertical 1 1280.2 1513.1 - 2700.0

177

SP : 38(5$&T)-1987

TABLE
span Wind force

131 STEEL LEAN-TO
Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg

ROOF

TRUSS
cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS)
Slope 1

1500.00 cm
I50 kg/m*

450.00 II

in 4 cm

Purlins
TENSION

at

140.56

MEMBER

LENGTH cm

MOMENT
kg.cm 3441.4 1830.3 708.3 443.2 330.8 949.9 4136.2 6239. 6813.0 8388.7

MOMENT
kg.cm 5303.9 2629.5 981.2 607.9 448.7 1171.2 6883.3 5136.8 8538.7 10266.5 11664.1 1201 I.9

kg
(1) (1) (1) (1)
9908.9 9134.8 7114.0 5083.3 3051.6 5.7 6715.7 6815.8 5454.2 5567.5 4029.4 4160.4 260'7.

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 I3 14 15 16 17 18 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 2 In I In 25 bracket bracket

136.36 272.13 272.73 212.73 272.73 272.73 140.56 140.56 140.56 14@.56 140.56 MO.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.41 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 23 I .84 23 indicates indicates reduction

(2) (2) (2)
(2) (2)

6444.5 5774.2 4130.3 2481.2 83

I .9

(1)
(1)

(2)
(1) (1) (1) (1)

1640.5 10224.9 10207.0 8405.5 8383.9 6330. 6330.9 4256.6 4262.5 2184.4 2413.9 2420.2 439. 490.4 499.2 496.4 740.4 4X1.8 3251.1 1116.2 1432.9 1835.3 2277.6 221.7 722.0 1135.0 1472.6 1834.7 2786.8 3091.8 load from combination other wind than load wind I

(2) I
(2)

(1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

7979.4 8483. I 8266.0 7119.2 7190.8 5966.X 2656.9

(2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (2) (2) (2)

I

11412.7 10655.6 7950.6 5251.4 3972.7 X02.2 1563.9 635. I 243.2 176.2 147.4 1008.8 6X6.4 4X8.4 279.8 166.7 1149.5 2499.9 133.9 237.8 161.1 1038.2 350.4

2742. I

I 186.0
1502.8 1638.2 359.8 397.7 404.3 401.9 600.3 391.2 2638.7 910.2 1164.5 1490.5 1849.3 272.9 856.2 1397.3 1814.5 2261.0 3433.9 3809.5

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2)

I

578.2 1960.4 799.5 303.2 212.9 191.1 1211.3 893. I 537.2 345.7 194.5 943.4 1722.0 519.6 1x5.4 161.5 836. I 276. I

(1)
(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

(2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

(1)
(1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2)
due from to IO wind force combination

I .84
force force is applied

load

Percent

combination Left R_actlon Right Reactlon

Dead Live Wind

load load load

reaction reaction reaction (without 25 percent reduction)

0.0 00 1265.6

12R0.2 1513.1 - 4050.0

0.0 0.0 1265.6

1280.2 1513.1 - 4050.0

178

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

Span Wind

force

TABLE 1500.00 cm 200 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 212.73 272.73 212.73 272.73 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 !40.56 140.56 140.56 1400.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.t4 306.82 lS3.4 I 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.X3 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.R: 245.83 304.92 23 I .84 231.84

132 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels
~MPRESSlON kg

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins 1 in 4 140.56 cm
MOMENT

450.00 II

at

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

kg.cm 5196.3 2741.8 1056.8 660.6 492.4 1400.7 4136.2 6239. I 6813.0 8388.7 7979.4 8483.1 8266.0 7119.2 7190.8 5966.8 2656.9 578.2 1960.4 799.5 303.2 212.9 191.1 I21 1.3, 893. I 537.2 345.7 194.5 1389.6 2582.5 776.9 274.4 233.7 1233.8 408.3

kg.cm 5303.9 2629.5 981.2 607.9 448.7 1171.2 8703.7 7564.0 10727.0 12898.3 14657.3 ! 5094.7 14341.7 13391.8 9990. I 7131.2 4992.5 1135.9 2309.8 938.5 359.0 259.4. 218.4 1483.8 1001.2 712.8 412.7 244.5 1149.5 2499.9 733.9 237.8 161.1 1038.2 350.4

I

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IQ II 12 13 14 I5 16 17 IX 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1) (1)

(1)
(1)

(1)
(1) (1)

(1) (1) (1) (1)
(1) (1) (1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

9728.0 8745.7 6322.2 3890.8 1458.8 2186.7 10224.9 10207.0 8405.5 8383.9 6330. I 6330.9 4256.6 4262.5 2184.4 2413.9 2420.2 439. I 490.4 499.2 496.4 740.4 481.8 3251. I I 116.2 1432.9 1835.3 2277.6 326.9 1060.8 1673.4 2171.3 2705.4 4109.2 4559.0

(1) (1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) Lx! (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(1)

9908.9 9134.8 7114.0 5083.3 3051.6 5.7 10125.9 10257.3 8235.4 8384.0 6097.9 6272.6 3963.9 4144.6 1831.6 2280.3 2461.6 530. I 586.5 596.3 592.7 885.2 576.8 3890.8 1341.4 1716.8 2197.6 2726.7 272.9 856.2 1397.3 1814.5 2261.0 3433.9 3809.5

,2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction
A

Right

Reaction

( Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Horizontals 0.0 O.il 1687.5

Vertical 1280.2 1513.1 - 5400.0

0.0 0.0 1687.5

1280.2 1513.1 - 5400.0

179

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLr: 133STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS (ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind 1500.00 cm 100 kg, rn' LENGTH cm 136.36 272.13 272.73 272.73 212.13 272.13 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 27.27 81.82 136.36 190.9 I 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 166.45 146.X7 174.63 213.01 257.29 202.72 202.72 Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg 450.00 II cm Slope Purlins
TENSION

force

at

I in 5 139.06 cm MOMENT kg.cm 8803.2 3706. I 1124.1 774.5 663.3 1304.5 2634.0 1989.7 251.8 647.7 146.7 434.4 121.6 387.0 47.7 377.5 679.4 644.3 4 16.4 287.8 265.4 179.9 302.0 573.9 375.7 160.7 128.4 160.3 409.8 4316.5 774.0 333.0 334.2 955.8 923.8

MEMBER

MOMENT kg.cm 2990.6 1300.3 395.9 279.5 245. I 523.5 7767.0 5572. I 703.9 1731.8 383.7 1112.2 286.9 960.9 146.6 964.5 1704.9 2194.9 1078.0 738.1 674.0 446.2 740.3 1384.7 1048.3 417.8 316.6 381.1 168.7 1542.0 286.0 102.8 III.4 378.5 367.6

kg (1)
(1) (1) (1) (1)
12588.0 11826.9 9227.4 6596.0 3958.8 8.1 4363.7 4461.9 3642.4 3706.3 2725. I 2795.3 1804.9 1876.4 884.0 106R.6 1138.4 182.8 202.4 204.6 204.3 309.0 197.9 1152.6 555.5 671.7 820.7 990.0 328.6 946.8 1646.3 2039.0 2471.3 3897. I 4305.2

I 2 3 4 5 6 I 8 9 IO I1 I2 13 I4 i5 I6 I7 I8 I9 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

0) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1) (1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(`0
(1) (1)

(1)
(1) (1)

(1)
(1) (1) (1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

4238.5 3904. I 2865.8 1817.2 766.8 806.7 12848. I 12940.X 10746.6 10717.7 8068.0 8056.0 5380.7 5371.9 2691.3 2966.3 2953.3 454.9 509.2 515.3 514.6 777.2 497. I 2894.5 1386.2 1683.8 2059.2 2484.8 130.9 395. I 655.9 811.7 983.8 1551.7 1714.1

(1) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (3

(1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) 0)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combihation other than wind load 25 Percent leduction is applied to force 8om wind load combination Left Reaction
A

Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 675.0

Reaction
h

f Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Horizontal 0.0 0.0 675.0

Vertical> 1266.6 1636.4 - 2936.2

Vertical 1266.6 1636.4 - 2936.2

180

SP : 38(S&T)1987
TABLE Span Wind 1500.00 cm IS0 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.13 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 21.27 81.82 136.36 190.91 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 166.4s 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 202.72 202.72 134 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels
tiMPRESSlON kg

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS)
SlOpc

force

450.00 11

Purlms

6t

in S 139.06 cm
I

MEMBER

MOMXNT kg.cm 5926.2 2556.8 777.7 546.0 476.2 998.8 7767.0 5572.1 703.9 1731.8 383.7 1112.2 286.9 960.9 146.6 964.5 1704.9 2194.9 1078.0 738.1 674.0 446.2 740.3 1384.7 1948.3 417.8 316.6 381.1 320.1 3019.2 555.6 206.9 221.8 724.1 702.6

-hNSlON

MOMXNI
kg.cm 8803.2 37%. 1 1124.1 714.5 663.3 1304.5 5221.7 3896.2 492.8 1254.8 281.2 833.6 229.4 131.8 95.6 124.0 1298.1 1325.5 800.9 552.4 508.4 342.8 574.1 1087.4 735.1 309.4 244.4 302.9 409.8 4316.5 774.0 333.0 334.2 955.8 923.8

hi (`1 (1) (`1 (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (`1 (1) (`1
12588.0 11826.9 9221.4 6596.0 3958.8 8.1 8647.6 8810.1 7221.9 7312.9 5407.6 5511.0 3587.7 36935 1766.4 2088.2 2190.8 348.6 386.9 391.2 390.6 590.7 378.2 2202.4 1060.0 1283.0 1567.9 1891.6 328.6 946.8 1646.3 2639.0 2471.3 3897.1 4305.2

1 2 3 4 S 6 7 8 9 IO 11 12 13 14 IS 16 17 `! 19 20 21 22 23 24 2s 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 3s

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (`1 (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (`1 (`1 (1) (1) (1) (1) (`1 (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (`1 (1) (`1 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

8417.4 .7791.2 5808.5 3805.1 1797.9 1208.7 12848.1 12940.8 10746.6 10717.7 8068.0 8056.0 5380.7 5371.9 2691.3 2966.3 2953.3 454.9 509.2 515.3 514.6 777.2 497.1 2894.5 1386.2 1683.8 2059.2 2484.8 250.1 747.5 1253.3 iss1.2 1880.0 2965.1 3275.6

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Eeaction

Right FactIon
-

rHarizontal~Vcrticel`)~Horiaontal
Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction 0.0 0.0 1012.s 1266.6 1636.4 - 4404.4

0.0
0.0 1012.5

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Vertical 7 1266.6 1636.4 - uQ4.4

181

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 1500.00 cm 200 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 212.73 212.73 212.13 272.73 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 27.27 8l.H2 136.36 190.91 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 166.45 146.87 174.63 213.01 251.29 202.72 202.12

135 STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins

force

450.00 II

1 in 5
at 139.06 cm
MOMENT

MnMaea

COMPRESSION b

MOMENT

TENSION kg

kg.cm 8861.8 3813.4 1159.6 81215. 707.3 1474.0 7767.0 5572. I 703.9 1731.8 383.7 I1 12.2 286.9 960.9 146.6 964.5 1704.9 2194.9 1078.0 738. I 674.0 446.2 740.3 1384.7 1048.3 417.8 316.6 381.1 471.5 4496.4 825.2 312.1 332.2 1069.7 1037.6

kgsm 8803.2 3706. I 1124.1 174.5 663.3 1304.5 7809.5 5802.8 733.8 1862.0 415.8 1232.8 337. I 1088.5 143.4 1070.5 1916.8 2006.7 1185.5 817.1 751.4 505.8 846.2 1600.9 1094.4 458.2 360.4 445.4 409.8 4316.5 774.0 333.0 334.2 955.8 923.8

I
2 3 4 5 6 1 8 9 10 II I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

12596.2 11678.2 8751.1 5192.9 2829. I 1610.7 12848. I 12940.8 10746.6 10717.7 8068.0 8056.0 5380.7 5371.9 2691.3 2966.3 2953.3 454.9 509.2 515.3 514.6 777.2 497. I 2894.5 1386.2 1683.8 2059.2 2484.8 369.3 1100.0 1850.6 2290.6 2116.3 4378.6 4837.0

(1)
(1) (1)

12588.0

11826.9
9227.4 6596.0 3958.8 8.1 12931.6 13158.3 10801.4 10919.6 8090.2 8226.7 5370.5 5510.6 2648.7 3107.8 3243. I 514.4 571.4 577.8 576.9 872.4 558.5 3252.3 1564.6 1894.4 2315.2 2793. I 328.6 946.8 1646.3 2039.0 2471.3 3897. I 4305.2

(1)
(1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2)
0) (1) (1)

(1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

2 )n bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left seaction Right teaction

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

0.0 0.0 1350.0

1266.6 1636.4 - 5872.5

0.0 0.0 1350.0

1266.6 1636.4 - 5872.5

182

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 136 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF
Span Wind 1500.00 cm 100 kg/m'
LENGTH

TRUSS.(ANALYSIS

RESULTS)
Slope Purlins

force

Spacing Panels
COMPRESSION kg (2)

450.00 cm II
MOMENT

I in 3
at 143.74 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

TENSION kg

cm 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO I1 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 `19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 45.45 136.36 227.27 318.18 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.89 227.27 304.92 288.36 209.54 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 284.77 284.77

kg.cm 981.1 732.0 365.4 263.5 243.4 649.0 4736.2 8208.8 8771.7 10919.6 10187.0 I I 116.8 10779.5 9171.9 9289.8 7620.6 3369.3 1568.7 2036.2 854.8 362. I 256.6 248. I 1297.8 1126.3 746. I 431.3 294.0 657. I 545.2 274.0 57.9 69.8 555.5 235.3

kgsm 3824.5 2235.5 981.9 681.7 603.4 1442.7 5210.9 5398.2 8841.3 10475.7 12149.8 12416.6 11907.2 I 1165.4 8295.9 5544. I 4103.2 930. I 886.2 369.6 159.7 117.0 104. I 602.8 542.8 364.9 192.4 138.4 1443.0 1804.0 740.2 138.0 107.6 1239.6 539. I

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

2584.8 2172.3 1289.1 406.6 475.4 1797.8 10231.1 10189.7 8321.4 8311.6 6284.9 6291.9 4251.7 4261.2 2219.3 2456.2 2465.7 586.3 633.4 639.9 634.7 955.1 622.8 3588.0 1168.7 1633.5 2200.2 2801.5 136.9 463.6 718.8 976.7 1247.9 1830.0 2032.0

(1) (1) (1)
(1) (1) (1)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(2) (2)

(2) (2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

(1)

9694.0 8835. I 6873.9 4910.8 2947.9 4.7 2808.0 2939.8 2237.5 2391.5 1638. I 1799.2 1040.7 1202.8 443.8 708.2 870.5. 267.0 284.5 286.8 284.3 428.5 279.8 1611.9 527.6 734.9 989.2 1259.2 304.8 987.3 1598.0 2174.1 2778.3 4073.8 4523.5

2 In bracket indicates force due 10 wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction
A

Right Horizontal 0.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

fiorizontal 0.0 0.0 1500.0

Vertical > f 1845.2 1752. I - 3600.0

0.0
1500.0

Reaction h Vertical 1 1845.2 1752.1 - 3600.0

183

SP : 38(5&T)-1987

TABLE
Span Wind force 15ww I50 cm MEMBER LEN~~TH

137 STEEL

LEAN-TO
Spacing Panels
IMPRESSION

ROOF

TRUSS
cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS)
Slope PLrlins at

600.00 II

I in 3
143.74 cm
MOMENT

kg/m?

MOMENT
kg.cm 2207.4 1528.0 737.0 526.3 481.2 1250.9 4736.2 8208.8 8771.7 10919.6 10187.0 I I 116.8 10779.5 9171.9 9289.8 7620.6 3369.3 1568.7 2036.2 854.8 362. I 256.6 248.1 1297.8 1126.3 746. I 431.3 294.0 1263.2 1164.8 553 5 113.3 125.3 1071.6 456.6

TENSION kg

cm

kg
(2? (2) (2) (2) (2) (-7) (1) 0) (1) 0)
il) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (i) (1) (!I 11) (11 (I! (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) 5741.8 4957.8 3255.8 1554.6 146.1 2695.8 10231.1 10189.7 8321.4 8311.6 6284.9 6291.9 4251.7 4261.2 2219.3 2456.2 2465.7 586.3 633.4 639.9 634.7 955. I 622.8 3588.0 1168.7 1633.5 2200.2 2801.5 264. I 885.3 1385.5 1883.3 2405.3 3528.6 3918.2

kg.cm 3824.5 2235.5 981.9 681.7 603.4 1442.7 6905.3 7230.6 11857.5 1405:.1 16301.6 16660.0 15976.5 1498.3.8 11129.3 7441.5 5506.7 1696.9 1721.0 718.8 309.2 224.8 203.8 1153.9 1030.9 690.9 371.6 264.2 1443.0 18040 740.2 138.0 107.6 1239.6 539.J

:
2 3
4 5 6 7 H 9 i0 1.1 12 II I4 I5 I6 17 I? I9 20 ?I 22 23 24 25 ?,> :`! 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

136.36 272.13 272.73
212.73 272.73 272.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 141.74 141.74 131.74 I-t3 74 143.74 143.74 143.:4 143.74 45 45 I :v.?fi L2- 27 31X lh 4w .O') 204 55 500 (lo it, 22' x9 .I' ^,

(1) (1) (1) (1) (i) (1)

9694.0 8835.1 6873.9 4910.8 2947.9 4.7 6180. I 6369.8 4957.0 5186.1 3666. I 3909. I 2378.9 2623.9 1092.5 1534.7 1780. I 513.3 548.6 553.3 548.6 X26.5 539.5 3108.0 1016.2 i416.6 1907.0 2427.7 304.8 987.3 1598.0 2!74.l 2178.3 4073.8 4523.5

(2) (2) 12)
(2) (2)

(2)
(2) Oi (2) (2)

(21
(2) (21 (2) (2) (2) 12) (3
(2)

(2)

304.Y? :vK A0 203 Sf Ihl __ ,T' L.Y . 77

(2)
(2) (1) 0) (1) (1) (1)
!li

llM 9_7 :hX v> .!%I `7 `X4 `7

0)

I In bracher 25 Percent

~nd~arr\

torte I, .:ppl~cd

Irom to

comblnatlon force from

other wnd

than

wind

load

reduLtl<lll

load combination
Left f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 K_eaction C \:ertlcaiI 1845.2 1752. - 5400.0 Right rHorlzontal_ia 0.0 1845.2 1752. 5400.0 ceactmn

Dead I.icr Wind

load load load

rc<,ct,on rract~on I~XIIOII
!wlFhoul ?

I

0.0
2250.0

I

percent

reduction)

2250.0

184

SP:38(S&Tb1987
TABLE 138STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSS(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Span Wind lSOO.OO cm 200 kg/m'
LENGTH Cm I

force

Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (l) (l) (1) (l) (1) (l) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (l! (1) (1) (1) il) (l) (1) (11 (2) (2) (?) 12; (2) (2) 8898.9 7743.4 5222.5 2702.5 183.3 3593.8 10231.1 10189.7 8321.4 8311.6 6284.9 629 I .9 4251.7 4261.2 2219.3 2456.2 2465.7 586.3 633.4 639.9 634.7 955. I 622.8 3588.0 1168.7 1633.5 2200.2 2801.5 391.2 1307.0 2052.3 2789.8 3564.6 5227.2 5804.3

600.00 II

cm

Slope Purlins

at

1 in 3 143.74 cm
MOMENT

MEMBER

MOMENT

TENSION kg

kg.cm 3433.6 2324.0 1108.6 789.2 718.9 1852.9 4736.2 8208.8 8771.7 10919.6 10187.0 I1 116.8 10779.5 9171.9 9289.8 7620.6 3369.3 1568.7 2036.2 854.8 362. I 256.6 248. I 1297.8 I 126.3 746. I 431.3 294.0 1869.4 1784.`4 832.9 168.8 180.9 1587.8 678.0

kgxm 3824.5 2235.5 981.9 681.7 603.4 1442.7 8599.8 10603.7 14873.8 17626.5 20453.3 20903.5 20045.8 I8802:2 13962.8 9769.0 69 10.2 2463.7 2555.1 1068.0 458.8 332.7 303.6 1704.9 1518.9 1016.9 550.8 390.0 1443.0 IRO4.0 740.2 138.0 107.6 1239.6 539.1

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

136.36 272.73 272.13 212.13 272.13 212.73 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143 74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 143.74 45A5 136.36 22-I. 27 31X.18 409.09 204.55 500.00 163.39 227.27 304.92 3X8.36 209.54 163.89 227.27 304.92 388.36 284.77 284.77

(1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2)
(2) (2)

(2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (7.)
(I! (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

0694.0 8835. I 6873.9 4910.8 2947.9 4.7 9552.1 9799.7 7676.4 7980.6 5694.0 6018.9 3717.0 4045.0 1741.3 2360.3 2689.7 759.6 812.7 819.7 812.8 1224.5 799.2 4604.2 1504.8 2098.3 2824.8 3596.2 304.8 987.3 1598.0 2174.1 2778.3 4073.8 4523.5

2 In bracket Indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force trom combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction 1 r Dead load reaction Live load rcactlon Wind load reaction Horizontal 0.0 0.0 3000.0 Vertxal 1845.2 1752.1 - 7200.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 3000.0 Reaction 1 n Vertical ) 1845.2 1752. I - 7200.0

(without

25 percent

reductioq)

185

SP : 38(S&T~l!I87

TABLE Span Wind 1500.00 cm 100 kg/m2 LtNCl'H Cm 136.36 272.13 272.13 272.73 272.13 272.73 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.41 ?75.00 152.46 192.b5 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 231.84 231.84 indicate\
~nd~cates is

139 STEEL

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF TRUSS 600.00 cm II MOMENT kgxm 21 IO.1 1156.5 454.0 285.2 213.7 634.8 5659.2 8536.4 9321.6 11471.5 10917.5 11606.6 11309.5 9740.5 9838.5 8163.9 3635. I 791.1 2682.3 1093.X 414.9 291.4 261.5 1657.4 1222.0 735.0 472.9 266. I 632.9 1083.4 330.6 122.2 114.7 557.4 182.8

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins 1 in 4 140.56 cm MOMENT kg.cm 7256.8 3597.7 1342.5 831.8 613.9 1602.5 6858.5 5137.7 8617.4 !0359.9 11765.5 12115.7 t-151 1.4 10745.5 802 1.O 5294.3 4006.7 609.6 1039.3 421.5 161.9 118.5 96.8 680.0 475.7 338.0 186.9 113.3 1572.8 3420.4 1004.1 325.4 220.5 1420.4 479.4

force

at

MEMREW

IMPRESSION kg

TENSION

kg
(1)

I 2 3 4 5 6 I 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 21 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 2 In bracket
I In bracket

(3 (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)
(1) (11 (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (U (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

3955.5 3498.2 2398.5 1296.0 193.4 1459.3 13989.8 13965.3 II500.5 11470.9 8660.9 8661.9 5824.0 5831.9 2988.1 3302.8 331 i.3 600.X 671.0 683.0 h79. I 1013.0 659.2 4448.2 1527. I 1960.5 25 I I .O 31 16.2 148.2 488.6 158.9 984.3 1226.3 1862.8 2066.7

(1) (1)
(1) (1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

(2)
(2) (2)

(2) (2)
(2)

(2)
(2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

13557.4 12498.3 9733.4 6955.0 4175.2 7.8 4140.0 4232.2 3344.2 3448.8 2449. I 2565.4 1555.8 1674.8 663.4 903.9 1023. I 241.3 265.8 270.0 268.4 401.1 261.5 1763.8 609.3 778.7 996.5 1236.3 373.4 1171.5 1911.8 2482.6 3093.5 4698.2 5212.2

foxe
force apphed

25 Percent. rcductlon

due to wind load combination from comblnatlon other than wind load IO force from wind load combination

Left Reaction
A

Right f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1125.0

( Dead load ~edclion L i\e I&id iedCIIOI1 M'lnd Iodd II"~~IOII (~~thwt

25 percent

reduction)

Horlrontal 0.0 0.0 11250

VertxaiJ 1X04.4 2017.4 - 3600.0

Reaction /i Vertical `r 1804.4 2017.4 -3K10.0

186

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span Wind 1500.00 cm 150 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 272.73 140.56 MO,56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.41 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 231.84 23 I .84

140 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slept Purlins

force

600.00 II

I in 4
at 140.56 cm MOMENT kgcm 7256.8 3597.7 1342.5 831.8 613.9 1602.5 9285.9 6884.3 11535.1 13869.0 15756.4 16226.1 15416.7 14393.7 10740.3 7093.5 5366.4 1054.5 2033.9 825.9 316.3 229.4 191.5 1313.4 875.5 637.2 364.0 217.1 1572.8 3420.4 1004.1 325.4 220.5 1420.4 479.4

MEMBER

COMPRESSION kg

MOMENT kgcm 4449.9 2371.5 918.7 575. I 429.3 1235.9 5659.2 8536.4 9321.6 11477.5 10917.5 11606.6 11309.5 9740.5 9838.5 8163.9 3635. I 791.1 2682.3 1093.8 414.9 291.4 261.5 1657.4 1222.0 735.0 472.9 266. I 1227.8 2230.6 673.6 240.9 211.1 1087.7 359.0

llNst0~

kg (1' (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)
13557.4 12498.3 9733.4 6955.0 4175.2 7.8 8686.9 8820.8 7052.5 7204.1 5207.0 5381.6 3364.9 3544.7 1524.2 1940.6 2121.0 468.3 517.5 526.0 522.9 781.0 509.0 3433.2 1184.3 1515.2 1939.3 2406.2 373.4 1171.5 1911.8 2482.6 3093.5 4698.2 5212.2

I 2 4 5 6 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17, 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) PI (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) iI)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)

8333.5 7460. I 5321.0 3175.4 1029.3 2187.5 13989.8 13965.3 11500.5 11470.9 8660.9 8661.9 5824.0 5831.9 2988.7 3302.8 3311.3 600.6 671.0 683.0 679. I 1013.0 659.2 4448.2 1527.1 1960.5 2511.0 3116.2 288.4 940.3 1476.8 1916.0 2387.2 3625.9 4022.8

(1) (1)

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction /\ (Horizontal Vertical3 0.0 1804.4 0.0 2017.4 1687.5 - 5400.0 Right (Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1687.5 Reaction h Vertical > 1804.4 2017.4 - 5400.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

187

TABLE 141STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF Span
Wind force

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS RESULTS)
Slope Purlins I in 4 140.56 cm
MOMENT

1500.00 cm 200 kg/m1
LENGTH cm 136.36 272.13 272.73 272.73 212.73 212.73 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 140.56 34.09 102.27 170.45 238.64 306.82 153.41 375.00 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 181.20 152.46 192.85 245.83 304.92 23 I .84 23 I .84

Spacing Panels COMPRESSION kg

600.00 cm II IU~MENT kg.cm 6789.7 3586.9 1383.4 864.9 644.9 1837.0 5659.2 8536.4 9321.6 11477.5 10917.5 11606.6 11309.5 9740.5 9838.5 8163.9 3635. I 791.1 2682.3 1093.8 414.9 291.4 261.5 1657.4 1222.0 735.0 472.9 266.1 1822.7 3377.9 1016.7 359.6 307.4 1617.9 535.3

at

MI~MBER

TENSION kg

kg.cm 7256.8 3591.7 1342.5 831.8 613.9 1602.5 11713.2 9922.1 14452.8 17378. I 19747.3 20336.5 19322.0 18041.9 13459.6 9352.2 6726.2 1499.4 3028.4 1230.4 470.7 340.2 286.2 1946.8 1315.3 936.4 541.2 320.9 1572.8 3420.4 1004.1 325.4 220.5 1420.4 479.4

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 a 9 10 II 12 I3 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

0)
(1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(I) (1) (1) (2)

!2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2)

12711.5 11422.0 8243.5 5054.7 1865.3 2915.8 13989.8 13965.3 11500.5 11470.9 8660.9 8661.9 5824.0 5831.9 2988.7 3302.8 3311.3 600.8 671.0 683.0 679. I 1013.0 659.2 4448.2 1527. I 1960.5 251 I.0 3116.2 428.7 1392.0 2194.7 2847.6 3548.0 5389. I 5979.0

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) !I) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) C-4 (2) (2)
(2)

(2) (2) (2)
il) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)

13557.4 12498.3 9733.4 6955.0 4115.2 7.8 13233.8 13409.4 10760.7 10959.4 7965.0 8197.9 5173.9 5414.6 2385.0 2977.3 3218.8 695.3 769.2 781.9 771.4 1160.9 756.4 5102.7 1759.4 225 I .6 2882.2 3576. I 373.4 1171.5 1911.8 2482.6 3093.5 4698.2 5212.2

2 In bracket indicates force due lo wind load combination ! In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A. Vertical 7 CHorizontal 0.0 1804.4 0.0 2017.4 2250.0 - 7200.0 Right fHorizonta1 0.0 0.0 2250.0 Reaction h Vertical 1 1804.4 20017.4 - 7200.0

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

188

Sf' : M(S&T)-1987 TABLE IL42STEEL
Span Wind _-___1500.00 cm 100 kg/m*
&EN01 W

LEAN-TO Spacing Panels
tiMPllESSION kg

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlinr
TENSION

force

600.00 II
MOMENT

I in 5
at 139.06 cm
MOMENT kg.cm

MEMBER

cm
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 9 IO 11 12 13 14 15 16 136.36 212.13 272.73 272.73 212.13 272.73 139.06 I3q.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139 06 139.06 139.06 139.06 21.27 RI.82 136.36 190.91 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.43 213.01 257.29 166.45 146.87 114.63 213.01 251.29 202.72 202.72

kg.cm 3768.3 1641.5 499.9 353.4 310.3 665.6 10613.8 7614.5 961.9 2366.5 524.3 1519.8 392. I 1313.1 200.3 1318.1 2329.7 2999.4 1473.1 1008.6 921.1 609.7 1011.7 1892.3 1432.6 570.9 432.7 520.8 214.7 1948.5 362.0 130.4 140.2 480.9 467.2

kg
(1)
(1)
17201.9 16161.8 12609.6 9013.6 5409.9 11.0 5498.4 5627.0 4589.0 4674.8 3432.6 3526.5 2272.6 2368. I 1111.7 1350.9 1444.3 232.4 257.2 259.9 259.5 392.7 251.5 1464.7 706. I 853.7 1043.0 1258.2 449.0 1293.9 2249.1 2786.4 3377. I 5325.6 5883.3

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1)
(1)

'7
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(1)
(0 (1)

(1) (1)
(1) (1)

(1) (1)
(1) (1)

(1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

5338.0 4911.0 3591.4 2258.8 923.9 1075.7 17557.3 17683.9 14685.6 14646.1 11025.2 11008.7 7352.9 7340.9 3677.8 4053.5 4035.7 621.7 695.8 704.2 703.2 1062.1 679.3 3955.4 1894.3 2301.0 2813.9 3395.6 166.3 503.2 833.6 1031.5 1250.2 1971.8 2178.3

(1) (0 (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1)

12029.8 5064.5 1536.1 1058.3 906.5 1782.7 3318.6 2514.2 318.1 820.4 186.2 551.6 155.0 492.1 60.0 479.3 863.5 8Q4.4 528.3 365.3 337.1 228.7 384.2 730.7 474.8 203.9 163.3 204.4 560.0 5898.6 1057.7 455.0 456.1 1306.1 1262.4

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction

*

Right rHorizonta1 0.0 0.0 900.0

Rtaction
I\

Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

f Horizontal 0.0 0.0 900.0

Vertical > 1785.2 2181.9 3915.0

Vertical \ 1785.2 2181/J 3915.0

189

SP : 38(S&T)_1987

TABLE Span Wind 15UO.CUcm 150 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.73 272.13 212.73 272.73 272.73 l39.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 27.21 81.82 136.36 190.91 245.45 122.13 300.00 146.81 114.63 213.01 251.29 166.45 146.81 174.63 213.01 251.29 202.12 202.12

143 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) SlOlK Purlins 1 in 5 139.06 cm MOMENT kg.cm 12029.8 5064.5 1536.1 1058.3 906.5 1782.1 6169.0 5056.3 639.5 1630.0 365.6 1083.8 293.1 959.8 123.8 941.3 1688.4 1112.1 1041.1 118.2 661.1 446.0 141.0 1415.4 954.0 402.2 318.0 394.3 560.0 5898.6 1051.1 455.0 456.1 1306. I 1262.4

force

600.00 cm II MOMENT kg.cm 7682.4 3316.9 1009.0 708.1 618.4 1299.2 10613.8 1614.5 961.9 2366.5 524.3 1519.8 392. I 1313.1 200.3 1318.1 2329.1 2999.4 1413. I 1008.6 921.1 609.7 1011.7 1892.3 1432.6 510.9 432.7 520.8 416.6 3918.1 121.5 261.5 281.4 941.1 913.8

at

MEMBER

~MPllESSlON kg

TENSION kg

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 t1 12 I3 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) 0) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) * (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

10909.8 10093.8 15 14.9 4909.2 2298.7 1611.1 11551.3 11683.9 14685.6 14646.1 11025.2 11008.7 7352.9 7340.9 3611.8 4053.5 4035.7 621.7 695.8 104.2 103.2 1062.1 619.3 3955.4 1894.3 2301.0 2813.9 3395.6 325.2 913.1 1630.0 2017.5 2445.2 3856.4 4260.3

(1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) 12)
(2)

(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1)
(1)

(1) (1)
(1)

(1) (1)

17201.9 16161.8 12609.6 9013.6 5409.9 11.0 11210.3 11424.6 9361.7 9483.1 1009.3 1147.5 4649.6 4190.9 2288.2 2710.4 2847.5 453.5 503.2 508.8 508.0 168.3 491.9 2864.5 1318.9 1668.8 2039.3 2460.2 449.0 1293.9 2249.1 2186.4 3311.1 5325.6 5883.3

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination I In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Right Left Reaction A Vertical 1 fHorizonta1 Horizontal 0.0 1185.2 0.0 0.0 2181.9 0.0 1350.0 5872.5 1350.0 Reaction
A

( Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

Vertical \ 1185.2 2181.9 5812.5

SP : 3U(S&T)l!B7

TABLE Span Wind 1500.00 cm 200 kg/m* LENGTH cm 136.36 272.13 272.13 212.73 272.73 272.73 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 139.06 27.27 81.82 136.36 190.91 245.45 122.73 300.00 146.87 174.63 213.01 251.29 166.45 146.87 174.63 213.01 257.29 202.72 202.72

144 STEEL LEAN-TO Spacing Panels

ROOF

TRUSS cm

(ANALYSIS

RESULTS) Slope Purlins I in 5 139.96 cm MOMFNT kg.cm 12029.8 5064.5 1536. I 1058.3 906.5 17827 10219.3 7598.3 960.9 2439.5 545.0 1616. I 442.4 1427.5 187.6 1403.4 2513.2 2621.0 1553.8 1071.0 985.1 663.2 1109.9 2100.0 1433. I 600.5 472.7 584.4 560.0 5898.6 1057.7 455.0 456.i 1306.1 1262.4

force

600.00 II

at

MEMBEU

c!CNt4PltESSlON

kg

MOMENT kg.cm 11596.5 4992.2 1518.1 1064.0 926.5 1932.8 10613.8 7614.5 961.9 2366.5 524.3 1519.8 392.1 1313.1 200.3 1318.1 2329.7 2999.4 1473. I 1008.6 921.1 609.7 1011.7 1892.3 1432.6 570.9 432.7 520.8 618.4 5887.8 1081.0 407.9 434.6 1402.5 1360.4

TENNON kg

I 2 3 4 5 6 I 8 9 IO II 12 13 I4 I5 16 I7 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

(?I
(2) (2)

@I
(2) (2) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)

16481.6 15276.5 11438.4 7559.6 3673.5 2147.8 17557.3 17683.9 14685.6 14646.1 11025.2 11008.7 7352.9 7340.9 3677.8 4053.5 4035.7 621.7 695.8 704.2 703.2 1062. I 679.3 3955.4 1894.3 2301.0 2813.9 3395.6 484.2 1443.0 2426.5 3003.4 3640.2 5741.0 6342.2

(1) (1) (1) (1)
(I) (1) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (I) (I) (1) (1) (1) (I) (1)

17201.9 16161.8 12609.6 9013.6 5499.9 11.0 16922.2 17222.3 14134.3 14292.7 10586. I 10768.4 7026.7 7213.7 3464.6 4069.9 4250.6 674.6 749.3 757.6 756.4 1143.8 132.3 4264.3 2051.6 2483.9 3035.7 3662.3 449.0 1293.9 2249.7 2786.4 3377. I 5325.6 5883.3

2 In bracket indicates force due to wind load combination 1 In bracket indicates force from combination other than wind load 25 Percent reduction is applied to force from wind load combination Left Reaction A Horizontal Vertical 1 0.0 1785.2 0.0 2181.9 1800.0 7830.0 Right <Horizontal 0.0 0.0 1800.0 Rfaction Dx Vertical 3 1785.2 2181.9 7630.0

/ Dead load reaction Live load reaction Wind load reaction

(without

25 percent

reduction)

191

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span = 9.0 m Wind P&we =

145 STEEL A-TYPE Slope = 1 in 3

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.19 m 150 kg/m' 200 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

100 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

h

SPACING (m)

h

/\

MEMBERS

Fdos.

LENGTH

.f4.5

6.0 1

c4.s

6.0 1

(4.5

6.0 1

(m) TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFI-ER RAFfER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 2.25 2.25 1.19 1.19 1.19 1.19 0.75 0.38 1.50 1.19 1.13 1.35 1.35 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 24040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 196.84 4.86 2-4040X6 24040X6 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X 6 6 6 6 24040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 196.84 4.86 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X 6 6 6 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X 6 6 6 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2&060X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 267.22 4.95

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 215.88 4.00

1-4040X6 1.4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 233.88 4.33

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 233.88 5.77

Sum of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

TABLE Span = 9.0 m Wind Pressure =

146 STEEL A-TYPE Slope =

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.16 m 150 kg/m2 200 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

I in 4
100 kg/m2

SPACING (m) MEMHERS Nos. L.wcw

SPACING (m)

(4.5 24040x6 2-4040X6 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050 X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 207.60 5.13 6 6 6 6

6.03 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-6060X 2-6060X 2-6060X 2-6060 X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 224.30 4.15 6 6 6 6

(4.5 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-5050 X 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050X i-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 14040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 225.6 5.57 6 6 6 6

6.0 1 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-6060X 2-6060X 2-6060X 2-6060X 1-4040X6 14040x6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 242.3 4.49 6 6 6 6

f

4.5

6.0 3 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 6 6 6 6 2-1070X 2-7070X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 285.28 5.28 6 6 6 6

(m) TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO I1 12 13 2.25 2.25 1.16 1.16 1.16 1.16 0.56 0.38 1.13 1.16 1.12 1.26 1.26 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-6060X 2-6060X 2-6060X 2-6060 X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 242.3

Sum of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

' 5.98

192

SP : 38(S&T)4987

TABLE

147 STEEL

A-TYPE ROOF TRUSSES (ISASECTIONS)
Purlioa Spacing= I50 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

Span= 9.0m
Wind Pressure=

Slope = 1 in 5 100 kg/m'
SPACING (m) A

1.15 m 200 b/m'
SPACING (m)

MEMBERS
TIE TIE RAFTER RAFI'ER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

Nos.

LENGTH
C!) 2.25 2.25 1.15 t.15 1.15 1.15 0.45 0.28 0.90 1.15 1.13 1.21 1.21

f 4.5
2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-6&50X 2-6060X 2-6060X 2-6060X 6 6 6 6

6.0 '
2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-7070X 2-7070X 2-7070X 2-7070X 6 6 6 6

(4.5

6.0 \

r4.5

6.0

)

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13

2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-6060X 2-6060X 2-6060 X 2-6060X 1-40X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 238.11 5.88 6 6 6 6

2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-7070X 2.7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 1-4040X6 I-5050X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X6 14040x6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 273.63 5.07 6 6 6 6

&6O@X6 2-6060X6 2-6&50X 2-6060X 2-6060X 2-606QX 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-505(,X6 2-5050X6 263.99 6.52 6 6 6 6

2-7070X6
2-7070X6 2-7070X 2-7070 X 2-7070X 2-7070 X 6 6 6 6

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-4040 X 6 1-5040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 220.11 5.43

1-4040X6 1-5050X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 257.53 4.77

1-4040X6 1$050X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 14040x6 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 299.51 5.55

Suni of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

193

SP : 38@&T)l987

TABLE Spap = 12.0 m Wind Premure=

148 STEEL A-TYPE Slope = 1 in 3

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA

SECTIONS)

Purline Spacing = 1.27. m 150 kg/m'
SPACING

100 kg/m*
SPAiXNG

200 kg/m* SPACING (m) A f4.5 6.0

(m) 6.0 1 r4.5

(m) 6.0 1

MEMBfiItS

Nos.

LENGTH

<4.5

)

tm) TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1.20 2.40 2.40 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 0.40 1.20 0.60 2.00 1.44 1.22 1.44 1.56 1.56 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050 X 2-5050X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 14040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 293.08 5.43 6 6 6 6 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050 X 2-5050X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 317.08 4.40 6 6 6 6 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 317.08 5.87 6 6 6 6 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 338.68 4.70 6 6 6 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 338.68 6.27 6 6 6 6 2-7070X6 2-7070X6 2-7070X6 2-5050X6 2-5050X 2-5050X 2-5050 X 2-5050X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040x6 1-4040X6 1-4040x6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 360.28 5.00 6 6 6 6

Sum of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kc/m*)

194

TABLE Span = 12.0 m Wind Prcssurc=

149 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA SECTIONS) Purlin 150 kg/m* Spacing = 1.15 m 200 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

Slope = 1 in 4 100 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

MEMBERS

NOS.

h

LENGTH (ml

f4.5

6.0

j

fi.5

SPACING A

(m) 6.0 `, (4.5

&

6.0

)

TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

1.20 2.40 2.40 1.24 1.24 1.24 1.24 1.24 0.30 0.90 0.45 1.50 1.34 1.21 1.34 1.42 1.42

2-5050X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050X6 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6

2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070X 2-7070 X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 14040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 369.63 5.13 6 6 6 6 6

2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 2-6060 X 2-6060 X 2-HI60 X 216060 X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 24040X6 347.31 6.43 6 6 6 6 6

2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6

2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 368.91 6.83

2-8080X6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 325.71 6.03

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 369.63 5.13

1-4Q40X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 429.25 5.%

Sum of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m2)

195

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span = 12.0 m Wind Prcsrure =

150 STEEL A-TYPE Slope = 1 in 5

ROOF

TRtiSSES

(ISA SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.22 m 150 kg/m' SPAC~~IG (m) 200 kg/m' SPACING (m) A 6.0

100 kg/m' SPACING (m) A c4.5 6.0 '

MEMBERS

Nos.

LENGTH (m)

rd.5

6.0 1

f4.5

j

TIE nE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFl-ER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of An&s

1 2 3 4 5 G 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Weight (kg)

1.20 2.40 2.40 1.22 1.22 1.22 1.22 1.22 0.24 0.72 0.36 1.20 1.30 1.m 1.30 1.34 1.34

2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6

2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6

2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-1070 X 6 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6

2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6

2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6

2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 361.09 6.69

1-5050X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 433.96 6.03

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 382.69 7.08

l-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 14040x6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 433.96 6.03

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6. 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 409.08 7.57

I-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 466.28 6.48

Unit Weight [kg/m')

1%

SP : 38(skT)-i987

TABLE 151STEEL A-TYPE ROOF TRUSSES (ISASECTIONS) Span= 1&m m
Wind Preallure = --. ~_--_
SPACING

-iin SlOpe
100 kg/m'
(m)

Purlins Spacing = 1.36 m
150 kg/m'
SPACING (m) I\

200 kg/m'
SPAClNG (m)

A

MEMBERS

NOS.

LENGTH

(4.5

6.0)

(4.5

6.0 5

d4.5

6.0 >

cm) TIE TIE TIE TIE RAnER RAFTER RAFIER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFl-ER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB
Sum bit

I

2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 I2 13 14 ,I3 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 of

1.29 2.57 2.51 2.57 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 0.43 1.29 2.14 I .07 3.00 1.55 2.14 1.44 1.55 2.14 1.98 1.98

2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-fo5O X 6 2dO4OX6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X

2-6060X6. 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2dO6OX6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 584.73 5.41

2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X

2-7070 2-7010 2-1070 2-7070

X X X X

6 6 6 6

2-7070 2-7010 2-7070 2-7070

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080

X X X X

6 6 6 6

6 6 6' 6 6

6 6 6 6 6

2-7010 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-6060X6 2--X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-6060x6 1-4040X6 l.-HMOX 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 2-4040 X 6
2-4040 630.65 5.84 Y 6

2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X

6 6 6 6 6

2-1070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 !-6+50X6 2-5050 X 6 Z-5050 X 6 689.45 6.38

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-%040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 517.03 6.38

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-6060x 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 563.98 6.96

1-4C4OX6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 l-4040x6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 612.02 7.56

Angles Weigh?: (kg)

Weight (kg/m*)

197

SP : 38(54&T)-1987

TABLE
Span = 18.0 m =

152 STEEL
Slope

A-TYPE
= I in 4 100 kg/m'

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA

SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.33 m kg m'

Wind

Pressure

150

kg: m'

200

MI:MHEKI --TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAF-1 RAFTER RAFrER RAmER RAFI`ER RAF1 WEH WFH WFH WFB WEH W r 1$ M'l WEH w FH WFH W FH WF B Sum (InIt I1 ER ER

NOS.

LbVGI lm)

II

I 2 3
4

1.29 2 57 2.51 2.57 I 33 I 33

2-6060 Z-6060 2-6060 2-5050 2-7070 2-7070 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 Z-6060 2-6060 i-4040 I-4040 I-4040 I-4040 I-4040 l-404(1 I-5050 I-4040 I-4040 1-30~0 2-4040 2-4040 536.28

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x. 6 X 6 x 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 x 6

2-8080 Z-8080 2-8080 2-6060 2-9090 2-9090 2.7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 I-4040 I-4040 I-4040 I-4040 l-4040 I-4040 I-5050 l-4040 I-4040 I-4040 2-4030 2-4040 638.55

x 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X C x 6 x 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x h X h Y 6 x 6 x 6 X 6 X h

2-7070 2.7070 2.7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2.M)60 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 I-4040 I-4040 I-4040 I-4040 I-4040 l-4040 I-5050 I-4040 I-4040 I-4040 2-4040 2.4O40

Y 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 x 6 x 6 X h

2-X080 x0x0 2-8080 2-8080 2-9090 2-9090 Z-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070

X 6 X 6 r: 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 x 6 X 6 * 6 X 6

2-8080 2-8080 2-80X0X 2-8080 2-7073 2.7070 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060

X 6 %6 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 % 6 X 6

?- 100100 2-100100 ?-UO90 2-9091! 2-9090 2-?070 2-7070 Z-7070 2-7070 2.7070 I-4040 l-4040 I-4040 l-4040 I-4040 I-4040 I-5050 I-4040 l-5050 I-5050 ?-5(15fl , i,,J

`< 6 X 6 * 6 /\ 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 N 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6

`- 100 IO0 X 6

5 6 7 x Y IO II II' II 14 15 I6 i7 Ih Ii, ?I) ?I .`7 21

1 33
1.33 1.33 I 33 1.33 0.32 0.96 1.61 0.80 2.25

1-4041~ x 6 l-4040 l-4040 l-4040 I-4040 I-4040 I-5050 I-4040 I-5050 x 6 X 6 Y 6 )i 6 X 6 x' 6 x 6 % h

I .44 I 82
I 31 1.44 I x2 I.71 I.71

I-5050 ' (1 2.4lill \ h 2.iil4il . h
II! h

)\ (

ot

Angles (kg

Wclg!~c rhgl m'l

577 93 7 I?

/` 1:

Wright

6.62

5.Yl

198

SP : 38 (S&T)-1987

TABLE

153 STEEL A-TYPE ROOF

TRUSSES (ISA SECTIONS)
Purlins Spacing = 1.31 m

Span = 18.0 m
Wind Pressure =

Slope = I in 5 100 kg/m'
Sr4c.i~~

I50 kg/m' St';\< ING A
f4 5 (m)

200 kg/m*
SPACING

(m) 6 03

(m)
6.0 3

h MthllitH\ NO\
__

A
6.0> f 4.5

l.t\c;Irl(1.5
( 111)

TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAR-ER RAFTER RAn'ER RAf+-fER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEH

l.2Y 2.51 2.57 2.51
1.31

2-80X0 x 6 2-8080 X6 2-8080 X 6 2-6060 X6

2-9090 X 2-9090 X 1-9090 X 2-7070 X

6 6 6 6

2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X

6 6 6 6

6 2-100100X 8 2-9090X6 2-100100X X 6 2-100100 X 8 2-9090X6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100X 8 2-9090 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090X6 2-9090 2-9090X6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090X6 2-9090 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080X6 2-8080 X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-5050X 6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 1-5050X 6 2-4040 X 6 2-4040X6 771.40 7.14 2-8080X6 2-8080 X 6 2-7070X6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070X6 2-7070X6 2-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 1-5050X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 707.34 8.73 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080X6 2-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 i-5050X 6 1-4040X 6 1-5050X 6 1-5050X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 911.00 8.43

8 9 IO 11 I2 13 14 15 16 I7 IX 19 20 21 22 23

1.31 1.31 1.31 I.31 1.31 1.31 0.26 0.77 1.29 0.64 1.80 1.39 1.65 1.34 1.39 1.65 1.57 1.57

2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X

6 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-X080X6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X 6 1-5050X6 1-5050X 6 1-4040X 6 I-4040X6 1-4040X 6 2-4040 X 6 2-4040 X 6 748.57 6.93

2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070X6 2-7070 X6 2-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 1-4040X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 630.58 7.76

1-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 l-40403( 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 1-5050X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 2-4040 Y 6 2-4040X6 611.05 7.54

Sum of AnglesWelght(kg) Unit Weightckg m*)

199

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span = 24.0 m Wind Pressure =

154 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.41 m 200 kg/m' SP~cwc (4.5
(m)

Slope =

1 in 3
100 kg/m2
SPACING

Purlins 150 kg/m' SPACING (m) f4.5

A

(m)

LENGTH

f

4.5

6.0 >

6.0 3

6.0 1

(m) TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAfTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB
Sum 01 Angles Weight

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
(kg)

1.33 2.67 2.67 2.67 2.67 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 0.44 1.33 2.22 3.11 1.56 4.00 1.60 2.22 2.98 1.74 1.60 2.22 2.98 2.40 2.40

2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 1-4040X 6

2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X 6 l-6060 X 6 I-8080 X 6 l-404QX6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 I-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-4040 X 6 1-6060X6 2-4040X6 2-4040 X 6 1009.16 7.01

2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 1-4%40X6 1-4040X6 l-6060 X 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 956.12 8.85

2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-I3080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 l-8080 l-7070 l-6060 l-8080 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6

2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 l-6060 X 6 l-8080 X 6 l-4040 X 6 1-4040X6 1-5050X l-7070 6 X 6

2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

2-8080 X 6 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X 1-4040X6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 1254.75 8.71 6 l-8080 X 6

l-4040 X 6 l-6060 X 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X 1-4040X 6 6 l-7070 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X 1-4040X 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 2-4040 X 6 2-4040 X 6 889.24 8.23 6 6

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1095.70 7.60

2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1057.52 9.79

Un.it Weight

(kg/m')

a00

SP :38(s&Tp1987.

TABLE Span = 24.0 m Wind Pressure =

155 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.37 m 150 kg/m' 200 kg/m'

Slope = 1 in 4 100 kg/m* SPACING (m)

SPACING (m) (4.5 h 6.0 > f-?%j-,

MEMBERS

Nos.

LENGTH (m)

r 4.5

6.0 3

TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

1.33 2.67 2.67 2.67 2.67 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 0.33 1.0 1.67 2.33 1.17 3.0 1.5 1:89 2.4 1.57 1.49 1.89 2.4 2.0 2.0

2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-5050

X X X X X

6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-9090X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 8 8 8 8 6 6 6 6 6

2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-7070

X X X X X

6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-9090X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 8 8 8 8 6 6 6 6 6

2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-9090X 2-9090X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X

2-100100 X 8 2-100100 x 8 2-100100 x 8 2-100100 X 8 2-9090 X 6

2-9090X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X

2-9090X 2-9090 X 2-9090X 2-9090 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X

6 2-100100X 8 6 2-100100 X 8 6 2-100100 X 8 6 2-100100 X 8 6 2-9090 X 6 6 2-9090 X 6 6 2-9090 X 6 6 2-9090 X 6 6 2-9090 X 6 14040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-5050X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 I-6060 X 6 I-7070 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 1325.58 9.21

l-4040 X 6 1-4040X 6 I-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 I-6060 X 6 I-4040 X 6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 l-4040 x 6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 2-4040 x 6 2-4040 x 6 912.73 8.45

14040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 l-6060 X 6 `l-5050 5 6 l-5050 X 6 t-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-4040 X 6 l-5050 x 6 2-4040 X 6 2-4040 X 6 1097.63 7.62

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 l-6060 X 6 I-4040 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X 6 1-4040X6 l-4040 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060 X 6 2-4040 X 6 2-4040 X 6 940.05 8.70

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 x 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 l-6060 X 6 1-5050x 6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060x6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 l-60641 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1129.92 7.85

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1040.65 9.64

Sum of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m*)

201

T.lBI.E Span =

156 Slope =

STEEL

A-TYPE 5 kg,m'

ROOF

TRl.SSES

(ISA SECTIONS)
Purlins 150 kg. m' Spacing = 1.36 m 200 kg m' -. -<w___.(rn) 6.0 3

24.0m
Pressure = _______

I

in

Wind

100

S~4(.1xc
MEMBERS Nos. L tSG'rIl (mi
-.____-

(m)
6.03 (4.5

,Sracfsc

(- 4.5

f-4.5

TIE TIE TlE TIE TIE KAFlER RAFTER R4F7`ER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WLH WEB WEB WER WEH WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum Unit of Angles Weight II

1 2 3 4 5 b 7 8 9 IO 12 13 14 15 16 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 (kg)

1.32
2.67 2.67 2.67 2.67 1.36 1.36 1.36 1 36 1.36 1.36

2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-7070 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2.8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 I-5050 l-4040 l-4040 I-5050 l-4040 i-5050

x r( X ii X 8 X 8 X 6 X 8 X 8 X 8 X 8 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 X 6 Y 6 x 6 x 6 x 6 Y 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

_` YOXir X i0 2-808(i 2-8080 :.-80X0 2-9090 2-100100 2-iOO100 2-I0010(l 2-IOOIOO 2-8080 2-&0X0 Z-8080 Z-8081) 2-8080 1-5050 l-4040 t-4040 I-5050 I-4040 l-5050 I-5050 I-5050 x IO X IO X IO X 6 x 10 X IO X 10 x 10 X 8 X 8 X 4 x 6 Y 8 x h X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 :< 6

2-8080 Z-8080 L-8080 2-8080 2-7070

K 8 X P x d X 8 X 6

L-8080 2-8080 L-8080 2-8080 2-9090 2-IOOiOO 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-8080 2-X080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 I-5050 I-4040 I-4040 l-5050 I-4040 I-5050 l-5050 l-5050 I-6060

X IO X IO X 10 X 10 X 6 X IO X 10 X 10 X 10 X 8 X 8 X 8 x 8 X 8 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 W 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9040 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 l-5050 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 1-4040X l-5050 1-4040X I-5050 I-6060 I-4040 I-5050 I-5050 I-6060 2-5050 2-5050

X 8 X 8 X 8 X 8 X 6 X 8 X 8 X 8 X 8 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 l-5050 1-4040X6 1-4040X6

x

IO

x 10 x 10 x 10 X 6 x x IO IO

2-YOYO X 8 2-9090 2-9090 2-8080 2-8080 2-80X0 2.8083 ll-8080 I-5050 I-4040 i-3040 I-5050 i-5050 I-4040 I-5050 I-6060 l-4040 l-5050 l-4040 I-5050 2-4040 2-4040 X x X R x 6 2: 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 Y 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 :< 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 2-YOYO X 8

x 10 X IO X 8 X 8 X 8 X 8 X 8 X 6

I .36
1.36 1.36 0.27 0.80 1.33 I .x1 0 93 2.40 I.44 1.71 2.08 1.49 1.44 I.71 2.DX 1.7') 1.79

X 6 6 X 6 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

I-5050 I-4040X6 I-5050 I-5050 l-5050 I-6060 1-4040X 1-6060X6 I-5050 1-6060X6 2-5050 2-5050

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

L-.JC40 Y 6

1-4040X.6 l-5050 !-6060 l-4040 l-5050 I-4OJoX6 I-4040 2-4040 2-4040

I -&Ci)hO X 6 I 4041) X 6 I-5050 l-4040 I-5050 2-4040 2-4040 x 6 Y 6 x 6 x 6 X 6

1-4040X6 l-5050 I-5050 1-6060X6 2-5050 2-5050

1058.96 9.81

1320.26 9.17

1063.12 9.84

1343.75 9.32

1i49.73
10.64

1410.83 9.79

Weight

(kg/m')

TABLE Span = 30.0I,, Wind Pressure =

IS7 SILF.1. ;i-IYPE ROOF

TR1'SSk.S (ISA SEC'TIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.44 m 150 kg m2 SP4cisG (m) h (4.5 6.0 I 2-8080 X 2-8080 x 2-8080 X 2-8080 x 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 x 2-8080 X 2-8080 Y 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 2-9090 x6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X6 2-9090x6 2-8080 x6 2-8080 x 6 2-IOOICC x6 2-100100 x6 2-ICCIOC x6 2-1001OC X6 2-100100x 6 2-IOOICO x6 2-lCC100 X6 2-9090X6 2-9090 x 6 2-9090 x 6 2-9090x6 1-4040X6 I-4C4CX6 1-6060x 6 1-8080x 6 1-100100x 6 1-6060x 6 1-9090x 6 1-5050x 6 1-6C6CX6 l-8080 x6 1-100100x 6 l-4040 x6 1-5050x 6 1-5050x 6 1-7070x 6 I-9090 X 6 2-6060x6 2-606CX6 1662.111 9.24 200 kg/m*
SPACING

Slope = I m 3 100 kg, m'
Sp'4cIxcr (m)

(m) A 6.0 1 2-iOO100 X 8 2-10010~~ a 2-IOOINI X 8 2-1Wloox 8 2-9090X6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090X8 2-9090x8 2%90X 8 2-9090X8 2-9090 x 8 2-9090 X a 2-9090X8 2-1COICC X 6 2-IOCIOO x 6 2-1OOlCC X 6 2-100100 X 6 I-4040x6 1-4040X6 1-6060x6 I-8080 x 6 1-100100X 6 1-6060X6 1%90x 6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X 6 I-8080X 6 1-IOClOO x 6 14040X6 1-6060x 6 1-6060X 6 I-8080 x 6 I-ICCIOC X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 1982.14 11.01

h
MI:MHtHS

LOS
I

LE\GTti

CA.5 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 x 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-8080 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

6.0 3 2-9090X6 2-9090 x 6 2-9090 x 6 Z-9090 x 6 '2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-IOOICO X 6 2-100100 x 6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100X 6 2-IOOlCCX 6 2-100100 x 6 2-9090 X 6 219090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100x 6 1-6060x 6 l-9090 X 6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100 X 6 1-4040x 6 1-5050X 6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X 6 1-7070x 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1622.05 9.01

f 4.5 2-9090 x 6 2-9090 x 6 2-9090 x 6 2-9090X6 2-8080 x 6 2-8080 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 1-4040x6 1-4040x6 I-6060x 6 1-8080X 6 I-1OOlCC X 6 1-6060x 6 1-9090x 6 I-5050 x 6 I-6MCX 6 1-8080X 6 I-IOCIOCI x 6 1-4040x6 1-5050x 6 I-6C60 x 6 l-7070 x 6 I-9090 x 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 1649.5 12.22

(m) TIE 1.IE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 I3 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 1.36 2 73 2.73 2.13 2.73 2.13 1.44 1.44 1.44

1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44
0.45 1.36 2.27 3.18 4.09 2.04 5.00 I.64 2.21 3.05 3.88 2.09 1.64 2.27 3.05 3.88 2.85 2.85

1-4040X6 l-4040x 6 1-6060X 6 I-8080 X6 1-100100 X 6 1-6060X6 I-9090 X 6 1-5050x 6 I-6060x 6 1-8080X 6 1-100100X 6 I-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 1-5050X 6 l-a)60 X 6 1-7070X 6 2-4040 X 6 2-4040 X 6 1363.70 10.10

1-4040X6 1-4040x 6 I-6060x6 I-8080 K6 1-100100X 6 1-6060X 6 l-9090 x 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X 6 I-8080 X 6 1-100100X 6 1-4040X 6 1-4040X 6 1-5050x 6 1-6060X6 I-8050 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 1492.2') 11.05

Sum of AnglesWeight(kg) UnitWeight(Lg!m'j

TABLE

158 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.41 m 150 kg/m' 200 kg/m'

Span = 30.0 m Wind Pressure =

Slope = 1 in 4 100 kg!m2
SPACING

cn
.. ;

co

(m)
6.03 f 4.5

SPACING

(m)
6.0) A -

A
M tMHtRS NOS. LENGTH (mj c4.5 h

3

TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WFB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

1.36 2.73 2.73 2.73 2.13 2.13 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 0.34 1.02 1.70 2.39 2.07 1.53 3.75 1.52 1.93 2.46 3.05 1.81 1.52 1.93 2.46 3.05 2.32 2.32

2-lOO100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-100100 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 x X X X X X X X X X X 8 8 8 8 8 8 6 6 6 6 6

2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100

x x X x X X

8 8 8 8 6 6

2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090 2-9090

X X X X X X x X X X X X X X X X X

8 8 8 8 6 6 8 8 8 8 8 8 6 6 6 6 6

2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100

X x x X X X

8 8 8 8, 6 6

2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100

X X x X X X 8

8 8 8 8 6 6

2-130130 2-130130 2-130130 2-130130 2-100100 2-100100

X X X X X x

8 8 8 8 8 8

5

2-100100 X 10 2-100100 X 10 2-100100 X 10 2-100100 X 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-9090 X 8 2-9090 X 8 2-9090 X 8 2-9090 X 8 2-9090 X 8 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 I-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 l-7070 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 I-6060 X 6 2-4040X6 24040X6 1884.96 10.47

2-1ooloo x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 X 10 2-9090 X 8 2-9090 x 8 2-9090 x 8 2-9090 X 8 2-9090 x 8 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 I-7070 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-7070 X 6 I-,8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X is 1917.30 10.65

2-9090 X 2-9090X8 2-9090X8 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-9090X8 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-9090 X

8 8 6 6 6 6 6

2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 X 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-9090X8 2-9090 X 8 2-9090 X 8 2-9090 X 8 2-9090X8 1-4040X6 1-5050X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 I-7070 X 6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-7070 X 6 1-8080X 6 1-4040X6 I-7070 X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 I-8080 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2163.89 12.02

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X 6 I-7070 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-5050X 6 I-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 14040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 1484.81 11.00

1-4040X6 1-4040X 6 I-5050 X 6 l-6060 x 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 l-7070 X 6 l-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 14040x6 1-6060X 6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1554.27 11.51

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 l-7070 X 6 I-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 I-7070 X 6 1-8080X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-8080 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 1718.32 12.73

Sum of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

TABLE Span = 30.0 m Wind Pressure = -.

159 STEEL A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA SECTIONS) Purlins 150 kg/m' Spacing = 1.39 m 200 kg/m2
SPACING

Slope =

1 in 5
100 kg/m2
SPACING

(m) (4.5

SPACING

MEMHERS

NO\.

LENGl

H

A

(In)

6.0 >

(4.5

A

(m) 6.0 j

(4
TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAP-TER RAFTER RAFI-ER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of Angles Unit Weight Weight 2 4 5 6 1.36 2.73 2.73 2.73 2.13 2.73 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 0.27 0.82 1.36 1.91 2.45 1.23 3.00 1.47 1.75 2.13 2.57 1.66 1.47 1.75 2.13 2.51 2.03 2.03 2-100100 X 8 2-100100 X 8 2-100100 X 8 2-100100 X 8 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-100100X 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 X 10 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X 6 I-5050 X 6 I-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 I-7070 X 6 14040X6 I-7070 x 6 l-4040 x 6 I-5050 X 6 I-5050 X 6 2-4040 X 6 2-4040X6 1720.39 12.74 2-100100 x 2-100100x 2-100100 x 2-100100 x 2-9090X8 2-9090X8 10 10 10 10 2-100100 X 2-100100 X 2-100100 X 2-100100 X 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-100100 X 2-100100 x 2-100100 x 2-100100 X 2-100100 X 2-100100 x 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 8 8 8 8 2-100100 x 2-IOQlOOX 2-100100 x 2-100100 x 2-9090X8 2-9090X8 2-130130 X 2-130130 X 2-130130 X 2-130130 X 2-130130 X 2-130130 X 2-9090X8 2-9090X8 2-9090X8 2-9090X8 2-9090X8 10 IO 10 10 2-100100x 2-100100 x 2-100100 x 2-100100 x 2-9090X8 2-5'0hX8 2-100100 x 2-100100 X 2-100100 x 2-100100 x 2-100100 x 2-100100 x 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 10 10 fo 10 2-130130 X 8 2-130130 X 8 2-lW130 X 8 2-1'30130 X d 2-100100 x 10 2-100100 x 10 2fl30130 2-130130 2-130130 2-130130 2-130130 2-130130 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 2-100100 X X X X X X X X X X X 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 (kg)

2-130130 X 8 2-130130 X 8 2-130130 X 8 2-130130 X 8 2-130130 X 8 2-130130 X 8 2-9090X8 \2-9090 X 8 2-9090X8 2-9090X8 2-9090 X 8 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 14040X6 I-5050 X 6 I-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-6060X6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 I-8080 X 6 l-5050 X 6 I-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2018.95 11.22

10 10 10 10 10 10

8 8 8 8 8 8

10 10 10 10 10 10

1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 14040X6 1-6060X6 l-5050 X 6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 i-4040X6 I-7070 X 6 1-5050X 6 L-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1745.79 12.93

l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050X 6 I-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 l-6060 X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 I-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 l-8080 X 6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2032.04 11.28

1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 I-7070 X 6 14040X6 1-6060X6 l-5050 X 6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 I-7070 X 6 S-5050 X 6 1-6&0X6 I-7070 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 1909.95 14.14

l-7070 X 6 1-4040X 1-4040X & 1-5050X6 I-7070 X 6 1-4040Xp 1-6060X6 1-6060X6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 lAO4OX6 I-8080 X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 I-8080 X 6 2-6060X6 26060x6 2215.43 12.31

I.

(kg/m')

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span=9 Wind m Pressure =

160 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE

SECTIONS) Spacing =

Slope =

1 in 3
100 kg/m2

Purlins I50 kg/m'

1.19 m
200 kg/m'
SPAC.lhG cm)

SPACING

(m)

SPAC'ING ("I)

MEMBERS

Cm)
TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

1
2 3 4 5 6
1

2.25 2.25 1.19 1.19 1.19 1.19 0.75 0.38 1.50 1.19 1.13 1.35 1.35

5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 20M 20M 20M 20M 20M 32L 32L 104.04 2.57

5OL 5OL 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 25L 20M 25L 20M 32L 321~ 121.67 2.25

65L 65L 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL. 20M 20M 20M 20M 20M 4OL 4OL 122.90 3.03

65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 25L 20M 25L 20M 5OL 501. 145.23 2.69

65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 25'L 20M 20M 20M 5OL 5OL 144.13 3.56

80L 80L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 25L 20M 25L 25L 65L 65L 164.63 3.05

8 9 10 II 12 13

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight
(kg/m*)

TABLE Span = 9.0 m Wind Pressure =

161 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE

SECTIONS) Spacing =

Slope = 1 in 4 100 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

Purlins 150 kg/m2
SPACING (m)

I. 16 m
200 kg/m' SPKIX A (m)
6.03

A
MEMRERS Nos LENGTH Cm) f 4.5 6.0 > (4.5 6.0 3 (4.5

TIE TIE RAFTER RARER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13

2.25 2.25 1.16 1.16 1.16 1.16 0.56 0.28 1.13 1.16 1.13 I.26 1.26

65L 65L 65L 65L 651, 65L 20M 25L 20M 25L 20M 32L 32L 132.92 3.28

65L 65L 80L SOL 8OL 80L 20M 25L 20M 25L 25L. 4OL 4OL 146.74 2.72

65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 25L 20M 25L 20M 5OL 5OL 140.62 3.47

80L 80L 80L 80L 80L 80L 20M 25L 20M 25L 25L SOL SOL 160.31 2.97

80L 80L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 25L 20M 25L 25L 5OL 5OL 150.84 3.72

9OL 9OL 80L 80L 80L 8OL 20M 32L 20M 25L 25L 65L 65L 186 83 3.46

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m2)

206

SP : 38(S&TblW)7

TABLE Span = 9.0 m Wind Pressure =:

162 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.15 m Xl0 kg/m' h (m)

Slope =

I

in 5

Purlins 150 kg/m*
SPACING

100 kg/m'
SPAC'ING

A Mt \~I<I KI NO\. I.l\blll /

(m)

(m)

h

SPACING > f4.5

4.5

CO?

fi.5

6.0

6.0

)

( 111) TIE
TIE RAFTFR RAFTIrK RAF1 ER RAI-l-FR WEB WER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB I 2 3 `t 5 6 7 8 Cl IO II I? I3 7.25 2.25 I.15 1.1s 1.15 I.15 0 4s 0.23 0.90 I.15 I.13 I.21
I.Zi

65L ML. X01. XOIA X01. X01 ?OM 3? I ZOM 251 2.51 301
401

8OL UOL YOL 901~ 9OL 9OL 20M 321. 20M 321 ?5l. 5111 501 177.5x 3.29

ROL 80L 801.. XOL XOL X01. ZOM 32L 20M 251. 25 I.. 501. 5OL 155.24 3.91

9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 20M 321. 20M 32L 25L 501. 5OL 195.22 3.62

90L 9OL 80L 80L 80L 80L 20M 32L 20M 25L 25L 501.. 5OL 175.88 4.34

9OL 90L 90L 90L 90L 9OL 20M 32L 20M 32L 32L 651. 65L 204.76 3.79

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg m')

I44 85 1.58

T.4BI.E Span = I2 m Wind Pressure =.

162 S'l'F:E:L A-TYPE Slopr = I 1" 3

ROOF

TRl:SSES

(TI'BE

SE:CTIONS) Spacing =

Purlins -___ 150 kg/m'

I

27 m 200 kgjm'

100 kg, m'

(m)
TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of Tubes Weight 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 !2 13 14 15 16 17 (kg) 1.20 2.40 2.40 1.27 1.27 I .27 1.27 1.27 0.40 1.20 0.60 2.00 1.44 1.22 1.44 1.56 1.56 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 20M 20M 20M 20M 20M 4OL 4OL 187.72 3.48 25L 20M 25L 49L 4OL 190.39 2.64 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 8OL ROL 8OL 65L 65L 65L 651~ 65L 20M 20M 20M 20M 20M 20M 25L 5OL 5OL 206.71 3.83 80L 8OL 8OL 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 20M 20M 25 20M 25L SOL 5OL 208.04 2.89 9OL 9OL 9OL 65L 65L 651.. 65L 65L 20M 20M 20M 20M 20M 20M 25L 5OL 5OL 230.23 4.26 9OL 9OL 9OL 80L 80L 8OL 8OL 80L 20M 20M 20M 20M 25L 20M 25L 65L 65L 255.12 3.54

Unit Weight

(kg/m*)

207

Sf' : 38(S&T)-I987

TABLE Span = 12 m Wind Pressure =

164 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.24 m kg/m'

Slope =

I

in 4 150
SPACING

Purlins kg/m' (m) 6.07

100 kg/m'

200

Sp~cIsc
A Mb\IHbRS TIE TIE TIE RAFTkR RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEH s ER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEH Su,m of lubes Unit Weqht I 1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II I2 11 I4 IS Ih
17

(m) 6.0' (4.5

SPACING (m) f 4.5 6.0 y

NOS.

l.EKG (m) I .N 2.40 2.40

I ,I

f4.5

hSI_ 65L 65L 8OL ROL @IL 8OL UOL 25L 2OM 20 M 2OM 251. 20 M 251. 32L. 321. lY2.59 3.57

901. 9OL 9OL 9OL 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 25L 2OM 251. 211\1 251. 2lJll 251. 401. 4Ol. 256X1 3.57

9OL 901. 9OL KOL 8OL SOL 8OL 8OL 2SL 2OM 20M 2OM 251 20M 251. 5OL 501, 237.04 4 5')

9OL 90,L 9OL 9OL 9OL. 9OL 9OL YOL 25L 20M 251. 20M 25L 2OM 251. 501 SOL 261 76 3.64

IOOL IOOL IOOL SOL 80L EOL 8OL 0OL 25L 20M 25L 20M 25L 20M 25L 501. 5OL 25

IOOM IOOM IOOM 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 25L 20M 25L 2OL 25L 25M 321. 65L 65L 313.41 4.35

1.24 1.24 1.24 1.24 1.24 0.30 0.90 0.45 I 50 I 34 1.71 I 34 I.42
I

42

Weight (kg' ~hg I,>

1.25
4.65

I

208

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span= 12 m

165 STEEL A-TYPE Slope = 1 in 5

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.22 m I50 kg/m' 200 kg/m2

Wind Pressure =

100 kg/m2

MEMBERS

Nos.

LENGTH Cm)

>

TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFIYER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

I
2 3 4 5 6 I 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17

1t20 2.40 2.40
1.22 1.22 1.22 1.22 1.22 0.24 0.72 0.16 1.20 1.29 1.21 1.29 1.34 1.34

9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 25L 20M 25L 20M 25L 20M 25L 4OL 4OL 251.94 4.67

IOOL IOOL IOOL I OOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 32L 32L 20M 32L 25L 32L 5OL 5OL 289.17 4.02

9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 25L 20M 25L 20M 25L 20M 25L 5OL 5OL 256.60 4.75

IOOL IOOL lOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 32L 32L 20M 32L 25L 321. 5OL 5OL 289.17 4.02

IOOL IOOL IOOL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 25L 20M 25L 20M 25L 25L 32L 65L 65L 282.10 5.22

125M 125M 125M IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 32L 20M 32L 20M 32L 25L 32L 65L 65L 373.04 4.18

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

209

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABS 166 smx
Span= Wind 18 m Pressure =

A-TYPE

roof

TIUJSSE~

('TUBE SECTIONS~ Purhns 150 kg/m' --_
SPACING

Slope =

I in 3
100 kg/m'

Spacing = 1.36 m 200 kg/m*
SPACING

~~_____..____
SI'ACING

h

(m) 6.0 '

(m) 6.0 '

A c 4.5

(m) 6.0 1

MEMBERS

No<.

L.I.NCrTH

( 4.5

( 4.5

(rn) --I-~____~_.__-_---_-._-.-____
TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFI`ER RAFIER RAFTER RAFTER RAF-I ER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WE R WEB WFH WFH WCR WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEH Sum of `Tubes Welpht

I
2 i 4 3 rs 7 8 9 i0 !I I:, 13

i.29 ?.S? ?.5? 2.S? I.36 I.36 1.36 1.3h 1.36 1.3b 1.36 CJ43 ; 29 2 14 1.07 706 1 55 2 is 143 I 55 2 14 I .98 !.ciK

HOL
X01. X01,

ROL ROL x01. 65L 65L 6SL h5L 65L `OM 20M 25L 20M 151. 251. 121. 20M 20M 251. SOL SOL 332.48

9OL 901, 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 8OL 8OL XOL ROL 8OL 20M 20M 251. 2OM 25L 25L 32L 20M 25L 25L SOL 501. 393.72 3.65

90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 80L 801~ b5L h5L 65L 651~ 65L 20M 2OM 251. 20M 251. 251. 32L 20M 25L 25L 65L 65L 382.65 4.72

IOOL IOOL IOOL lOOL 9OL 9OL 801. 801, 801 ROL XOL 20M !OM 25L 20M 2%. 25L 32L 20M 25L 32L 651 65L 430.32 3.98

1OOL IOOL IOOL lOOL 80L KJL 65L 65L 651~ 651. 651 2Clhf 20M 251. 2Ohl 251. 25L 32L 20M 25L 321. 65L 651. 406.42 5.02

IOOM IOOM lOOM IOOM 9OL 9OL 9OL 901. 901 901 901 XM 2OM 251. 20M 25L 251. 32L 20M 32L 32L 65L 65L 497.08 4.60

ia
IS I3 1' iP I (i 10 ?1 27 2-s !ka)

210

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span = 18 m Wind Pressure = .--

167 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TCBE

SECTEONS) Spacing = 1.33 m 200 kg/m'
SPAC`IUG (Ill)

Slope = 1 in 4 100 kg/m' ____
SPA<.ING

Purhns 150 kg, m' SPA(`I\G

A

(m) 6.0 J f4.5

(m) 607 fi.5

MEMHERS

Nos.

,_ENG

IH

6.5

6.0 I

tni) TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAF?ER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of Tubes Weight Unit Weight (kg/m')

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 a 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 (kg)

i.29 2.57 2.51 2.57 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 0.32 0.96 1.61 u.80 2.25 1.44

YOL 901. 901. 901. 9OL 9OL 801. ROL 8OL 8OL 8OL 2OM 20M 20M 20M 20M 25L 32L 20M 25L 20M 401~ 4OL 365.83 4.52

IOOM 100M IOOM 90M IOOM lOOM IM)L

IOOL 1001 1001.
IOOL 9OL ?OL l%OL 801, 8OL 8OL 8OL 20M 2OL 2OM 20M 20M 25L 32L 20M 25L 25L 5OL 5OL 394.16 4.87

1OOM IOOM lOOM IOOM 1oilhi
IO(Ikl I

125hl
I'511 12551 125!vL 9OL YOL XOL 8OL 8011 8OL XOL 20M 2OM 2OM 2Ohl X'M 25L 32L 20M 25L 32i. 65L
h51.

125.M 12521 125M 125M IOOM IOOM 1001. IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 25L 20M 25L 25L 20M 251. 32L 20M 32L 32L 65L 651. 582.97 5.40

OOL

I OOL
1OOL IOOL I OOL 25L 20M 25L 25L 20M 25L 32L 2OM 32L 25L 5OL 5OL 478.61 4.43

1001. IOOL lOOId I LIOI. 251, 20M 251, 25L 2OM 251. 321~ 20M 32L 321. i,51. 65L 509.17 4.71

I .82 1.31
1.44 1.82 1.71 1.71

520.`00 6.42

211

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span = 18 m Wind Pressure =

168 STEEL

A-TYPE

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.31 a 200 kg/m2
SPACING (m)

Slope = 1 in 5 100 kg/m'
SPACING

Purlins 150 kg/m'
SPACING

(m) 6.0 J 14.5

(m) 6.01)

MEMRERS

Nos.

,_ENGl

H

f

4.5

( 4.5

6.03

(m) TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAF?-ER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of Tubes Unit Weight Weight 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 (kg) 1.29 2.57 2.51 2.57 1.31 1.31 1.31 1.31 1.31 1.31 1.31 0.26 0.77 1.29 0.64 1.80 1.39 1.65 1.34 1.39 1.65 1.57 1.57 1OOL 1OOL 1OOL 1OOL IOOM 1OOM 90M 90M 90M 90M 90M 251. 20M 20M 25L 20M 25L 32L 20M 32L 20M 401~ 4OL 422.96 5.22 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M !35M I OOM IOUM IOOM IOOM IOOM 321. 251. 25L 2SL 20M 32L 321. 20M 32L 25L 501. 5OL 610.31 5.65 1OOM IOOM IOOM 1OOM IOOM IOOM 90M 90 M 90M 90M 90M 251. 20M 20M 25L.. 20M 25L 32L 20M 32L 25L 5OL 5OL 480.46 5.93 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M IOOM IOOM 1OOM 1OOM IOOM 32L 25L 25L 25L 20M 321. 32L 20M 32L 32L 65L 65L 622.H6 5.77 I25M 125M 125M 125M IOOM 1OOM 9OM 90M 90M 90M 90M 2<L 20M 20h 251~ 20M 25L 32L 20M 32L 32L 65L 65L 566.82 7.00 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 1OOM 1hOM 1OOM IOOM IOOM 32L 25L 251. 251. 20M 32L 32L 20M ,32L 321 65L 65L 622.86 5.77

(kg/m2)

212

SP : 38(S&T~l!M7
TABLE Span = 24 m Wind Pressure = 169 STEEL A-TYPE Slope = ROOF TRUSSES (TUBE SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing - 1.41 m 150 kg/m* SPACING (m) c4.5 h 6.0> <p%-, 200

1 in 3
100 kg/m*

kg/m'

-SPACING

(m) 6.01)

MEMH~RS --

NOS

LENGTll Cm) 1.33 2.61 2.67 2.67 2.67 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 0.44 1.33 2.22 3.11 1.56 4.00 1.60 2.22 2.98 1.74 1.60 2.22 2.98 2.40 2.40

r4.5

1 -2 3 4 5 6 / 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEti WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum 01 Tubes Weight

9OL 9OL 9OL 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 20M 20M 25L 4OL 20M 32L 251. 721 JCII LOM 20M 25L 32L 5OL 5OL 598.59 5.54

IOOL 1001. IOOL IOOL 8OL IOOM IOOM IOOM IOOM 1OOM IOOM IOOM IOOM IOOM 20M 20M 25L. 4OL

IOOL IOOL 1OOL IOOL IOOL 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 20M 2OL 25L 4OL 20M 32L 25L 321. 401. 20M 5L 32L 4OL 65L 65L 650.46 6.02

lOOH IOOH 1OOH IOOH IOOH IOOM IOOM IOOM lOOM 1OOM IOOM IOOM IOOM IOOM 20M 20M 25L 4OL 20M 32L, 25L 32L 5OL 20M 25L 32L 4OL 65L 65L 847.71 5.89

125M 125M 125M 125M 125M IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 1OOL 1OOL 20M 20M 25L 4OL 20M 32L 25L 32L 4OL 20M 251~ 32L 5OL 80L 8OL 844.27 7.82

125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 1OOH 1OOH IOOH 1OOH IOOH IOOM IOOM 1OOM IOOM 20M 25L 25L 4OL 20M 32L 25L 32L SOL 25L 32L 4OL 5OL 80L 80L 944.94 6.56

2OM
32L 25L 321. 5.01. 20M 25L 25L 32L 65L 65L 732.44 5.04

(kg)

Unit Weight

(kg/m2)

213

SP : 38(S&T)-1987
TABLE Span=24 Wind m Pressure = 170 STEEL A-TYPE Slope = 1 in 4 100 kg/m2 SPACING (m)
MEMBERS

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE SECTIONS) Purlins 150 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

Spacing

= 1.37 m 200 kg/m' SPA~IHG (m) A 6.0 5 (4.5

h

Nos.

LENGTH

f4.5

6.0 `,

(4.5

6.07

(m) TIE TIE TIE HE `TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WkB WEB WEB WEB 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II I2 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 1.33 2.67 2.67 2.67 2.67 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 0.33 1.00 1.67 2.33 1.17 3.00 1.49 1.89 2.40 1.57 1.49 1.89 2.40 2.01 2.01 IOOM IOOM IOOM 1OOM 1OOM 1OOM 1OOM 1OOM IOOM 1OOM 90M 90M 90M 90M 25L 20M 20M 32L 20M 25L 25L 32L 40L 20M 25L 20M 25L 5OL 5OL 686.77 6.36 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M IOOM 1OOM IOOM IOOM 32L 20M 25L 32L 25L 25L 32L 32L 40L 20M 32L 25L 32L 5OL 5OL 878.04 6.10 125M l25M 125M 125M 125M IOOM 1OOM 1OOM IOOM IOOM 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 25L 20M 20M 32L 20M 25L 25L 3iL 40L 2OM 25L 25L 32L 65L 65L 794.74 7.36 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M IOOM IOOM IOOM IOOM 32L 20M 25L 32L 25L 25L 32L 32L 4OL 20M 32L 32L 4OL 65L 65L 897.03 6.23 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 1OOM IOOM IOOM IOOM 1OOM 9OL 9OL YOL YOL 25L 20M 20M 32L 20M 25L 25L 32L 4OL 20M 25L 32L 4OL b5L 65L 798.52 7.39 150M 15OM 15OM 150M 150M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 1OOM IOOM ICOM IOOM 32L 20M 25L 32L 25L 25L 32L 32L 401. 2OM 32L 32L 5OL SOL SOL 981.46 6.82

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

214

SP : 386&T)-1987

TABLE Span = 24 In Wind Pressure =

171 STEEL A-TYPE Slope = 1 in 5

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE SECTIONS) Purlins 150 kg/m' Spacing = 1.36 m 200 kg/m*
SPACWG (m)

100 kg/m*
SPACING (m)

A
MEMHERS Nos. LENGI H ' 4.5

SPACING (m)

A.

A 6.03 f 4.5 6.0 3

6.03

f4 5

Cm) TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 I.33 2.67 2.61 2.67 2.61 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1 36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 0.27 0.80 1.33 1.87 0.93 2.40 1.44 1.71 2.0s 1.49 I.43
1.71

125M 125M 125M 125M 90M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M IOOM IOOM IOOM IOOM 32L 20M 20M 25L 20M 20M 32L 321~ 32L 20M 32L 20M 25L 5OL 5OL 812.16 5 52

150M 150M 150M l5OM IOOM 150M 15OM 150M 150M l5OM 125M 125M 125M 125M 32L 25L 25L 25L 25L 20M 32L 32L 401. 20M 4OL 251~ 25L 5OL 5OL 975. !7 6.77

125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M IOOM lOOM lOOM IOOM 32L 20M 20M 25L 20M 20M 32L 32L 32L 20M 32L 25L 32L 65L 65L 842.72 7.99

15OM 150M 150M 150M 150M 150M 150M 150M l5OM 15OM 125M 125M 125M 125M 32L 25L 25L 25L 25L 20M 32L 32L 4OL 20M 4OL 32L 32L 65L 65L 1029.58 7.15

150M 15OM 15OM 15OM l5OM 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M lOOM lOOM IOOM lOOM 32L 20M 20M 25L 20M 20M 32L 32L 32L 20M 32L 32L 4OL 65L 65L 939.47 8.70

150H 150H 150H 15OH l5OH 150M 150M l5OM 150M 150M 125M 125M 125M 125M 32L 25L 25L 25L 25L 20M 32L 32L 4OL 20M 401. 32L. IOL ROL 801_ 108?.h7 7.55

2.08 1.79 1.79

Sum ot Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg,`m')

215

51' : 38 (S&T)-1987

I .\HI.E

172 Sl E:b:l .A-l.Sl'kI

ttooi;

I`HC~SSES

(TUBE

SKrIONS) Spacing = 1.44 m 200 kg/m* --_

Puriins I50 kg, m2 ---

I .36 2.73 2.13 2:73 2.13 2.73 1.44 1.44 I.44 144 1.44 1.44 1.44 I.44 I.44 lti I.44 C.&l

IOOI. 1001. 1001. 1001. 801. 801_ IOOM IOOM ; 00 M IOOM IOOM IOOM IOOM 9OL 3OL YOi. 901. ?CM 251. !`v i ;,,I SOI+ 251. S1Fl `51. 321 40 L 501. NM 321 251 32L 501, 651. 651. 920.61 6.92

i25M 125M l25M l25M 125M 12511 IOOM I 00 M IOOM IOOM ! 00 M 1OOM ICOM 9OL `NL UOL. i'i)l 20 "Ll ,, c &,I. 251 40 1. SOL 251. 501. 251. ?21_ 401 501. 20 M 321. 321. JCl 5OL XOI.. XOL I IS9.X4 x.59

l25M l25M 125M l25v l25M l25M 125&l l25M 125M 125M 125M 125M 12CM IOOL 1001. 1001. l!tiL 2OM 121. 32i. 401~ 5OL. 251. 501. 32L. 4OL Xl_ 651. 25L 321. 321. 4OL 651. EOL 801. 132?.91 7.35

i25M l25M l25M l25M 12514 125M IOOM IOOM ,lOOM IOOM IOOM iOOh4 1OOM 1OOM IO0 M I00 M i<COM 70M 25L 251. 401. 5OL 25L. 50 L 251. 321 401. 501. 25L 321. $21~ 5OL 651. 9nl_ 9CL 122i.99 9.05

150M l5OM 150M 150M 15OM 15OM 125h4 125M 125M l25M 125M l25M 125M i25M l25M 125M 125M 2OM 32L. 321. 4OL 5OL 25L 5OL 32L 4OL. 50L< 651. 25L 4OL 401 5OL 65L 9OL. 9OL 1493.02 8.29

1 _I? 7 17 . .& 1.ix
4.00 2.05 S.ou I.64 2.27 3.05 3.w 2. IO I.64 2.27 3 05 3.8X 2 85 2 85

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span = 30 m Wind Pressure =

173 STEEL A-TYPE Slope =

ROOF TRUSSES

(TUBE SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.41 m 150 kg/m' 200 kg/m' SPacwci (m) A r4.5 6.0 3

1 in 4
100 kg/m*

S:Phclsc
MEMR~KS Nos.
LFNC,l II

A

(m)
6.0 `I

SPACING

A

(m) 6.03

(4.5

f4.5

(171) TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAF'l ER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 I4 15 lb 17 1X 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 1.36 2.72 2.12 2.72 2.72 2.72 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 0.34 1.02 1.71 2.39 3.07 1.53 3.75 1.5: 125M 125M 125M i25M iOOL !OOl. i25M 12_CM 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 251. 25L 25L 32L 40L 20M 32L 32L 32L 4OL 5OL 20M 4OL 25L 25L 32L 5OL SOL 1122.68 8.32 150M 150M 150M 15OM IOOH 1OOH 15OH I SOH l5OH 15OH 15OH I50H 150H 150M 150M 150M 150M 25L. 32L 25L 32L 4OL 25L 32L 32L 4OL 5OL 5OL 20M 5OL 32L 32L 32L 65L 65L 1394.55 7.75 l25M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M 125M !25M 125M 25L 25L 25L 32L 4OL 20M 32L 32L 32L 4OL 5OL 20M 4OL 32L 32L 40L 65L 65L 1220.60 9.04 15oM 15OM

150M
15OM ISOM 150M 150M 15OM 125M l25M 12fM 125M l25M 125M 125M l2SM ! 25M 125M 125,w 2SL 25P. 25L 32;) 401, 20M 32L 32L 32L 40L 5OL 25L 4OL 32L 4OL 5OL 8OL ROL 1326.32 9.82

15OM
15OM 15OM l5OM

175M 175M 175M 175M 15OM 15OM 175M 175M 175M 175M 150M ISOM 15Oh-i 15OM 15OM 150M l50M 32L 32L 32L 32L 40L 25L 32L 4OL 40L 5OL 65L 25L 5OL 4OL 5OL 65L 8OL 80L 1634.04 9.08

! 50H 150H 15OH 150H 150H 150H 150H 150M 15OM 15OM 150M
25L 32L 25L 32L 40L 25L 32L 32L 40L 5OL 5OL 20M 5OL 32L 40L 5OL 8OL BOL 1469.35 8.16

1.93
2.46 3.05 1.81 1.53 1.93 2.46 3.05 2.32 2.32

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

217

SP:38(S&T)-1987
TABLE Span = 30 m Wind Pressure = 174 STEEL A-TYPE Slope = 1 in 5 100 kg/m'
SPACING (m) MEMRERS Nos. LENGTH

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE SECTIONS) Purlins 150 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

Spacing

= 1.39 m 200 kg/m2

h

f4.5

6.0 3

(4.5

6.0>

(m) TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAmER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAfTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of Tubes Weight I 2 3 4 5 6 I 8 9 :0 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 (kg) 1.36 2.73 2.73 2.13 2.13 2.73 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 0.27 0.82 1.31 1.91 2.46 1.23 3.00 1.47 1.75 ,2.13 2.51 1.67 1.47 1.75 2.13 2.57 2.03 2.03 15OM 15OM 15oM 15OM 1OOM IOOM 150M 150M 150M 15OM 15OM 150M 150M 1OOH IQOH 1OOH 1OOH 4OL 25L 25L 25L 32L 25L 25L 32L 32L 40L 50L 20M 5OL 32L 25L 32L SOL 50L 1206.96 8.94 175M 175M 175M 175M 15OM 15OM 175M 175M 175M i75M 175M 175M 150M 150M 15OM 15OM 150M 5OL 25L. 32L 32L 401. 32L 32L 4OL 4OL 5OL 65L 20M 65L 40L 32L 40L fz5L 65L 1601.72 8.90 150M 150M 150M 150M 150M 150M 15OM 150M 150M i5OM i5OM l5OM ISOM 1OOH 1OOH 1OOH lOOH 4OL i5i 25L. 25L 32L 25L 25L 32L 321. 4OL SOL 20M 5OL 32L 32L 40L 65L 65L 1304.65 9.66 175M 175M 175M 175M 150M l5OM 175M 17SM 175M 175M 175M 175M !SOM l5OM 150M 15ilM 150M 5Oi 32L 32L `2L 4OL 32L 32L 4OL 401. 5OL 65L 25L 65L 4OL 40L 5OL 65L 65L 1611.48 8.95 15OH 150H 15OH 15OH 150H 15OH 15OM I50M i5OM 150M 15OM 150M 15OM IOOH IOOH lOOH IOOH 4OL 25L 25L 251. 32L 25L 25L 32L. 32L. 4OL SOL 20M 5OL 32L 4OL 5OL 8OL 8OL 1353.22 10.02 175M 175M 175M 175M 150M UclM 175M 175M 175M 175M 175M 175M 150M l5OM 150M 15OM 150M 5OL 32L 32L 32L 40L 32L 32L 4OL 4OL 5OL 651. 25L 65L 4OL 5OL 65L 65L h5L 1623.92 9.02

Unit Weight

(kg/m*)

218

SP : 38(s&T)19s7

TABLE Span = 9 m Wind Pressure =

175 STEEL

LEAN-TO

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA

SECTIONS)

Slope =

I in 3
100 kg/m*

Purlins Spacing = 1.36 m I50 kg/m*
SPACING (m)

200 kg/m2
SPACING (m)

SPACING (m)

h

h

A

MEMBERS

Nos.

LENGTH

r

6.03

(4.5

6.0 -I

f4.5

6.0>

(m) TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEE WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WER WEB I` 2 3 4 5 6 I 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 1.29 2.57 2.57 2.57 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 0.43 1.29 2.14 I .Ol 3.00 1.55 2.14 1.44 1.55 2.14 1.98 1.98 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 14040x6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1+40X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 240.62 5.94 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 24040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 14040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 24040x6 240.62 4.46 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 24040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040-k 6 24040X6 24040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 242.76 6.00 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X 6 6 6 6 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X 6 6 6 6 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X 6 6 6 6

24040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 260.76 4.83

24040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X I-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 268.68 6.63

2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-lO4OX6 2-4040X6 24040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 I-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 14040X6 1-6060X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 270.61 5.01

6

6 6 6

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

219

SP : 38(S&T~1987

TABLE Span = 9 m Wind Pressure =

176 STEEL

LEAN-TO

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.36 m 200 kg/m'
SPACING h (m)

Slope =

1 in 4
100 kg/m'

Purlins 150 kg/m'
SPACING h

SPACING MEMBERS NOS. LENGTH

(m) 6.0 3 f4.5

(m) 6.0> (4.5

r4.5

6.0 >

(m) TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum Unit of Tubes Weight Weight 1 2 3 4 5 6 I 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 1.29 2.57 2.51 2.51 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 0.32 0.96 1.61 0.80 2.25 1.44 1.82 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 2-5050' 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X X X X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 2-5050 2-%50 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 L-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X X X X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X X X X X y X X 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-5&30X6 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 6 6 6 6 6 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 2-5Q5Q 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

I5
16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 (kg)

1.37 1.44
1.82 1.71 1.71

1-4040X6 I-4040 X I-4040 X 1-4040X6 24040x6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 1-4040X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 22X.83 5.65

6 6

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-4040 X 2-4040X6 14040 X I-5050 X 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-4040 X 2-4040 X 2-4040X6 246.83 4.57

6 6 6

6 6

1-4040X6 1-4&40X6 1-4040X6 I-4040X6 2-4040 X I-4040 X I-5050 X 1-4040X6 14040X6 I-4040 X 2-4040 X 2-4040 X 246.83 6.09

6 6 6

6 6 6

14040X6 14040x6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040 X 6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 248.65 4.60

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 24040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 1-4MOX6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040 X 6 264.85 6.54

1-4040X6 I-4040 X I-4040 X I-4040 X 2-4040 X 1-4040X6 I-5050 X I-4040 X I-5050 X I-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 273.13 5.06

6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

(kg/m*)

220

SI' : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 177 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF Span = 9 m Wind Pressure `= -Slope =

TRUSSES (ISA SECTTONY)
Purlins Spacing = 1.31 m 150 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

I in 5
100 kg/m*

2tM kg/m'
SPACING (m) c+-m

SPACING (m)

A
MEMBERS Nos. LENGTH (m) fi.5 6.0 7 f4.5

h
6.0 1

TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFI"ER RAFTER RAFl-ER RAFl-L;R RAFTER RAFf'ER RAFTER WE5 WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 I7 18 I9 29 21 22 23

1.29 2.57 2.51 2.57 I.31 1.31 I.31 I.31 I.31 I.31 I.31 0.26 0.71 I.29 0.64 1.80 1.38 1.65 1.34 1.38 1.65 1.57 1.5:

2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050

X X X X X X X x X X X

6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6' _2-606OX6 2-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 l-4040X6 14x6 1-4040X6 24040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 IJo X6 l-4040 X 6 I-4040 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 268.73 4.98

2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050

X X X X X X X X X X X

6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060x0 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4044)X6 I-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 270.38 5.01
--I-

2-7070 2-7070 2-1070 2-7070 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050

X X X X X X X X X X X

6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-7010 2-1070 2-7070 2-7010 2-ai0 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060

x X X X x X X x X X X

6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

1-4040X6 l-4040 X 6 1-4040x 6 I-4040 X 6 2-4040X6 1-4040X 6 l-5050 X 6 I-4040 X 6 I-4040 X 6 lr404OX6 2-4040 X 6 24040X6 236.02 5.83

1-4040X6 l-4040 X 6 I-4040X6 I-4040 X 6 2-4040 X 6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 14040X6 l-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 236.02 5.83

14040X6 1-4040X6 I-4040X6 1-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 I-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 211.45 6.70
-

I-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-4040 X 6 2-4040X6 14040x6 I-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 I-5050 x 6 t-5050x 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 294.24 5.45

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

221

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span = 12 in Pressure =

178 STEEL Slope

LEAN-TO =

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.41 m kg/m2

!
100

in 3 kg/m' (m) 6.07 150

Purlins kg/m' (m)

Wind

200

Sll~cwG
A MEMRERS NOS. LEi%GTH (m) (4.5

SPac.IF;c;

f

SPACING (m) f\ 4.5 6.0 1

TIE
1`1 E 7IE TIE TIE RAF1 RAF'TFR RAF1 Rht'I R ,\tl ER tR ER I-R

1.33 2.61 2.61 2.6? 2.67 I.41 1.41

2-4040 24040 24040 2-4040 2-4040 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 14040X6 14040X6 1-6060X6 6

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

2-4040 2-4040 24040 2-4040 24040 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 14040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 X 6

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-606U 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 l-4040 l-4040 1-6060X X 6

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 6

2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-6060X6 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-606U 2-6060 2-6060 I-4040 1-4040X6 f-606(: X 6 14040X6 2-7070 14040X6

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-7070

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 6 6

2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 14040X6 14040X6 1-6060X6 X 6 14040

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 f-4040 1-4040X 1-6060X X 6

8
9 I0
II 12 13 14 I5 I6 17 3.1 I 19

1.41 I.41 I.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 0.44 1.33 2.22

R.`ifTER R ,\ t- .I E R R,AF I'ER R.A.tTER 1VI H w 1:H WFH

I-8080x
1.56 4.00 i .60 2.22 2.98 1.74 I.60 2.22 2.98 2.40 2.40

f-8080 I-4040 2-7070 14040 X.6 X 6 X 6

I-8080 14040X6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

f-8080 I-4040 2-7070 14040 X 6 X 6 X 6

I-8080 X 6

I-8080 14040X6 2-7070 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 14040x6 14040X6 l-6060 X 6 I-7070 2-5050 2-5050 511.32 9.47 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

% 6 X 6

WEB WEB W I' H W b.H WEH WEH Wf H WEH WFH WkH Sum Unit 01 Tubes Weight (kg Welght m')

20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 (kg)

2-7070 14040X6 I-6060 l-8080 14040X6 l-4040 14040X6 I-6060 24040X6 24040X6 426.36

2-7070 1-4040X6

1-6060X6 f-8080 X 6 I-4040 X 6 14040X6 l-4040 X 6 1-6060X6 24040X6 24040X6 426.36 7.90

1-6060X6 f-8080 X 6 14040x6 14040X6 I-5050 l-6060 X 6 X 6

1-6060X6 I-8080 X 6 14040X6 14040X6 I-5050 f-7070 2-5050 2-5050 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 14040X6 14040X6 I-6060 X 6 l-8080 2-6060 2-6060 524.56 7.29 X 6 X 6 X 6

24040X6 2-4040 X 6 462.20 8.56

464.118 6.46

5.92

222

SP :38(S&T)-1987
(ISA

TABLE
Span = 12 m Wind Pressure =

179 STEEL LEAN-TO
Slope = 1 in 4 100 kg/m2

ROOF

TRUSSES

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.37 m 200 kg/m* SPACING (m) A f4.5 6.0 3

Purlins 150 kg/m' SPACING (m) A

SPACING fm) A

MEMHEHS

NOS.

LENGTH
(m)

(4.5

6.03

f4.5

6.0)

TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WE0 Sum of Tubes Weight

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 (kg)

1.33 2.67 2.67 2.67 2.67 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 0.33 1.00 1.67 2.33 1.17 3.00 1.49 1.89 2.40 1.57 1.49 1.89 2.40 2.00 2.00

2-5050 X 6 2-MS0 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 I-6060 X 6 I-4040 X 6 2-5050 X 6 l-4040 X 6 l-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-4040 X 6 l-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040 X 6 357.71 6.62

2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 24040X6 403.68 5.61

2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050-X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 14040X6 I-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 14040X6 14O4OX6 l-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 383.36 7.10

2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 415.73 5.77

2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 l-6060 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 412.98 7.65 6 l-6060 X 6

2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 14040x6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 x 6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 466.70 6.48

Unit Weight

(kg/m')

223

SP : 38(S&T)-1937

I`ABLE 180 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF
Span := 12 II! Wind Pressure =
Slope =

TRUSSES (ISA SECTIONS)
Purlins 150 kg/m' Spacing = 1.36 m
200 kg/m*

I

in 5

100 kg/m'

1.33 2.61 2.67 2 67 2.67 1.36
I ?b 1.36 I 36 1.26 ! 36 1 36 I.36 I.36 0 27

2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 24060 X 6 ?-Ml60 X6 2-6060 X6 2-6060 X 2-6060 X
i-0060 L-h060 ?-MhO 2-M)M) 2-6060 `-6'.ibIl 2-ho60 I-4040 I-4040 i-4040
I -SO50

2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 Z-7070 2-8080 :-X(CN 2-8080 2-1(080 2-80X0

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X b X 6 -i 6 `X 6 X 6

2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-X080 :-X080 2-80X3 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 l-4040 I-4040 1-4&w I-5050 I-4040 ?-SO50 I-5050 I-SO50 I-6060 l-4040

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x h X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 `* 6 X 6

2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 2-6060 I-4040 l-4040 I-4040 I-5050 l-4040 2-4040 I-4040 l-5050 I-6060 I-4040 I-5050 I-5050 I-6060 2-5050 2-5050 431.20

X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 X b X b X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 X 6 x 6 x 6

2-9090 X 6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090X6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090X6
2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-X030 2-8080 2.8080 2-8080 I-4040 I-4040 I-4040 I-5050 t-4040 2-5050 l-5050 l-5050 I-ho60 l-4040 I-5050 I-5050 l-6060 1-5050 505.57 7.01 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 % 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x 6 X 6 X 6 X 6

6 6

X 6 X 6 X 6 X b X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 X b
X

2-60060 X 6

2-R(!PO X 6 2.sow x h 2..X(i'c(l s h .`.-X(iN I 6

0.x0 1.33 1.x7 0.`)) 2.4(1 144 1.71 2.08 I.4Y 1.44 1.71 2 0% I.7V 1.7')

b

I-4040 2-4040 t-4040 I-5050 I-ho(d) I-4040 I-4040 I--N40 I-4040 2.4040 2.4040

x b x 6 X 6 X 6 X 6 x h /( 0 X 6 x 6 `< ti Y b

l-SO50 X 6 !. SO50 x 6 I-6000 L-5050 ?-SO50 4s X h x 6 k 6 51 0 ?:

?-5OSO X 6

7.9x

224

T.iBI,EI81 STEEI. LEAN-TO ROOF Span = 15 m Wind Pressure = Slope = I in 3 100 ka,m'
SP~c.Ixti
MEURERF 90s. l.l\Llll

TRUSSES (ISA SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.44m 150 kc/m'
SPACING A

200 kg/m*
SPACING /\ (m)

(m)

(m) 6.03

f-4.5

(4.5

6.03

(In) TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 a 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 i8 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 1.36 2.13 2.13 2.73 2.73 2.73 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 0.45 1.36 2.27 3.18 4.09 2.05 5.00 1.64 2.27 3.05 3 88 2.10 1.64 2.27 3.05 3.88 2.85 2.85 2-4040X6 2-4040 X 6 2-4040 X 6 24040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 14040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100 X 6 1-6060X6 2-8080 X6 1-5050X 6 I-606QX6 1-8080X 6 1-100100X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050X 6 1-6060X6 1-7070X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050X6 622.40 9.22 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 6 6 6 6 6 6 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 2-5050 X 6 6 6 6 6 6 2-6060X6 26060x6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-7070 X6 2-7070 X6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070X6 2-7070 X6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 14040x6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100X 6 1-6060X6 2-8080 X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100X 6 1-4040X6 l-4U4OX6 l-505006 1-7070X 6 1-9090X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 718.50 7.98 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 26060x6 2-6060X6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2.7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070X6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2.7070 X 6 2.7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 16060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100X 6 1-6060X6 2-8080 X 6 l-5050X 6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050X6 I-7070 X 6 1-9090X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 722.18 10.78 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2.7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-1070 X 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-7070 X 6 2-7070.X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070X6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 1-404OXYl 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100 x 6 1-6060X6 2-8080 X 6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100X 6 1-4040X6 14040X6 1-5050X 6 l-6060X6 1-7070X 6 2-6060X6 2-5050 X 6 670.01 7.44

2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 14040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-1001&X 6 1-6060X 6 2-8080 X 6 1-5OSO X 6 1-6060X6 I-8080 X 6 1-100100X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-7070X 6 1-8080X 6 2&60X5 2-6060X6 668.75 991

2-8080 X 6 2.8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X-6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2.8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-100100X 6 1-6060X6 2-8080X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-100100 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 1-8080X 6 1-100100X 6 2-7070 X6 2-7070 X 6 787.087 a.75

Sum of Angles Weight(kg)
IJnit

Weight(kg/m')

---_.

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span= 15 m

182 STEEL LEAN-TO Slope =

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.41 m

1 in 4
100 kg/m2

Wind Pressure =

150 kg/m2 SPACING (m) f 4.5 6.03

200 kg/m' SPACING (m) A f 4.5 6.0 >

SPACING

A

(m) co-`5

MEMRERS

Nos.

LENGTH Cm)

P 4.5

TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAmER RAFTER RAFTER RAnER RAFTER RAFl-ER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

1.36 2.73 2.73 2.73 2.13 2.73 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 0.34 1.02 1.70 2.39 3.07 1.53 3.75 1.52 1.93 2.46 3.05 1.81 1.52 1.93 2.46 3.05 2.32 2.32

2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060 x 6 2-6060X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 2-5050 X X X X X X X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-1070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 14040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 2-7070 X 6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 I-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 24040X6 2-4040X6 598.87 6.65

2-6060X6 2-6060X6 2-C&50X6 2-6060X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-4040X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 l-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 14040X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 596.58 8.84

2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-5050 2-5050 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-7010 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070

X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X

6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-5050 2-5050

X X X X X X

6 6 6 6 6 6

2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-6060 X6 2-6060X6 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 2-7070 X X X X X X X X X X X 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7010 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-6060X6 2-CMOX6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 16060x6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X6 I-7070 X 6 I-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 26060x6 2-6060X6 626.70 9.28

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 2-6060X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 540.26 8.00

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 I-50500 6 1-6060X6 1-8080X 6 1-404&X 6 2-7070 X 6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 I-7070 X 6 1-8080X6 14040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 x 6 658.24 7.31

1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 2-7070 X 6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 l-5050.X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 l-8080 X 6 2-6060X6 2-6060X6 691.51 7.75

Sum of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

226

SP : 38(S&Tb1987

`TABLE 183 STEEL LEAN-TO Span=15

ROOF

TRUSSES

(ISA SECTIONS)

m

Slope =

I in 5
1%) kg/ m'

PwIin.9 Spacing = 1.39 m
150 kg/m* SPACING (m) h r 4.5 6.0 7 200 kgjm' SPACING (m) h 6.0 ) r4.5

Wind Pressure = __l___le MEMRERS Nos.

.

SPACING (m) A (4.5 6.0 3

LENGTH (Ip)

TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEE WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB W.EB WEB WEB

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 I2 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

1.36 2.13 2.73 2.73 2.73 2.73 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39

2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-7070 X 6 2-404QX6 2-4540 X 6 2-SO80 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-4040X6 231040x6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 14040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 I-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 l-5C50 X 6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X 6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 511.61 7.58

2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 Z-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 4 2-404ilX6 2-4040X$ ;-xl90 x 2-9090 x 2-9090 X 2-9090 X 2-9Q90 X 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-5050 X 2-5050 x 2-5050 X Z-5050 X 6 5 6 6 6

2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-7070 X 2-5050 X 2-5irSOX

6 6 6 6 6 6

2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-8080 2-5050 2-5050

X X X X X X

6 6 6 6 6 6

2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-lO4OX6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 2-404QX6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 I-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 1-5050X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 578.67 8.57

2-100100 X 2-100100 X 2-100100 X 2-100100 X 2-6060X6 2-.5060X6

6 6 6 6

1.39
1.39 1.39 0.27 0.82 1.36 1.91 2.45

6 6 6 6

2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 Z-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-8080 X 6 2-4040X6 24040X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 1-4040X6 14040X6 1-4&0X6 1-5050X 6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 2-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 I-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 l-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 536.84 7.95

2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 2-6060X6 1-5050X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1&60X6 1-5050X 6 1-6060X6 l-7070 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 598.67 6.65

2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090 X 6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-9090X6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 2-5050 X 6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 2-6060 X 6 l-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 l-6060 x 6 l-7070 x 6 l-8080 x 6 2-6060 X 6 2-6060X6 657.57 7.30

1.23
3.w

1.47
1.75 2.13 2.57 1.66 1.47 1.75 2.13 2.57 2.03 2.03

14040x6 1-4040X6 1-4040X6 l-5050 X 6 l-7070 X 6 1-4040X6 2-6060 X 6 l-5050 X 6 l-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 l-8080 X 6 1-4040X6 1-6060X6 lN4OX6 I-5050 X 6 1-6060X6 2-4040X6 2-4040X6 573.08 6.37

Sum of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m*)

227

%P : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span=9 m

184 STEEL LEAN-TO Slope = 1 io 3

ROOF TRUSSES

(TUBE SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.36 m 150 kg/m' 200 kg/m2
SPACING (m)

Wind FVessure=

100 kg/m*
SPACING

A

(m)
6.0 3 (

SPACING

A

(m)
6.0 1 (4.5

A

MEMBERS

Nos.

LENGTH (m)

( 4.5

4.5

6.0

1

TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

1 2 3 4 5
6

1.29 2.51 2.51 2.51

5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 20M 20M 25L 20M 40L 20M 32L 20M 20M 25L 5OL 5OL 128.78 3.18

65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 25L 5OL 25L 32L 20M 20M 25L 5OL 5OL 163.58 3.03

65L 65L 65L 65L 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL SOL 20M 20M 25L 20M 40L 20M 32L 2OL 25L 25L 65L 65L 152.01 3.75

65L 4% b>L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 25L 20M 5OL 25L 32L 20M 25L 32L b5L 65L. 172.25 3.19

SOL SOL SOL SOL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 20M 20M 25L 2GM 40L 20M 321. 20M 251~ 321. 65L 651. 161.92 4.00

SOL SOL SOL SOL 65L: 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 25L 2OM 50M 25L 32L 20M 25L 32L 65L 65L 18!.43
3.36

1.36
1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 1.36 0.43 1.29 2.14

7 8 9 10 1: 12 13 I4 15 16 17 1x 19 20 21 22 23

1.07
3.00 1.55 2.14
1.44 ,I.55 2.14 1.98 I .98

Sum of Angles Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

228

TABLE Spar! = 3 m Wind Pressure = 185 STEEL LEAN-TO Slope. = 1 in 4 IO0 kg/m' l._.SPnc-r.uc (m) t
No';.
LENGTH

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE SECTIONS) Purlins 150 kg/m2 Spacing = 1.33 m 200 kg/m'
SPACING

_--___..--___ (4.5

SPACING (m)

(m) 6.0 >

A r4.5

MEMHERS

6.03

(4.5

6.0 >

(m)
TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFI-ER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEH Sum of `Tubrx Weight Unit Weight (kg/ m2) I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 (kg) 1.29 2.57 2.51 2.51 I .33 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 1.33 0.32 0.96 1.61 0.80 2.25 I .44 1.82 1.37 1.44 1.82 1.71 1.71 32L 25L 25L 20M 20M 20M 40L 4OL 143.78 3.55 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 20M 65L 65~ 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 2OM 20M 25L 20M 4OL 25L 32L 20M 251~ 251, 50L 5OL 151.52 2.81

80L 80L 80L 80L 65L 651. 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 2OM 20M 20M 32L 25L 25L 20M 251 25L 5OL 5OL 157.44 3.89

80L 8OL 801. 80L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 2OM 20M 25L 20M 40L 25L 32L 2OM 25L 32L 65L 65L 167.55 3 10

9OL 90L 90L 90L 65L 65L 6:L 65L 6X 65L 65L 20M 2OM 20M 20M 321. 25L 25L 2OL 25L 32L 65L 65L 181.92 4.49

9OL 90L

9OL 901. 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 25L 20M 40L 25L 32L 20M 321~ 32L 65L 65 I. 186.01 ?.-I4

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE
Span = 9 m

186 STEEL LEAN-TO Slope = 1 in 5

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE SECTIONS) Purlins Spacing = 1.31 m 150 kg/m' 200 kg/m*
SPACING (m) h

Wind Prcsaun =

100 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

SPACING (m) h

MEMBERS -TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAi-=rER RAFl-ER KAFTER RA FrER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of Tubes Weight

Nos.

LENGTH (m)

r4.5

6.0 `r

(4.5

6.03

(4.5

6.0 2

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 (kal

1.29 2.57 2.51 2.57 1.31 1.31 1.31 1.31 1.31 1.31 1.31 0.26 0.77 1.29 0.64 1.80 I .38 I .65 1.34 I .38 1.65 1.57 1.57

65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 20M 20M 32L 25L 25L 20M 25L 20M 4OL 40L 144.67 3.57

8OL 8OL 8OL 801. 90L 9OL 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 20M 20M 25L 4OL 25L 32L 20M 25L 25L 5OL 5OL 186.06 3.44

8OL 8OL 8OL 8OL 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 20M 20M 32L 25L 25L 20M 25L 251~ SOL SOL 159.85 3.95

9OL 90L 90L 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 20M 20M 25L 20M 4OL 25L 32L 2OM 25L 25L 65L 65L 213.98 3.96

90L 90L 90L 90L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 20M 20M 32L 25L 25L 20M 32L 32L 651. 651. IX9.h5 4.68

1OOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 90L 9OL 9OL 90L 9OL 9OL 90L 20M 20M 25L 20M 4OL 25L 32L 20M 32L 32L 65L 65L 216.16 4.19

Unit Weight

(kg!m2)

230

SP : 38 (S&T)-1 987

TABLE Span=12 Wind m Pressure =

187 STEEL

LEAN-TO

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.27 m 200 kg/m'
SPACING

Slope =

I in 3
100 kg/m'

Purlins 150 kg/m"
SPACING

SPA(`ING

(m! 6.0 3 6.5

(m) 6.07 f

(m) 6.0 3

A
MEMHERS NOS. LENGTH

A 4.5

A

(r4.5

(m) TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFI-ER RAFTER RAFTER WEB' WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 1.33 2.61 2.67 2.67 2.67 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 0.44 1.33 2.22 3.11 1.56 4.00 I.60 2.22 2.98 1.74 1.60 2.22 2.98 2.40 2.49 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 2OM 20M 25L 4OL 20M 65L 25L 32L 4OL. 2Ohl 20M 25L 32L 5OL. 501~ 243.83 4.52 651. 65L 65L 65L 65L 8OL 8OL 80L 8OL 80L 80L 80L 8OL 801. 20M 25L 251. 4OL 20M 65L 25L 321. 5OL 20M 25L 25L 32L 65L 65L 268.87 3.13 8OL 80L 8OL 8OL 8OL 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 25L 4OL 20M 65L 25L 32L 4OL 20M 251~ 32L 4OL 65L 65L 268.20 4.91 8OL 8OL 80L 8OL 8OL 80L 80L 8OL 8OL 8OL 8OL SOL 8OL EOL 20M 25L 25L 40L 20M 65L 25L 32L 5OL 20M 251~ 32L 4OL 8OL 8OL 289.25 4.02 9OL 9OL 90L 9OL 9OL 8OL 80L 801 8OL 801 8OL 80L 80L 8OL 25L 20M 251. 4OL 20M 65L 25L 32L 4OL 20M 25L 32L 5OL 8OL 8OL 3 12.38 5.78 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 901. 9OL 9OL 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 901. 25L 25L 25L 40L 20.M 65L 25L 32L 5OL 20M 25L 4OL 5OL 8OL 8OL t41.92 4 75

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg') Unit Weight (kg: m')

1.4 i

SP : 3%(S&T)_1987

TABLE Span = 12 m Wind Pressure ___----___=

188 STEEL

LEAN-TO

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.37 m 200 kg/m*
SPACING A (m)

Slope =

1 in 4
`00 kg/m2

Purlins 150 kg/m' __-SPACING A (m)

SPAC`ING A MEMHERS NO?,. LENG I'll f

(m)

4.5

6.03

6.5

6.03

(4.5

6.0

>

(m) TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER -RAFTER RAFTER RAETER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of Tubes l!nit Weight Weight (kg/m2)

I
2 3 4 !i 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 I4

1.33 2.67 2.67 2.67 2.67 1.37 1.37

65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 20M 32L 20M 5OL 25L 32L 40L 20M 25L 25L 25L 5OL' 5OL 214.30 3.97

8OL 8OL 8OL 80L 80L 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 20M 20M 25L 32L ZOM 5OL 25L 32L 4OL 20M 25L 25L 32L 5OL 5OL 265.43 3.69

9OL 9OL 9OL 90L 9OL 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 20M 20M 32L 20M 5OL 251~ 32L 4OL .20M 25L 251. 32L 65L 65L 258.26 4.78

9OL 901, WL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 901. 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 20M 20M 25L 32L 20M 5OL 25L 32L 4OL 20M 251~ 321. 40L 65L 65L 298.47 4.15

901. 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 651, 65L 20M 20M 20M 32L 20M 5OL 25L 32L. 40L 20M 25L 32L 40L 65L 65L 260.95 4.83

IOOL 1OOL 1OOL 1OOL 1OOL 9OL 9OL 9OL 901, 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 20M 20M 25L 32L 20M 5OL 25L 32L 4OL 20M 32L 32L 5OL 8OL 8OL 319.32 4.43

1.37
1.37

1.37
1.37 1.37 1.37 1.37 0.33 1.00 1.67 2.33 1.17 3.00 1.49 1.89 2.40 1.57

1s
16 17 I8 I3 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 (kg)

1.49
1.89 2.40 2.00 2.00

232

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span = 12 m Wind Pressure =

189 STEEL

LEAN-TO

ROOF

TRL'SSES

(TliBE,

SECTIONS) Spacing = 1.36 m 200 kg/m'
SPACISG

Slope =

1

m 5

Purlins 150 kg m'

100 kg m' SPncr?ic h (m) 6.0>

MEMBERS

Nos.

LENGTH

(4.5

SPA(.IVG (m) /\ 6.0 `) (4.5

h

(m) 6.0 7 _

f4.5

(m) TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of Tubes Unit Weight Weight (kg: m2) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IO I1 12 13 14 15 16 17 1x 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 2Y (kg) 1.33 2.61 2.61 2.67 2.67 1.36 1.36 1 36 1.36 1.36 1.3h 1.36 I.36 8OL 8OL 8OL 80L 8OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 901. 9OL 9OL 901. 20M ?OM 2OM 151~ 20M 4OL 25I_ 32i 32L 20M 25L 2OM 25L 5OL 5OL 247.16 4.58 901. 9OL YOL 9OL 9OL IOOL 1001 1001~ lOOL 1OOL. 1001. IOOL 1ClOL 1001. 25L 20M 20M 25L 20M 5OL 32L 32L 4OL 20M 32L 25L 25L 5OL SOL 290.79 4.04 9OL 9OL 9OL 901. 9OL 9OL 901~ 90L. 901 901. 90L. 901. 901. 901. 20M 20M 20M 251~ 2OM 4OL 25L 32L 32L 20M 25L 251. 321 651~ 65L 278.75 3.16 IOOL IOOL IOOL 1001. IOOL 1OOL IOOL 1OOL IOOL IOOL IOOL. 1001. IOOL lOOL 25L 20M 20M 25L 20M 5OL 32L 32L 4OL 20M 32L 32L 32L 65L 65L 312.84 4.35 IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 9OL 9OL 9OL 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL. 901. 901. 2OM 20M 20M 25L 20M 40L 25L 32L 321. 20M 32L 32L 4OL 65L 65L 295.73 5.48 IO@H iOOH lOOH IOOH 1OOH lOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 1OOL IOOL IOOL 25L 20M 20M 25L 20M 5OL 32L 32L 4OL 20M 32L 32L 4OL 80L 80L 372.27 5.17

I

36

0.27 0.80 1.33

I .x7
0.93 2.40 1.44 1.71 2.08 1.49 1.44
1.71 ?.OX 1 79

1.79

233

SP : 38(S&Tb1987

TABLE
Span= 15 m

190 STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF
Slope =

TRUSSES (TUBE SECTIONS)
Purlins Spacing = 1.32 m I50 kg/m* SPACING (m) A 200 kg/m' SPACING (m) h

I in 3
IOCIkg/m'

Wind Pressure =

MEMBERS

Nos.

LENGTH

SPACING (m) AC 6.03 r4.5

64.5

6.09

f4.5

6.07

(m)
TIE TIE TIE TIE TlE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WI-R WEB WEB WEB M'FB WFB WEB Wt-B WF`H W'EB I 2 3 4 5 6 I a 9 10 I1 12 13 14 15 16 17 I8 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 21 28 29 30 31 I .36 2.13 2.73 2.13 2.13 2.73

65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 65L 80L 80L 8OL 8OL 8OL 80L 8QL 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 25L 25L 4OL 5OL 25L 65L 25L 32L
4OL 5OL 2OM 25L 25L 321. 4OL 65L 651. 159.8

8OL

SOL SOL 8OL 8OL 8OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 90L 65L 65L 65L 65L 25L 25L 25L 4OL 5OL 25L 8OL 32L 32L 5OL 65L 20M 25L 25L 321. 5OL 65L 6OL

8OL 8OL 8OL 8OL 8OL 8OL 8OL SOL 80L 8OL 8OL 8OL 80L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 25L 25L 4OL 5OL 25L 65L 25L 32L 4OL 5OL 2OM 25L 32L 4OL 5OL SOL 9OL 393.21 5.83

9OL 9OL 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 90L 90L 90L 90L 65L 65L 65L 65L 25L 25L 25L 401. 5OL 25L 8OL 32L 32L 5OL 65L 25L 25L 32L 5OL 65L 9OL 9OL 473.67 5.26

90L 9OL 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 8OL 8OL 80L 8QL 8OL 8OL 8OL 65L 65L 65L 65L 25L 25L 25L 4OL 5OL 25L 651. 25L 32L 40L 5OL 25L 32L 32L 5OL 65L 90L 9OL 439.57 6.51

IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL lOOL IOOL 90L 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL ROL 8OL 80L 80L 25L 32L 25L 4OL 5OL 25L 8OL 32L 32L 5OL 65L 25L 32L 4OL 5OL 65L 9OL 9OL 494.43 5.49

1.44 1.44 1.44 1.44 I.44 1.44 I.44 1.44 I.44 1.44

I .`I4
0.45 1.36 2.27 3.18 4.09 2.05 5.00 I.64 2.27 !.05 3.8H 2.10

I .64
2.27 3.05 3.88 2.83 2.85

Wt:H
WEB WEB Sum I;nll of Tubes Wright Wright

32 33
34 35 (kg)

I

416.65 4.03

(kg'&`)

5.33

SP : 38CSBtTW87

TABLE 191STEEL LEAN-TO ROOF TRUSSES
SpanIS m Slope =

(TUBE

SECTIONS)

I in 4
100 kg/m*

Purlins Spacing*= 1.41 m 150 kg/m'
SPACING (m)

Wind Pressure =

200 kg/m' SPACING (m) A 6.0 ( 4.5

SPACING (m)

A

A

MEMBERS

Nos.

LENGTH (m)

fi.5

6.03

f4.5

6.0 >

>

TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFl-ER RAFTER RAFTER RAFl-ER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB Sum of Tub

1 2 3 4 5 6 1 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 21 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 Weight (kg)

1.36 2.73 2.73 2.73 2.13 2.73 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 0.34 1.02 1.70 2.39 3.07 1.53 3.75 1.52 1.93 2.46 3.05 1.81 1.52 1.93 2.46 3.05 2.32 2.32

8OL 80L 80L 8OL 80L 8OL .?OL 90L 90L 9OL 9OL 90L 90L 65L 65L 65L 65L 20M 25L. 25L 32L 4OL 20M 65L 25L 321. 4OL 5OL 20.M 32L 25L 25L 32L 65L 65L 349.21 5.17

90L 9OL 90L 9OL 90L 9OL 1001~ 1OOL IOOL IOOL 1OOL IOOL IOOL 8OL EOL 8OL 80L 2OM 321. 25L 32L 4OL ZOM 65L 32L 32L SOL SOL 251. 32L 25L 32L 40L 65L 65L 403.65 4.48

9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 90L 9oL 9OL 9OL 90L 90L 90L 9OL 901. 65L 65L 65L 65L 2OM 25L 25L 32L 4OL 2OM 65L 25L 3iL 401. 5OL 20M 32L 321~ 321. 50L 65L 65L 385.88 5.12

IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 80L 8OL 1001. IOOL. 1001. IOOL 1OoL IOOL IOOL 8OL. 80L 8OL 801~ 20M 32L 251~ 321. 4OL 20M 651. 321. 321. 501. 501. 251 321 321 401. 501. HOI XOL
4 14.04 4.60

IOOL 1OOL IOOL IOOL 901. 9OL YOL 9OL 9OL 9OL 9OL 901. Yoi 65L 65L 65 1. 651 2OM ?I. :cL .:21. 001. 20M 65L 25L 32L 40L 5OL 20M 32L 32L. 40L 5OL 8OL 801. 403 22 5.97

1OOH IOOH IOOH IOOH 9OL 9OL IOOL IOOL IOUL 1OOL IOOL 1OOL 1OOL 9OL 90L 90L 9OL 251 32L 25L. 32L 4l! 1

.`;I\! fbf`l ICI.
321. 501. >!I1 251 ??!. 4flL. 50L. 65L 9OL 9OL. 473.99 5.21

Uni! Weight (kg/m*)

235

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Span= 15 m

192 STEEL LEAN-TO Slope =

ROOF

TRUSSES

(TUBE

SECTIONS)

I in 5
100 kg/m2

Purlins Spacing = 1.39 m 150 kg/m' SPACING (m) A 6.0 3 fi.5 200 kg/m* SPACING (m) h 6.03 fi.5

Wind Pressure =

SPACING

h

(m) 6.0 >

MEMUERS

Nos.

LENGTH (m)

6.5

TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE TIE RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER RAFTER WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB WEB

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 I5 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35

1.36 2.13 2.73 2.73 2.13 2.73 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39

90L 90L YOL. 9OL 80L 80L 1OOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 1001. IOOL IOOL 5OL 5OL SOL 5OL 25L 2OM 20M 25L 32L 20M 5OL 32L 32L 32L 5OL 2OM 32L 25L 25L 32L 5OL 5OL 335.82 4.98

1OOM IOOM IOOM 1OOM 8OL 8OL IOOM 1OOM IOOM IOOM 1OOM IOOM IOOM 65L 65L 65L 65L 32L 25L 25L 25L 32L 25L 65L 32L 32L 40L 5OL 20M SOL 25L 25L 32L 65L 65L 411.74 4.57

IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 8OL 8OL IOOL IOOL 1OOL IOOL IOOL 1OOL 1OOL 5OL SOL 5OL 5OL 25L 2OM 20M 25L 32L 20M 5OL 32L 32L 32L 5OL 20M 321. 25L 32L 4OL 65L 65L 359.46 5.33

1ooM IOOM ICilM IOOM 80M 80M IOOM IOOM IOOM IOOM 1OOM IOOM IOOM 65L 65L 65L 65L 32L 25L 25L 25L 32L 25L 65L 32L 32L 4OL 5OL 20M 5OL 32L 32L 5OL 65L 65L 412.07 4.58

IOOH 1OOH IOOH IOOH 90L 9OL IOOL 1001~ 1OOL IOOL IOOL IOOL IOOL 5OL 5OL 5OL 5OL 25L 20M 20M 25L 32L 20M 5OL 32L 32L 32L 5OL 20M 40L 32L 40L 5OL 8OL 8OL 417.27 6.18

125M 125M 125M 125M 9OL 90L IOOM IOOM IOOM IOOMIOOM IOOM 1OOM 65L 65L 65L 65L 32L 25L 25L 25L 32L 25L 65L 32L 32L 40L 5OL 20M 5OL 4OL 40L 5OL SOL SOL 474.44 5.21

1.39
1.39 1.39 1.39 1.39 0.27 0.82 1.36 1.91 2.45 1.23 3.00 I$7 1.75 2.13 2.57 1.66 1.47 1.75 2.13 2.57 2.03 2.03

Sum of Tubes Weight (kg) Unit Weight (kg/m')

236

TAB1.E Truss R00b
s LOPE ,:t;L:R, CO::\,\ G,n-

193 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

STEEL

ROOF

TRIISSES Column Spacing = 4.5 ff

Span = 9.0 m
BASIC Hixtt

r

CYLI VX Tcri>ir~n

t'OR(`LS

ALTERNATE CDLUMN SEC~IOH Ji ,y;=> (ISLB ISMB

pre\ston (kg, m?) I in 3 100 100 IS0 I50 200 200 100 100 150 110 200 200 100 100 I50 150 200 200
NWE -The

[+-y&J

ISWB

lSH5

(m) 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 h0 `I5 6.0 45 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.3

(kg) 2232 2423 2232 2423 2232 x23 2354 2545 2354 2545 2354 2545 2420 2619 2428 2619 2420 2619

`kg) 118 --726 582 1333 I I90 124 732 588 I339 1196 127 734 591 I342 II98 in the above stress.

(kg) 95 124 143 186 191 24x 97 125 I45 188 194 251 104 132 I55 199 208 266

(kg) 722 959 1082 1436 1443 1918 700 938 I050 1406 1400 I875 693 930 1040 1396 1387 1861

(kgm) 1453 2564 2180 3846 2907 5129 1358 2436 2037 3655 2716 4073 I326 2394 1909 3591 2652 4788 2001.19 8 275133.0 250127.9 300137.7 250' 27.9 325143. I 2001 19.8 250127.9 225123.5 3004 37.5 250: 27.9 325143. I 200119.0 2503 27.9 225123.5 300137.7 250127.9 325143. I 175/ 19.3 225j31.2 200,25.4 250137.3 225;31.2 300144.2 1751 I9 3 225131.2 200125.4 25Oj 37.3 225131.2 300144.2 175119.3 225131.2 200/ 25.4 250j37.3 225125.4 300144.2 175/22:1 200128.8 175122.1 225133.9 200: 20.0 250140.9 175122.1 200128.0 175122.1 225133.9
200j28.8

150/27.1 150/27.1 15Oj27.1 200137.3 ISOj27.l 200/37.3 150/27.1 150/27.1 150127. I 2OOj37.3 l50/27.1 200137.3
I50127, I

I in 4

250140.9 ISO/ 17.0 200/28.8 175122.1 225133.9 200/28.8 250140.9

I in 5

150/27.1 150/27.l 200137.3 150/27.1 200/37.3 to account

Iorces presented in allowable forces

table are after 25% reduction.

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

for 33: $& increase The column

axial

do not include

the wall cladding

weight

(30 kg/mz).

TABLE 194CANTILEVER COLUMN Truss Span = 9.0 m
ROOF SLOPE BASIC HEIGHT COLUMN FORCES

SECTIONS FOR STEEL ROOF TRUSSES
Column
ALTERNATE COLUMN SECTION

Spacing

= 6.0 m

WIND OF PRESSURE COLUMN (Cornpression

A Tension f&P Shear at Base7 Base Moment (kgm) 1938 3419 2907 5129 3877 6838 1810 3249 2716 4873 3621 6498 1768 3192 2652 4708 3536 6385

h

7

r

ISLB

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB>

(in)
I in 3 100 100 150 150 200 200 100 100 150 150 200 200 100 100 150 150 200 200 NOTE-The 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

(kg)
3126 3381 3126 3381 2126 338 I 3288 3543 3288 3543 3288 3543 3387 3642 3387 3642 3387 3642

(kg)
45 855 664 I665 I474 53 863 672 I673 1482 57 867 676 I677 1486

(kg)
128 165 191 248 255 331 129 167 194 251 258 335 138 176 208 265 277 353

(kg)
962 1278 1443 1918 1925 2557 934 1250 1400 1875 1868 250 I 924 1241 1387 1861 I849 248 1

225/23.5 275133.0 250127.9 326143.1 275/33.0 350149.5 225123.5 275133.0 250127.9 325143.1 275/33.0 350149.5 200119.8 275/33.0 250127.9 325143.1 275133.0 350149.5

200125.4 250131.3 225131.2 300144.2 225:31.2 350152.4 200/25.4 250137.3 200/25.4 300144.2 225131.2 350/52.4 200125.4 250/37.3 200/25.4 300/44.2 225131.2 350152.4

175/22.1 225133.9 200128.8 250140.9 200/28.8 250140.9 175/22.1 225133.9 200/28.8 250140.9 200/28.8 250140.9 175122.1 225133.9 200/28.8 250140.9 200128.8 250140.9

150/27.1 200137.3 150/27.1 200/37:3 200137.3 225/43.1 150127.1 200/37.3 150127.1 200/37.3 200/37.3 225143.1 150/27.1 200/37.3 150/27.1 200/37.3 150134.6 225143.1
to account

I in 4

1 in 5

forces presented m allowable forces

in the above stress.

table are after 25% reduction,

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

ior 33 - o/u increase 3 The column

I

axial

do not include

the wall clad

ing weight

(30 kg/m*).

TABLE Truss
ROOF

195 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS FOR STEEL ROOF

TRUSSES
Column Spacing = 4.5 m

Span = 12.0 m HEIGHT OF PRESSURE COLUMN fCompression BASIC
WIND COLUMN FORCES

ALTERNATE COLUMN SECTION h

SLOPE

h Tension (kg) 310 167 1120 977 690 Base3 Moment c LSLB ISMB

LSWB

lSHB>

hi m2)
I in 3 100 100 100 150 I50 IS0

Cm)
4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0

(kg) 2773 2964 3341 2713 2964 3341 2773 2964 3347 2935 3126 3909 2935 3126 3509 2935 3126 3509 3034 3225 3608 3034 3225 3608 3034 3225 3608

(hi
99 128 185 149 191 217 198 255 369 101 129 186 151 194 279 201 259 312 110 138 195 165 208 293 220 267 391

(kg). 725 962 1436 1088 1443 2155 1442 1911 2873 696 934 1408 1045 1400 2112 1393 1868 2816 681 924 1399 1031 1387 2098 1314 1849 2813

(kgm) 1469 2584 5755 2203 3877 8632 2938 5169 I1510 1341 2414 5499 2011 3621 8249 2682 4828 10999 I298 2357 5414 1948 3536 8122 2591 4115 10829

200 200 200 I in 4
100 100 100 150 I50 I50 200 200 200 100 100 100 150 150 150 200 200 200
NOTE -The

1930 1787 I500 318 175 1128 985 698 1938 1795 1508 322 118 1132 988
101 1942 I798 1511

200119.8 275133.0 400156.9 250121.9 300/31.1 500/75.0 250121.9 325i43.1 55Oj86.3 200119.8 2jOl27.9 400156.9 225123.5 3OOi31.7 450/65.3 250!27.9 325143.1 500/75.0 2OOjl9.8 250127.9 350149.5 225/23.5
3OOi31.7

115/19.3 225131.2 400/61.6 200125.4 250131.3 450172.4 225131.2 300144.2 500186.9 175j19.3 225131.2 350152.4 200125.4 250137.3 450172.4 225131.2 300144.2 5OOi86.9 115/19.3 225131.2 350152.4 200/25.4 250137.3 450172.4 200125.4 300144.2 SOOi86.9

175122.1 200/ 28.8 300/48. I 175122.1 225133.9 400/66.7 200128.8 250/40.9 450/19.4 175122.1 200128.8 300/48. I 175122.1 225133.9 400166.7 200128.8 250140.9 450/ 19.4 I so/ 17.0 200128.8 300/48.1 175122.1 225133.9 400/66.7 200/28.8 250/40.9 450179.4

150127.1 150/27.1 225146.8 150/21.1 200137.3 300/58.8 150/27.1 200137.3 350167.4 150/27.1 IM/27.1 225143. I 150/27.1 2oB/ 37.3 250154.7 I50/27.1 200137.3 300/63.0 150/27.1 I50/27.l 225143. I 15Oj27.1 200137.3 250/51.0 150/27.1 200137.3 300/63.0 to account

E

I in 5

450165.3 250121.9 325143.1 500/75.0

forces presented in allowable forces

in the above stress.

table are after 25% reduction

if the wind load is one of the loads m the combination

for 33 i%

increase

The column

axial

do not include

the wall cladding

weight

(30 kg/mZ).

TABLE Truss
KOOF

196 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

STEEL

ROOF

TRUSSES Column Spacing = 6.0 m

Span = 12.0 m
BASK WIND HEICiHl OF COL~IMS FORCES R

SLOPE

ALTERNATE COLUMN SECTION h

PRESSURE COLUMN (Corn-

Tension (kg) 278 87 1358 1167 785 2438 2247 1865 289 98 I369 1178 795 2449 2258 1875 294 103 I374 1183 800 2454 2263 1880

(

ISLB

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB

1

pression
(kg!m2)

Cm)
4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.Q 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0

(kg) 3878 4133 4643 3878 4133 4643 3878 4133 4643 4094 4349 4859 4094 4349 4859 4094 4349 4859 4225 4480 4990 4225 4480 4990 4225 4480 4990

(kg)
I32 170 246 198 253 369 264 340 492 134 172 248 201 258 372 268 344 497 146 I85 260 220 267 391 293 369 521

(kg)
967 I238 1916 1450 1925 2873 1934 2566 383 I 928 I245 1877 1393 1868 2816 1858 2490 3755 916 1232 1865 1374 I849 2798 I832 2465 3731

(km)
1958 3446 7673 2938 5169 II510 3917 6892 15346 I788 3119 7332 2682 4428 10999 3576 6438 I4665 1731 3143 7219 2597 4715 10829 3463 6287 14439 225123.5 275133.0 450/ 65.3 250; 27.9 325143. I 550/86.3 275133.0 350149.5 600/99.5 225123.5 275; 33.0 45Oi65.3 250,27.9 325143.1 5QO/75.0 275,`33.0 350149.5 6OOi99.5 200/ 19.8 275; 33.0 450 /_ 65.3 250127.9 325143. I 500/ 75.0 275/33.0 350i49.5 600199.5
if the wind

I in 3

100 100 100 IS0 150 150 200 200 200 100 100 100 TSO 150 150 200 200 200 100 100 loo 150 150 150 200 200 200 Nor!: ---The

200125.4 250137.3 450/ 72-4 225131.2 300144.2 500/86.9 225131.2 350152.4 5501103.7 200125.4 250137.3 450172.4 200/25.4 300/44.2 500186.9 225/31.2 350152.4 550/103.7 200/ 25.4 250137.3 450172.4 ZOO/25.4 300/44.2 500; 86.9 225131.2 350: 52.4 550/ 103.7

175122.1 225133.9 350156.9 200128.8 250140.9 450179.4 225: 33.9 300148. I 500195.2 175122.1 225133.9 350156.9 2OOj28.8 250140.9 450179.4 200128.8 250140.9 500195.2 175122.1 225133.9 350156.9 200: 28.8 250/40:9 450179.4 200128.8 250140.9 500195.2

l-50/27.1 200137.3 25015 I .O 150127.1 2OOl31.3 350167.4 200131.3 225143. I A001 77.4 150/27.1 200137.3 25Oj51.0 150/27.1 200137.3 300163.0 200137.3 225143. I 400177.4 150/27.1 200137.3 250151.0 150127.1 ZOO/37.3 360163.0 150134.6 225143. I 400177.4 to account

I in 4

1 in 5

forces presented in allowable

in the above table are after `5~~ reduction, stress. weight (30

load is one of the loads in the combination

for 33 iv0

increase

The column

axial

forces do not include the wall cladding

kg'm').

TABLE Truss
ROOF SLOPE

197 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

STEEL

ROOF

TRUSSES Column Spacing = 4.5 m

Span = 18.0 m BASIC
WlVI
PRtSSl:WE

HEIGHT OF COLUMN / ' COm-

COLIJMN

FORCES

ALTERNATE \

COLUMN

SECTION k

Tension m (kg) 520 233 1735 1448 1161 2950 2663 2376 532 245 1747 1460 1173 2962 2675 2388 538 251 1753 1466 1179 2968 269 I 2394

Shear

at

pression

Base ' Moment (kgm) 2624 5815 10258 3937 8723 15387 5249 I1631 20516 2369 5432 9746 3554 8148 I4620 4738 10864 19493 2284 5305 9577 3426 7957 14266 4569 10610 19154

I ISLB

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB

1

(kg m*)
I in 3 100 100 100 150 150 I50 200 200 200 100 100 100 I50 150 I50 200 200 200 100 100 100 150 150 150 200 200 200
NOTE --The

Cm)
6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 1:..0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0

(kg) 4087 4469 4852 4087 4469 4852 4087 4469 4852 4330 4712 5095 4330 4712 5095 4330 4712 5095 4478 4860 5243 4478 4860 5243 4478 4860 5243

(ki)
134 I91 248 201 287 373 269 383 497 137 194 251 205 290 376 273 387 502 151 208 265 226 311 398 302 416 530

0s)
969 1443 1918 1454 2165 2876 1938 2887 3836 926 1400 la75 1389 2101 2813 1853 2801 3750 912 I387 1816 1368 2080 2792 1824 2774 3722

275: 33.0 400/ 56.9 600199.5 300137.7 500/75.0 325/43. I 55Oj86.3 250/ 27.9 350j49.5 6OO/p5.5 300137.7 450/65.3 325143. I 500/75.0

225131.2 400/61.6 550/ 103.7 250/ 37.3 450172.4 600/122.6 300144.2 5Wj86.9 600/ 122.6 225/31.2 350152.4 5501103.7 250137.3 450172.4 550/ 103.7 300144.2 500j86.9 600/ 122.6 225131.2 350/ 52.4 550/ 103.7 250137.3 450172.4 550/ 103.7 300144.2 500/ 86.9 6001122.6

200/28.8 ,300/48.1 450179.4 225133.9 400/66.7 SOp/95.2 250140.9 450179.4 550/112.5 200/28.8. 300/48.1 450179.4 225133.9 400166.7 500/95.2 250140.9 450/79.4 5501112.5 200/28.8 300/48.1 45op9.4 225133.9 400166.7 500195.2 250140.9 450179.4 550/112.5

15Ol27.1 225146.8 400177.4 200137.3 300/58.8 200137.3 350167.4 150127.1 225143.1 350172.4 200137.3 25Ol51.0 450192.5 200137.3 300163.0 150127.1 225143.1 35Ol72.4 200137.3 2pOl51.0 450187.2 200137.3 300/63.(l to account

I in 4

I

in

5

250127.b 35Ol49.5 600/99.5 300/ 37.7 450165.3 600199.5 325143. I 500/ 75.0

forces presented in allowable forces

in the above stress.

table are after 25% reduction,

if th'e wind .load is one of the loads in the combination

for 33: % increase The column

axial

do not include

the wall cladding

weight

(30 kg/m*),

TABLE Truss
ROOF SLOPE

198 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

STEEL

ROOF

TRUSSES
Column

a .. Spacing = 6.0 n

Span = 18.0 m
BASIC WIND HEIGHT OF p COLUMN FORCES .

ALTERNATECOLUMN SECTION

PRESSURE COLUMN ' COm-

Tcprion
f&P

Shear

at
Base>

pression (kg) I in 3 100 100 100 I50 150 I50 200 200 200 100 100 100 ISQ I50 I50 200 200 200 100 100 100 150 I50 IS0 200 200 200
NOTE-The

Base 1 Moment

'

/

\ ISLB

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB

(kg) 514 131 2134 1751 1369 3754 3371 2989 530 147 2150 1767 1385 3770 3387 3005 537 155 2157 1775 1392 3777 3395 3012

(hi)
179 255 331 269 383 497 358 510 66 182 258 335 273 381 502 364 516 669

(kg)
1292 1925 2557 1938 2887 3836 2584 3849 5114 1235 1868 2500 1853 2801 3750 2471 3736 5000 1216 1849 248 1 1824 2774 3722 2432 3698 4963

(bm)
3499 7754 13677 5249 11631 20516 6999 I5508 27354 3159 7242 12995 4738 10864 19493 6318 14485 2599 1 3046 7073 I2769 4569 10610 19154 6092 14146 25539
300137.7

6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0 6.0 9.0 12.0

5689 6199 6709 5689 6199 6709 5689 6199 6709 6013 6523 7033 6013 6523 7033 6013 6523 7033 6211 6721 723 I 6211 6721 7231 6211 6721 7231

450/65.3 600199.5 325143.1 550/86.3 350149.5 600199.5 275133.0 450165.3 609199.5 325143. I 500/75.0 350149.5 600/99.5

250137.3 450172.4 550/103.7 300/44.2 5OOl86.9 600/ 122.6 350152.4 550/103.7 250137.3 450172.4 550/ 103.7 300144.2 500186.9 600/ 122.6 350/ 52.4 550/ 103.7 250137.3 400/61.6 550/ 103.7 300144.2 500/ 86.9 &XI/ 122.6 350152.4 500186.9 -

225133.9 350156.9 500/95.2 250/40.9 450179.4 550/112.5 300/48.1 500/95.2 600/ 133.7 225133.9 350156.9 500195.2 250140.9 450179.4 55OiIl2.5 250140.9 500195.2 6001133.7 200/28.8 350156.9 500/95.2 250140.9 450179.4 550/ 112.5 250140.9 500195.2 600/ 133.7

200137.3 250/5l.O 450187.2 200137.3 350167.4 225143. I 400177.4 200137.3 25O/Sl.O 450187.2 200137.3 300/63.0 225143. I 400177.4 200137.3 250151.0 450187.2 200/ 37.3 350/ 58.8 225143. I 400177.4 to account

1 in 4

1 in 5

201 277 353 302 416 530 402 554 707

275133.0 450165.3 609199.5 325143. I m/ 75.0 350149.5 6&X3/99.5 -

forces presented in allowable forces

in the above table are after 25% reduction, stress. the wall cladding weight

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

for 33 f9c

increase

The column

axial

do not include

(30 kg/m*).

TABLE
Truss ROOF SLOPE

199 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

STEEL

ROOF

TRUSSES Column Spedng 4 4.3 m

Span = 24.0 m
BASIC WIND HEIGHT OF COLUMN FORCES fl

ALTERNATE COLUMN SECTION h

PRESSURE COLUMN Gem-

Tension (kg) 546 259 2166 1879 3786 3499 562 275 2182 1895 3802 3515 570 283 2190 1903 3810 3523

Shear fCaP (kg) 198 255 297 383 396 510 201 258 302 387 402 516 220 502. 330 416 440 554

at

'

ISLB

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB

1

pression

(kg/m*)
I in 3

(ml
9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0

(kg) 5646 6028 5646 6028 5646 6028 5970 6352 5970 6852 5970 6352 6167 6550 6167 6550 6167 6550

(kg)
1450 1925 2175 2887 29ot-t 3849 1393 1868 2090 2801 2786 3736 1374 1849 2061 2774 2749 3698

(bm)
5875 10338 8813 15508 11751 20677 5364 9657 8047 14485 IO729 19314 5195 943 1 7792 14146 10390 18862 400156.9 600/99.5 5Oc~75.0 550186.3 350149.5 600199.5 450165.3 500,175.o 400/61.6 550/ 103.7 450/ 72.4 600/ 122.6 500186.9 600/ 122.6 350152.4 550/ 103.7 450/ 72.4 5501103.7 500186.9 600/ 122.6 350/52.4 550/ 103.7 450/72.4 550/ 103.7 500/ 86.9 6001122.6 350156.9 450179.4 400/66.? 500/95.2 450179.4 550/112.5 . 3OOj48.1 450179.4 400166.7 500195.2 450179.4 550/112.5 300/481 450179.4 400166.7 500195.2 450179.4 55OlIl2.5 225146.8 400177.4 300/S&S 350167.4 225143.1 350172.4 250/5l.O 450192.5 300/63.0 _225143.1 350167.4 250/51.0 450187.2 300/ 58.8 -

100 100 I50 150 200 200 loo 100 150 I50 200 200 100 100 150 150 200 200

1 in 4

.

Iin

350/ 49.5 600/ 99.5 450165.3 600199.5 500/ 75.0

Nom-The

forces presented in allowable forces

in the above table are after 25% reduction, stress. the wall cladding weight

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

to account

for 33: 1% increase The column

axial

do not include

(30 kg/ms).

TABLE 200 CANTILEVER Truss Span = 24.0 m
ROOF BASIC HEIGHT

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR iTEEL

ROOF TRUSSES Column Spacing = 6.0 m

COLUMN FORCES

ALTERNATE COLUMN SECTION

SLOPE

WIND OF , PRESSURE COLUMN ' Compression (kg/m*) cm) 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 (kg) 7828 7828 7828 8338 7828 8338 8260 8770 8260 8770 8260 8770 8523 9033 8523 9033 8523 9033 100 100 150 150 200 200 100 100 I50 150 200 200 100 100 150 150 200 200 NOTE -The

Tension

Shear at A Base 1 fcap

Base Moment

`3

' ISLB

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB

'

(kg)
503 121 2663 2281 4823

(kg)
264 340 396 510 528 680 268 344 402 516 536 689 293 369 440 554 587 739

(kg)
1934 2567 2900 3849 3867 5132 I858 2490 2786 3736 3716 498 I 1832 2465 2749 3698 3665 4931

(kgm)
7834 13784 11751 20677 I5669 27569 7152 I2876 10729 19314 14305 25752 6926 I2574 10390 I8862 I3854 25149 450165.3 6OOj99.5 550/86.3 600/99.5 450/ 72.4 550/ 103.7 5OOj86.9 600/ 122.6 5501103.7 450/ 72.4 550/ 103.7 500186.9 600/ 122.6 550/ 103.7 350156.9 500195.2 450179.4 SSO/ 112.5 500195.2 600/ 133.7 350/56.9 500/95.2 450/ 79.4 550/ 112.5 500/95.2 6001133.7 55Oj56.9 500195.2 450/ 79.4 55r)/ I 12.5 500, 95.2 600' 133.7 ZSO/Sl.O 450187.2 350167.4 400177.4 250151.0 450187.2 300163.0 400/77.4

I in 3

1 in 4

525 142 2685 2302 4845 4462 535 152 2695 2312 4855 4472

450/65.3 600189.5 500; 75.0 600;99.5

I in 5

450'65.3 600/99.5 5Ooi75.0 55Oj86.3

4OOi61.6 5501103.7 500; 86.9 600) 122.6 500; 86.9

250/51.0 450187.2 300/58.8 NO/ 77.4

forces presented in allowabte forces

in the above table are after 25Y0 reduction, stress. the wall cladding weight

if the wind load is one'of

the loads in the combination

to account

for 33:

% increase

The column

axial

do not includr

(30 kg, ml).

TABLE Truss ROOF
SLOPE

201 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

STEEL

ROOF

TRUSSES Column Spacing = 4.5 m

Span = 30 m
BASIC WIND HEIGHT OF / COLUMN FOKES

ALTERNATE CO~JMN SECTION

PRESSURE COL~JMN

' Compression (kg) 6876 7259 6876 7259 6876 7259 7281 7664 728 I 7664 728 I 7664 7528 7910 7528 7910 7528 7910

Tension (kg) 819 532 2844 2557 4869 4582 839 552 2864 2577 4889 4602 848 561 2873 2586 4898 461 I

Shear rCap

at MlZZn?

cISLB
(km)
5936 10419 8904 15628 11872 26838. 5297 9567 7945 14350 10594 13134 5085 9284 7628 I3927 10170 I8569 400/ 56.9 600199.5 500/ 75.0 550/86.3

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB

3

(kg/m*)
I in 3 100 100 150 150 200 200 100 100 150 150 200 200 100 100 150 150 200 200
NOTE --The

Cm)
9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0

(ki
205 262 307 392 410 524 209 267 313 398 417 531 232 289 348 434 464 578

(kg)
1457 1930 2185 2897 2914 3863 1385 1860 2078 2i90 277 I 372 I 1362 1837 2043 2755 2725 3674

400/61.6 5501103.7 450/ 72.4 600/ 122.6 500186.9 6001122.6 3501'52.4 550,`103.7 450: 72.4 550,' 103.7 5OOi86.9 6Oti 122.6 350 152.4 5501103.7 450/72.4 550; 103.7 5OOi86.9 600/ 122.6

350156.9 450/ 79.4 4OOi66.7 SOOi95.2 450; 79.4 5SO/Il2.5 300/48.1 450179.4 400/66.7 500195.2 450/79.4 550/ 112.5 300:48.1 450179.4 350/56.9 500195.2 450; 79.4 550; 112.5

225146.8 400;77.4 300/ 58.8 35Oi67.4 225143.1 350: 72.4 250151.0 450/87.2 300: 63.0

I in 4

350149.5 600/99.5 450!65.3 500/75.0

I in 5

350149.5 600199.5 450;65.3 600,99.5 500/75.0

225/ 43. I 350/ 67.4 25015 I .o 450187.2 3OQ58.8

forces presented in allowable forces

in the above stress.

table are after 2506 reduction,

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

to account

for 33foi,

increase

The column

axial

do not include

the wall cladding

weight

(30 kg/m2).

TABLE Truss Span = 30 m

202 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

STEEL

ROOF

TRUSSES Column Spacing = 6.0 in'

ALTERNATE COLUMN PRESSI~RF COLI'MY (kg, m')
'

SECTION
ISWB ISHB '

Compression (kg) 4528 10039 9528 10039 9528 10039 I0069 10579 10069 10579 10069 10579 10397 10907 10397 10907 10397 10907

Tension

Shear CCap (kg) 273 349 410 524 546 698 278 354 417 531 557 709 309 386 464 578 619 `77 I

at Base? (kg) 1943 2575 2914 3863 3885 5150 1847 2480 277 I 372 I 3695 4961 1817 2449 2725 3674 3633 4898

Base Moment (kgm) 7915 13892 II872 20833 I5830 27784 7063 I2756 10594 19134 14126 25512 6780 I2379 10170 I8569 13561 24759

'

'

ISLB

lSMB

Cm)
9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 9.0 12.0

(kg)
82% 439 3522 3139 6222 5809 848 466 3548 3166 6248 5866 861 479 3561 3179 626

I

in 3

100 100 150 150 200 200

450165.3 600199.5 550j86.3 6oOi99.5

450172.4 550/103.7 5OOi86.9 6001122.6 550/ 103.7

400166.7 500/95.2 450179.4 550/ 112.5 500195.2 600/ 133.7

25015 I .O 450187.2 350167.4 400/ 77.4 25O/Sl.O 450/ 87.2 300/63.0 400177.4

I in 4

100 100 150 150 200 200

450165.3 6OOi99.5 500/ 75.0 600/99.5

400/61.6 5501103.7 500186.9 600! 122.6 550/ 103.7

350156.9 5OOi95.2 450/ 79.4 550, 112.5 5OOi95.2 6Oq/ 133.7

I

in 5

100 100 150 150 200 200

400/ 56.9 600199.5 500/75.0 550; 86.3

400161.6 5501103.7 500/86.9 6001 122.6 500186.9

350; 56.9 500195.2 450179.4 5501 112.5 450,79.4 600/ 133.7

25015 I .o 400/82.2 3OOi58.8 350/ 72.4

I

5879

Norm-The

forces presented

in the above table are after 2576 reduction, stress. the wall cladding weight (30

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

to account

I
for 333 % increase in allowable The column axial forces do not include kgim2).

TABLE 203 CANTILEVER Truss Span = 9.0 m
ROOF SLOPE BASK: WIND HEIGHT OF p Tension

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR LEAN-TO

ROOF TRIISSES Column Spacing = 4.5 m

COLUMN FORCES 4 fl

ALTERNATE COLUMN SECTION

PRESSURE COLUMN ' Com-

Shear f Cap (kg) 275 304 398 456 551 608 228 257 342 385 456 513 200 228 299 342 399 456

at Base 1 (kg) 1202 1139 1352 1708 `1803 2277 854 1091 128 1637 1708 2183 825 Id63 1238 1594 1651 2126

pression (kg/m*)
I in 3

Base 1 Moment (kgm) 2262 3643 3394 5464 4526 7286 2049 3358 3073 5037 4098 6716 1921 3187 288 I 4781 3842 6375

'

ISLB

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB '

(m) 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

(kg) 2143 2335 2143 2335 2143 2335 2265 2456 2265 2456 2265 2456 2339 2530 2339 2530 2339 2530

(kg)
I85 41 792 649 1400 1256 191 47 798 655 1406 I262 300 156 960 817 1621 1478

IO0 I00 150 I50 200 200

'

250/ 27.9 300/37.7 275133.0 325143. I 275133.0 350149.5 225i23.5 275133.0 250127.9 325143. I 275/ 33.0 350/49.5 225123.5 276133.0 250127.9 325/43.1 275133.0 350149.5

200/25.4 250137.3 225131.2 300/44.2 250137.3 350152.4 200125.4 250137.3 225131.2 300/44.2 250-/ 37.3 350152.4 200125.4 250137.3 225131.2 300144.2 225131.2 350152.4

175/22.1 225133.9 200,!28.8 250140.9 225133.9 300148. I 175122.1 225133.9 200/28.8 250/40.9 225133.9 250/40.5 175/22.1 225133.9 200128.8 250/ 40.9 200128.8 250/40.9

150127.1 200137.3 150/30.6 200137.3 200137.3 225143.1 150127. I 200137.3 150127.1 200137.3 200/ 37.3 225143. I 150/27.1 200/37.3 150/27.1 200137.3 200137.3 225143. I to account

I in 4

100
100 I50 I50 200 200

1 in 5

loo I00 I.50 150 200 200
NOTE -The

forces presented in allowable forces

in the above stress.

table are after 25 % reduction,

if the wind load is one of the loads m the combination

for 33 f % increase The column

axial

do not include

the wall cladding

weight

(30 kg/m2).

~~__~~
TABLE Truss
ROOF SLOPE

204 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

LEAN-TO

ROOF

TRUSSES Column Spacing = 6.0 m

Span = 9.0 m
BASK WIND HEIGHT OF COLUMN FORCES h

ALTERNATE COLUMN SECTION

PRESSURE COLUMN f Com-

Tension fCaP

Shear

at Base)

pression

Base Moment

&LB

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB '

(kg/W
1 in 3 100 100 1.50 I50 200 200 loo 100 I50 150 200 200 I in 5 100 too I50 IS0 200 200
NOTE ---The

Cm)
4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4-5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

(kg)
2978 3233 2978 3233 2978 3233 3140 3395 3140 3395 3140 3395 3239 3494 3239 3494 3239 3494

(kg)
156 966 775 1776 1585 164 _ 974 783 I784 1593 310 119 I I91 1000 2072 1880

(kg)
367 405 551 608 734 811 304 342 456 513 608 684 366 304 399 456 532, 608

(kg).
1202 1518 1803 2277 2404 3036 II39 1455 I708 2183 2277 2910 II00 1417 1651 2126 220 I 2834

(km)
3017 4857 4525 7286 6034 9715 2732 4477 4098 6716 5464 8955 2561 4250 3842 6375 5123 8500 250127.9 325143. I 275133.0 350149.5 300/37.7 400/ 56.9 250/ 27.9 3OOi37.7 275! 33.0 350/49.5 300/37.7 400156.9 250/ 27.9 300137.7 2751'33.0 350149.5 3Oq37.7 400: 56.9 225131.2 300/44.2 250137.3 350152.4 300/44.2 400/61.6 200/ 25.4 300/44.2 25Oi37.3 350j52.4 250137.3 M/61.6 200125.4 250137.3 225131.2 350152.4 250137.3 400161.6 200/28.8 250140.9 225133.9 300/48.1 250/40.9 350156.9 200/28.8 250140.9 225133.9 250/40.9 250140.9 300/ 48. I 200/28.8 225133.9 200/ 28.8 250/40.9 225133.9 300/48. I 15Oj27.1 200137.3 200/37.3 225143. I 200/40.0 250/ 5 1 .o 150/27.1 200137.3 200137.3 225143.1 200137.3 250/s I .o 150/27.1 200137.3 200137.3 225143. I 200137.3 250! 5 I .o to account

I in 4

forces presented in allowable forces

in the above table are after 255% reduction, stress. the wall cladding weight

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

for 33 f "`0 increase `The column

axial

do not include

(30 kg/m*).

TABLE 205 CANTILEVER Truss
ROOF SLOPE

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR LEAN-TO

R.OOF TRUSSES Column Spacing = 4.5 m

Span = 12.0 m
BASIC WIND PRESSURE HEIGHT OF COLUMN fl ' ComCOLUMN FORCES ALTERNATE GJLUMN

SECTION .

Tension

Shear / CaP

at Base>

pression

Base Moment

)

'

ISLB

ISMB

1SWB

1SHB '

W
I in 3

mi)
100 100 100 150 150 150 200 200 200 loo 100 100 150 I50 150 200 200 200 100 IO0 100 150 150 150 200 200 200

Cm)
4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0

(kg) 2661 2852 3234 2661 2852 3234 2661 2852 3234 2823 3014 3396 2823 3014 3396 2823 3014 3396 2921 3113 3495 2921 3113 3495 2921 3113 3495

(kg)
394 251 1204 1061 174 2014 1871 I584 402 259 1212 1069 182 2022 1819 I592 548 404 II8 1429 1285 999 2310 2166 1879 in the above stress.

(kg)
338 367 424 508 551 636 671 734 848 215 304 361 413 456 542 551 608 122 237 266 322 356 399 485 415 532 646

(kg)
810 1202 1616 1441 1803 2514 1929 2404 3353 902 1139 1613 1352 II08 2120 1803 2271 3226 863 1100 I515 1295 1651 2363 1127 2201 3150

(ke-4
2541 4022 1912 382 I 6034 I1868 5095 8045 15824 2262 3643 7342 3394 5464 11014 4525 1286 14685 2092 3415 7001 3138 5123 10501 4184 6830 14002 250121.9 300/31.7 450165.3 275133.0 325143. I 550/86.3 3cm/31.7 350149.5 600199.5 250121.9 300137.7 450165.3 215133.0 325143. I 500/ 75.0 275133.0 350149.5 600195.5 225123.5 275133.0 450165.3 250121.9 325143. I 500/15.0 275133.0 350149.5 550186.3 200125.4 250/ 37.3 450112.4 225131.2 300/44.2 500186.9 250131.3 400/61.6 550/ 103.7 200125.4 250137.3 450112.4 225131.2 300144.2 500186.9 250137.3 350152.4 55Ol103.7 200125.4 250131.3 4OOl61.6 225131.2, 300144.2 5@0/ 86.9 250131.3 350152.4 500186.9 200128.8 225133.9 400166.7 200128.8 250140.9 450119.4 225133.9 300/48.1 500195.2 115/22.1 225133.9 350156.9 200128.8 250140.9 450119.4 225133.9 300148. 500195.2 115122. 225133.9 350156.9 200128.8 250140.9 450119.4 225133.9 300148.1 500195.2 150/21.1 200137.3 25015 I .O 200137.3 200/40.0 350167.4 200137.3 25bl51.0 400/17.4 150/21.1 200131.3 250151.0 I M/ 34.6 200137.3 300163.0 200131.3 225143. I 400/17.4 150/21. I 200137.3 25015 1 .O I50/21. I 2OOj31.3 300/58.8 2OOl31.3 225143. I 350112.4 to account

I in 4

P

I

1 in 5

I

& ..

NOTE for

-The

forces presented in allowable forces

table are after 25% reduction,

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

33: % increase The column

axial

do not include

the wall cladding

weight

(30 kg/m*).

TABLE

206 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

LEAN-TO

ROOF

TRUSSES Column Spacing = 6 m

TrussSpan = 12.0 m RWX
SLOPE

BASIC
WIND

HEIGHT OF /PA_

COLUWV FOKES w

ALTERNATE COLQ.MN SECTION

PRESSURE COLUMN

' Compression (kg) 3698 3953 4463 3698 3953 4463 3698 3953 4463 3914 4169 4679 3914 4169 4679 3914 4169 4679 4045 4300 4810 4045 4300 4810 4045 4300 4810

rension f

Shear Cap

at Base7

Base
Momerit

1

/

'

ISLB

ISMB

ISWB

\

ISHB '

(kg/m*)
1 in 3 100 100 100 150 150 150 200 200 200 100 100 100 150 150 150 200 200 200 100 100 100 150 150 150 200 200 200

(4
4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0

(kg)
413 222 I493 1302 920 2573 2382 2000 424 233 1504 1313 980 2584 2392 2010 618 427 45 1793 1601 1219 2967 2776 2393

!k)
452 490 566 677 734 848 903 980 1132 367 405 482 551 600 722 734 811 963 317 355 431 475 532 646 633 710 862

(kg)
I286 1602 2233 I929 2404 3223 2573 3205 4470 1202 1518 2150 1803 2277 3226 2404 3036 430 I 1151 1467 2100 I727 2201 3150 2303 2935 4200

(km)
3396 5363 10549 5095 8045 15824 6793 10727 21099 3017 4857 9790 4525 7286 14685 6034 9715 19580 2789 4553 9334 4184 6830 14002 5578 910? 18667 275133.0 325143.1 500175.0 300/37.7 350149.5 600199.5 325143. I 450165.3

225131.2 300144.2 500i86.7 250/37.3 400/61.6 550/103.7 300144.2 45oj72.p 600/122.6 225131.2 300144.2 450172.4 250137.3 350/52.4 550/103.7 300/44.2 400/61.6 550/103.7 225131.2 300/44.2 450/72.4 250137.3 350/52.4 500/86.9 250/37.3 400/61.6 550/103.7

200/28.8 250/40.9 450179.4 225133.9 300/48.1 500/95.2 25Ol40.9 350156.9 500195.2 200/28.8 250140.9 400166.7 225133.9 300/48.1 500195.2 250140.9 350156.9 500195.2 200/28.8 25Oj40.9 400166.1 225133.9 250140.9 450: 79.4 250140.9 300148. I 500195.2

25Oj30.5 2OOi37.3 300/58.8 200/37.3 250/51.0 400177.4 225143.1 300/58.8 450187.2 150127.1 200137.3 300/58.8 200137.3 225143.1 400/77.4 200/40.0 250151.0 450187.2 150127.1 200/37.3 3OOl58.b 200137.3 225143.1 350172.4 200137.3 250/51.0 450187.2
to account

I in 4

250/ 27.9 325143. I sOO/ 75.0 275133.0 350149.5 600199.5 300/37.7 400156.9 250127.9 300137.7 500/75.0 .275/33.0 350149.5 55Ol86.9 300/37.7 400156.9 600199.5

I in 5

NOTE -- The forces presented for 33: % increase `The column in allowable forces

in the above table are after 25% reduction, stress. the wall cladding weight

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

axial

do not include

(30 kg/mz).

TABLE 207 CANTILEVER Truss
ROOF SLOPE

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR LEAN-TO

ROOF TRUSSES Column Spacing = 4.5 m

Span = 15 m
BASIC HEIGHT OF p COLUMN FORCES A

ALTERNATE COLUMN SECTION

WIND

A Base ' Moment ' ISLB ISMB ISWB

PRESSURE COLUMN ' Com-

Tension (Cap (kg) 599 455 169 161 I 1460 1181 2624 2480 2194 609 466 179 1621 1478 1191 2634 249 I 2204 791 647 361 1892 I749 1462 2993 2850 2563

Shear

*

at Base 3

. ISHB 1

pression

(Kim*)
1 in 3 IO@ 100 100 150 150 150 2cO 200 200 100 100 100 150 150 150 200 200 200 100 100 :OO, 150 150 150 200 200 200 Ncic -

Cm)
4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0

(kg) 3185 3376 3758 3185 3376 3758 3185 3376 3758 3387 3579 3961 3387 3679 3961 3387 3579 3961 3511 3702 4384 3511 3702 4084 3511 3702 4084

402 431 488 603 646 731 804 861 975 322 351 408 484 527 613 646 703 817 275 304 361 413 456 542 550 608 722

1027 1265 1739 1542 1898 2609 2055 253 I 3479 949 1186 1661 1423 1779 249 I 1898 2372 3321 902 1139 1613 3152 1705 2120 1803 2279 3226

2832 4402 8481 4248 6603 12722 5665 8805 16963 2476 3927 7769 3114 5891 11654 4952 7855 15539 2262 3643 7342 3394 5464 11014 4525 7286 14685

250127.9 300137.7 450165.3 275133.0 350149.5 550186.3 300137.7 400156.9 600199.5 250127.9 300137.7 45Oi65.3 275133.0 325143. I 550186.3 300137.7 350149.5 6OOl99.5 250127.9 300137.7 450165.3 275133.0 325143.1 500/75.0 275133.0 350149.5 600199.5

225131.2 250137.3 450172.4 250137.3 350152.4 ;:;;::; 400161.6 5501103.7 200125.4 250137.3 450172.4 225131.2 300144.2 500/86.9 250137.3 350152.4 5501 103.7 200125.4 250137.3 450172.4 225131.2 300144.2 500186.9 250137.3 350152.4 550/ 103.7

2OOI28.8 250140.9 400166.7 225133.9 250140.9 450179.4 250140.9 3OOj48.1 500/95.2 200/28.8 225133.9 350156.9 200128.8 250140.9 450179.4 250133.9 300148.1 500195.2 115l22.1 225133.9 350156.9 200128.8 250140.9 450179.4 225133.9 300/48.1 500195.2

15OJ27.1 200137.3 250154.7 200137.3 225143. I 350161.4 200/37.,3 25Ol51.0 400177.4 I50127.1 200137.3 25G/SI.O. 150/27.1 200/40.0 350167.4 200137.3 225146.8 4Ool77.4 la/??.1 200/3?.3 250/51.1 150134.6 2uof37.3 350167.4 200137.3 225143.1 400177.4 to account

1 in 4

1 in 5

The forces presented in allowable forces

in the above stress.

table are after 25% reduction,

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

for 33; % increase The column

axial

do not include

the wall ciadding

weight

(30 kg/m2).

TABLE 208 CANTILEVER Truss
ROOF SLOPE

COLUMN

SECTIONS

FOR

LEAN-TO

ROOF

TRUSSES Column Spacing = 6.0 m

Span = 15.0 m
BASIC WIND HEIGHT COLCMX FORCES

OF A PRESSURE COLUMN ' Com-

Tension kg) 664 472 90 2014 1822 1440 3364 3172 2i90 677 486 103 2027 1836 I453 3377 3186 2803 920 728 346 2388 2197 1814 3856 3665 3282

Shear CCap

at Base )

pression

Base 3 Moment

)

ALTERNATE COLUMN SECTION h

' ISLB

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB )

(kg: m9
1 in 3 100 100 100 150 150 I50 200 200 200 I00 100 100 I50 150 I50 200 200 200 IO0 I00 100 I50 I50 I50 200 200 200
NOTE -The

(mf
4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0 4.5 6.0 9.0

(kg) 4426 468 I 5191 4426 4681 5191 4426 468 I 5191 4691 4952 5462 4691 4952 5462 4697 4952 5462 4861 5116 5626 4861 5116 5626 4861 5116 5626

(kg)
536 574 650 804 861 975 I072 II48 1301 431 468 546 646 703 817 861 937 1089 367 405 482 551 608 722 735 811 963

(kg)
1317 I687 2319 2056 253 I 3479 274 I 3374 4639 1265 1581 2214 1898 2372 3396 2530 3163 4428 1202 1518 2150 1803 2277 3226 2404 3036 4301

(kgm)
3776 5870 II309 5665 8805 16963 7553 II740 22618 3002 5237 10359 4953 7855 I5539 6004 10474 20719 1117 4857 9790 4526 7286 14685 6034 9715 19580 275133.0 325143. I 550186.3 300:37.7 4001.56.9 600199.5 325143.1 450165.3 250127.9 325143. I 500/ 75.0 300/ 37.7 350149.5 600/99.5 325143. I 450165.3 250127.9 325143. I 5OOl75.0 275133.0 350149.5 60019a.5 300/3?.? 400156.9 225131.2 300/44.2 500186.9 250137.3 4OOj61.6 550/ 103.7 300144.2 450172.4 600/ 122.6 225131.2 300144.2 SOO/86.9 250/3?.3 350/52.4 550/103.? 300144.2 450172.4 @IO/ 122.6 225131.2 300144.2 500186.9 250137.3 350/ 52.4 550/ 103.7 300/44.2 400/61.6 550/ 103.7 200/ 28.8 250140.9 450179.4 250140.9 300/48.1 500195.2 250/40.9 350156.9 500195.2 200/28.8 250140.9 400/66.? 225143.9 300/48.1 500195.2 250140.9 350156.9 500195.2 200/28.8 25Oi40.9 400166.7 225133.9 300/48.1 500195.2 250140.9 350/56.9 SOO/95.2 200137.3 200137.3 350161.4 2OOl37.3 250/51.0 400~71.4 225j46.8 3OOl58.8 I501 27. I 200137.3 300/58.8 200/ 37.3 225146.8 400/?7.4 225143.1 250154.7 450/8?.2 150/27.1 2OOj37.3 300/58.8 200137.3 225143. I 400/??.4 225143. I 250/51.0 450187.2 to account

I in 4

I in 5

forces presented in allowable forces

in the above table are after 25% reduction, stress. the wall cladding weight

if the wind load is one of the loads in the combination

for 33 !j o/n increase The column

axial

do not include

(30 kg/ml).

SP : 38(S&T)_1987

TABLE 209 CRANE Tritiss SPAN (m) 5.0 W Y and 12 18 24 30 NOTE-6.5 8.5 10.5 12.0 CW 2 2 2 2 WB 3 3.5 4 4.8 W 8.5 10.5 12.5 14.0

LOAD

DATA

USED

FOR

DESIGN

CRANE CAPACITY (T) 7.5 CW 4 4 4 4 WB 3 3.5 4.0 4.8 W 10.5 12.5 IS.0 17.0 10 CW 4 4 4 4 WB 3 3.5 4.0 4.8 W 17.5 19.5 23.0 25.5

m
CW 1 7 7 7 WB 3.8 4.0 4.5 5.0 ,

1. Notation: W-wheel load without impact including the effect of crab crane and weight weight (T), WB-wheel base (m). 2. All the above E.O.T. tight duty cranes are cabin operated with no axiliary hoist. 3. Wheel loads do not include impact factor. 4. Crane span may be approximately 1.3 m less than the given truss span. 5. This data shall be verified with the data supplied by crane manufacturer and appropriate made in the design, if necessary.

lifted. (T), CW-crab

modifications

shall be

TABLE Gantry Span = 4.5 m TRUSS SPAN

210 ANALYSIS

AND

DESIGN

RESULTS

OF GANTRY

GIRDERS

CRANE

GIRDER FORCES

FORCE ON COLUMN b Load (T) 11.30 14.63 18.95 25.82 13.45 16.50 19.64 27.62 15.04 17.82 21.37 29.29 15.46 17.96 21.79 32.42 (see Fig. 5, 45). Force

GIRDER SECTION ClSMB kk ISMC) Channel Section 200/22.l 200122.1 200122. I 259130.4 200122. I 200122.1 225125.9 300/35.8 200122. I 225/25.9 25Ol30.4 300/35.8 225/25.9 225125.9 250/ 30.4 300/35.8

CAPACITY (Vertical Bending Moment

A Transverse> Moment (Tm) 0.20 0.33 0.39 0.76

(m) 9 and I2

0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 1.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 Sec:ion is an I section

(Tm) Y.66 12.47 15.50 25.35 12.46 15.28 18.31 28.15 15.28 18.09 21.82 33.07 17.39 20.20 24.64 36.59

0-J
0.24 0.39 0.47 0.78 0.22 0.36 0.43 0.75 0.20 0.32 0.39 0.68 0.18 0.29 0.35 0.68 350152.4 400/61.6 400/61.6 500/86.9 400/61.6 406/61.6 450/72.4 5501103.7 400161.6 450172.4 500186.9 5501103.7 450172.4 450172.4 500/86.9 5501103.7

18

0.20
0.33 0.39 0.76 0.20 0.33 0.39 0.76 0.20 0.33 0.39 0.76

24

30

NOTE -The

Girder

with top channel

253

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 211 ANALYSIS AND DESIGN RESULTS OF GANTRY GIRDERS Gantry Span-6.0
TRUSS SPAN

m
CRANE CAPACITY GIRDER FORCIZS A FORCE? ON COLUMN A GIRDRR &ETION

A ffsMB Section lSMC> Channel Section 225125.9 225125.9 250/ 30.4 300/35.8 225125.9 250130.4 250130.4 300135.8 250/ 30.4 250130.4 300135.8 300/35.8 250130.4 250130.4 3OOi35.8 3OOl35.8

(m) `9 and I2

(-0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0

fVerticZll Bending Moment (Tm) 14.54 18.76 23.29 31.78 16.82 20.58 24.65 37.69 20.51 24.26 29.26 44.26 23.32 27.07 33.01 48.94

Tfansverse~ fiertical Moment Load (Tm) 0.30 0.49 0.59 .0.95 0.26 0.44 0.53 I.01 0.26 0.43 0.53 I.01 0.26 0.43 0.53 1.01 (-0 12.83 16.63 20.45 30.65 15.68 19.22 22.89 33.25 18.13 21.46 25.75 36.69 18.63 21.63 26.25 37.94

Surge) Force (-0 0.27 0.44 0.53 0.93 0.25 0.41 0.50 0.90 0.24 0.39 0.47 0.85 0.21 0.35 0.42 0.79

450172.4 450172.4 5OOl86.9 550/ 103.7 450172.4 500/86.9 500186.9 550/ 103.7 500/86.9 500/ 86.9 55OilO3.7 600/ 122.6 500186.9 500/ 86.9 5501103.7 600/ 122.6.

I8

24

30

NOTE-The

Gird& Section is an 1 section with top channel (see Fig. 5, 45).

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 212 ANALYSIS AND DESIGN RESULTS FOR STEPPED COLUMN
CRANE CAPACIN

TRUSS
SPACING

TOTAL COLUMN

BASIC
WIND PR@SUlU3 h_ '

COLUMN bVl?

CRANE CAP

COLUMN Betow

CIaNt3

CM

HEIGHT

(r,
5

(ml
4.5

Cm) 8.25

(kg/ m3 100 I50 200 100 150 200 100 I50 200 100 150 200 100 150 200 100 I50 200 100 I50 200 100 150 200

Design Forces + Moment 7 fAW Force's' 0-I (Tm) 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 7.78 1.78 7.78 7.78 1.78 7.78 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 7.78 1.78 7.78 7.78 7.78 7.78 1.381 2MJ4 2.627 1.381 2.004 2.627 1.8t4 2.644 3.474 1.814 2.644 3.474 1.466 2.089 2.712 1.466 2.089 2.712 1.910 2.740 3.570 1.910 2.740 3.570

DesiKn
Section

"

De@

ISMB 225131.2 250137.3 300/44.2 225131.2 250137.3 300144.2 250137.3 300/44.2 350142.1 250137.3 300/44.2 35Oj52.4 250137.3 250137.3 300/44.2 250137.3 250137.3 300144.2 250137.3 300144.2 350152.4 25Or31.3 3OOl44.2 350152.4 20.692 24.271 27.85I 23.736 28.693 33.650 25.922 30.694 35.467 29.932 36.541 43.150 23.186 26.765 30.345 26.406 31.363 36.328 28.960 33.732 38.505 33.195 39.804 46.413

l 175/ 19.3
175119.3 2OOl25.4 175119.3 200125.4 2OOl25.4 175119.3 200125.4 200125.4. 200125.4 225131.2 225131.2 115/19;3 175119.3 250125.4 200125.4 200125.4 225131.2 200125.4 200125.4 225131.2 200/25.4 225131.2 250137.3

9.15

6.0

8.25

9.15

7.5

4.5

8.25

9.75

6.0

8.25

9.75

175/ 19.1 200/22.1 200/22.1 175/19.1 2oop2.1 225/2x9 200/22.1 200/22. I 225125.9 mO/22.1 225125.9 250130.4 200/22.1 200/22.1 m/22.1 200/22. I 225125.9 225125.9 200122.1 225125.9 225125.9 225125.9 250/30.4 300/35.8

NOTE-

I. See Fig. 5. 2. Roof column and crane column may be 1SMC or 1SMB as desired. Preferably the roof column and crane column will have same depth. 3. Axial Force is based on the roof load from 30 m span length. 4. Axial Force includes the self weight, crane load, roof load and contribution of wind moment. 5. The forces presented are after 25% reduction to account for wind load if it is one of the loads in the combination.

255

SP:38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 213 ANALYSIS
CRANE CAPACITY

AND

DESIGN RESULTS
h

FOR STEPPED

COLUMN
COLUMN BELOW CRANE CAP h

TRUSS
SPACING

TOTAL COLUMN HEIGHT

BASIC
WIND PRESSURE

CWUMN ABOVE CRANE CAP
/ ' Design \ r

Forces Y Moment i (Tm) I.511 2.134 2.757 1.51 I 2.134 2.757 1.961 2.791 3.621 I.961 2.791 3.621 I.685 2.308 2.93 I 1.685 2.308 2.931 2. I86 3.016 3.846 2.186 3.016 3.846

Design ' Section ISMB

' Design Axial Force"." (T)

Design Y ( ISMB

e ' Axial Force"'

A

Sections"' A

1

ISMC `,

U)

(ml

(m)

(kg/t+) 100 150 200 loo 150 200 100 150 200 100 150 200 100 150 200 100 150 200 100 150 200 100 I50 200

(T) 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 7.78 7.78 7.78 7.78 7.78 7.78 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 5.86 7.78 7.78 7.78 7.78 2.78 7.78

8.25 4.5 9.75

IO

8.25
6.0

9.75

8.25 ,4.5 20 9.75

8.25 6.0 9.75

250137.3 250137.3 300/44.2 250137.3 .250/37.3 300/44.2 250137.3 300/44.2 350152.4 250137.3 300/44.2 350152.4 250137.3 250137.3 300144.2 250137.3 250137.3 300/44.2 3OOi44.2 300144.2 350/52.4 300144.2 300144.2 350152.4

26.395 29.974 33.554 29.712 34.669 39.626 32.818 37.590 42.363 37.166 43.775 50.384 36.224 39.803 43.383 39.896 44.853 49.810 43.668 48.440 53.213 48.610 55.219 61.828

175119.3 200/25.4 200/25.4 200/25.4 200/25.4 225131.2 200125.4 200125.4 225131.2 225/31.2 225131.2 250137.3 200/ 2%4 225131.2 225/31.2 225131.2 225131.2 250137.3 225131.2 250137.3 250137.3 250137.3 250137.3 300144.2

200/22.1 200/22. I 225125.9' 200/22. I 225125.9 250130.4 200/u. I 225125.9 250/ 30.4 225125.9 250/30.4 300/35.8 225125.9 250130.4 250/ 30.4 250/ 30.4 250130.4 300/35.8 250/30.4 300/35.8 300135.8 300/35.8 350/42. I 350/42. I

NOTE -

I. See Fig. 5. 2. Roof column and crane column may be ISMC toe to toe or ISMB as desired. Preferably the roof column and crane column will have same depth. 3. Axial Force is based on the roof load from 30* m span length. 4. Axial Force includes the self weight, crane load, roof load and contribution of wind moment. 5. The forces presented are after 25% reduction to account for wind load if it is one of the loads in the combination.

256

TABLE 214 FOUNDATION FORCES FOR CRANE COLUMN FOOTINGS
SPAN SPACING COLUMN HEIGHT CAPACITY OF CRANE fl TRUSS LOAD A \ * WIND LOAD h B&> CRANE LOAD

A (AF X IO' Moment (kg.m) 10023 10023 10023 10023 13880 13880 13880 13880 13363 13363 13363 13363 18506 18506 18506 18506 11.30 14.63 18.05 25.82 11.30 14.63 18.05 25.82 12.83 16.63 20.45 30.65 12.83 16.63 20.45 30.65 Surge 7 Force (kg) 240 390 470 780 240 390 470 780 210 440 530 930 270 440 530 930

' DL

LL'

I AF Shear (kg)

(ml
9.0

(ml
4.5

(m)
8.25

V)
5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 10.0 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 LO.0 20.0 719 719 719 719 719 719 719 719 1016 1016 1016 1016 1016 1016 1016 1016 982 982 982 982 982 982 982 982 1309 1309 1309 1309 1309 1309 1309 1309 -2430 - 2430 -2430 - 2430 -2430 - 2430 -2430 -2430 - 3240 - 3240 - 3240 -3240 -3240 - 3240 - 3240 - 3240

9.75

2676 2676 2676 2676 3151 3151 3151 3151

9.0

6.0

8.25

9.75

3569 3569 4202 4202 4202 4202

Nom-

1. TO obtain wind forces for basic wind pressures of 100 kg/m* and I50 kg/m2 reduce the wind forces given in the table proportionately. 2. Crane load axial force is the vertical load transmitted by the gentry girder when crane is operating under full capacity. 3. Additional forces from wall and self weight of columns should be considered for foundation design. 4. Forces given in the table for wind loads are actual values for 200 kg/m* wind zone without any reduction.

TABLE
SPAN SPACING COLUMN

215 FOUNDATION
CAPACXTY

FORCES

FOR CRANE

COLUMN

FOOTINGS

T~vss LOAD m (kg) 986 986 986 986 986 986 986 986 1392 1392 1392 1392 1392 1392 1392 1392 (kg) 1310 1310 1310 1310 1310 1310 i310 1310 1746 1746 1746 1746 1746 1746 1746 1746 (AF (kg) - 3240 -3240 - 3240 -3240 - 3240 -3240 - 3240 -3240 - 4320 - 4320 -4320 -4320 - 4320 -4320 -4320 -4320

HEIGHT ::Na (ml 12.0 (m) 4.5 (mj 8.25 (-0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0
7.5

WIND LOUD CRANELOAD A A Base 1 <AF X 103 surge > Base Force Shear Moment (kg) (kg) (kg.m) (kg) 2676 2676 2676 2676 3151 3151 3151 3151 3569 3569 3569 3569 4012 4012 4012 4012 LO023 10023 10023 10023. 13880 13880 13880 13880 13363 13363 13363 13363 18506 18506 18506 18506 11.30 14.63 18.05 25.82 11.30 14.63 18.05 25.82 12.83 16.63 20.45 30.65 12.83 16.63 20.45 30.65 240 390 470 780 240 390 470 780 270 440 530 930 270 440 530 930

9.75

6.0

8:25

9.75

10.0 20.0 5.0 1.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 1.5 10.0 20.0

K.rr~-- 1. 2. 3. 4.

To obtain wind forces for basic wind pressures of 100 kg/m2 and 150 kg/m2 reduce the wind forces given in the table proportionately. Crane load axial force is the vertical load transmitted by the gantry girder when crane is operating under full capacity. Additional forces from wall and self weight of columns should be considered Forfoundationdesign. (Weight of AC. cladding + girt = 30 kg/m'). Forces given in the table for wind loads are actual values for 200 kg/ mr wind zone without any reduction.

TABLE 216 FOUNDATION
SPAN SPACING

FORCES

FOR CRANE

COLUMN
WIND

FOOTINGS
CRANE LOAD

COLUMN HEIGHT

CAPACITY OF CRANE

Tttuss LOAD
A

fDL

LL'

TAF
(kg)
-4860 -4860 -4680 - 4680 - 4680 - 4680 - 4680 -4680 - 6480 -6480 -6480 -6480 -6480 - 6480 -6480 -6480

(ml 18.0

(ml 4.5

(ml 8.25

(-0 5.0

(kg)
1562 1562 1562 1562 1562 1562 1562 1562 2198 2198 2198 2198 2198 2198 2198 2198

W
1964 1964 1964 1964 1964 1964 1964 1964 2619 2619 2619 2619 2619 2619 2619 2619

LOAD A Ta Base Shear Moment (kg) 0rg.m) 2676 2676 2676 2676 3151 3151 3151 3151 3569 3569 3569 3569 4012 4012 4012 4012 10023 10023 10023 10023 13880 13880 13880 13880 13363 13363 13363 13363 18506 18506 18506 18506

A fiF X 10' (kg) 13.450 16.50 19.64 27.62 13.45 16.50 19.64 21.62 15.68 19.22 22.89 33.25 15.68 19.22 22.89 33.25 Surge3 Force (kg) 220 360 430 750 220 360 430 750 250 410 500 900 250 410 500 900

9.75

6.0

8.25

9.75

7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0

Nora - 1. 2. 3. 4. -

To obtain wind forces for basic wmd pressures of 100 kg/m2 and 150 kg/m* reduce the wind forces given in the table proportionately Cra& load axial force is the vertical load transmitted by the gantry girder when crane is operating under full capacity. Additional forces from wall and self weight of columns should be considered for foundation design. Forces given in the table for wind loads are actual values for 200 kg/m* wind zone without any reduction.

-~
TABLE
SPAN SPACING COL;lMN

217 FOUNDATION C*.PK,Tv
OF CRANE

FORCES
TRL~ h LOAD

FOR

CRANE

COLUMN

FOOTINGS
CRANE LOAD A

WIND LOAD A

HEIGHT

CDL

LL)

(AF

Base Shear (kg) 2676 2676 2676 2616 3151 3151 3151 3151 3569 3569 3569 3569 4012 4012 4012 4012

Base3
Moment &cm)

f

AFX (kg)

10'

Surge? Force (kg) 200 320 390 680 200 320 390 680 240 390 470 850 240 390 470 850

(m)
24

(m)
4.5

(m)
8.25

0)
5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 1.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 1.5 10.0 20.0

(kg)
2192 2192 2192 2192 2192 2192 2192 2192 3077 3017 3017 3077 3077 3017 3017 3071

(kit)
2619 2619 2619 2619 2619 2619 2619 2619 3492 3492 3492 3492 3492 3492

(kg)
- 6480 - 6480 - 6480 - 6480 - 6480 - 6480 -6480 - 6480 -8640 -8640 -8640 -8640 -8640 -8640 -8640 -8640

9.15

6.0

- 8.25

9.75

10023 10023 10023 10023 13880 13880 13880 13880 13363 13363 13363 13363 18506 18506 18506 18506

15.04 17.82 21.37 29.29 15.04 17.82 21.37 29.29 18.13 21.46 25.15 36.69 18.13 21.46 25.75 36.69

NOTE -

I. To obtain wind forces for basic wind pressures of `100 kg/m* and 150 kg/m2 reduce the wind forces given in the table proportionately. 2. Crane load axial force is the vertical load transmitted by the gantry girder when crane is operating under full capacity. 3. Additional forces from wall and self weight of columns should be considered for foundation design. (Weight of A.C. cladding + girts = 30 kg/m?. 4. Forces given in the table for wind loads are actual values for 200 kg/m2 wind zone without any reduction.

TABLE
SPAN SPACING COLUMN HEIGHT

218 FOUNDATION
CAPACITY OF CRANE

FORCES
LOAD A

FOR CRANE COLUMN FOOTINGS
WIND A LOAD CRANE LOAD A

TRIM

CDL

L>

r AF

Base

Cm) 30.0

(ml
4.5

(m)
8.25

CT)
5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0 5.0 7.5 10.0 20.0

!W
2878 2878 2878 2878 2878 2878 2878 2878 4030 4030 4030 4030 4030 4030 4030 4030

(kg)
3273 3273 3273 ,3273 3273 3213 3273 3273 4364 4364 4364 4364 4364 4364 4364 4364

(kg)
-8100 -8100 -8100 -8100 -8100 -8100 -8100 -8100 - 10800 - 10800 - 10800 - 10800 - 10800 - 10800 - 10800 -10800

(kg)
2676 2616 2676 2676 3151 3151 3151 3151 3569 3569 3569 3569 4012 4012 4012 4012

BaseMoment (kg.m) 10023 10023 10023 10023 13880 13880 13880 13880 13363 13363 13363 13363 18506 18506 18506 18506

rAF

x 1133
(kg) 15.46 17.96 21.79 32.42 15.46 17.96 21.79 32.42 18.63 21.63 26.25 37.94 18.63 21.63 26.25 31.94

Surge3 Force (kg) 180 290 350 680 180 2&l 350 680 210 350 420 790 210 350 420 790

9.15

E
6.0 8.25 9.75

NOTE - 1. To obtain wind forces for basic wind pressures of 100 kg/m2 and 1.50kg/m2 reduce the wind forces given in the table proportionately. 2. Crane load axial force is the vertical load transmitted by the gantry girder when crane is operating under full capacity. 3. Additional forces from wall and self weight of columns should be considered for foundation design. (Weight of A.C. cladding + girts = 30 kgjm'). 4. Forces given in the table for wind loads are actual values for 200 kg/ m2 wind zone without any reduction.

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 219 CONNECTION TUtI&?
SPAN

DETAILS

OF A-TYPE

ANGLE TRUSSES
DETAIL

9

I2

18

24

30

No.

(m) I 6 I I 1 3,6,9,14 4 10 7 12 16 2 5,8,1 1 3.6.9.17 12 4 7.10,13 I5 19 2 58.14 I1 18 16 (see Tables 221 and RT Rl Rlf R2 R3 R4 R4s RS R6 R6f TI T2 T2f T3 T3f WI 222).

3.8
4

3.6,1
4 I

2 497 9 13 2 5.8

4 8

6 10 2 5 9 7

I

12 IO

IS 13

NOTE -

For number

and

size of fasteners

to be used in thii connection

TABLE TRU.?s
SPAN

220 CONNECTION

DETAILS

OF LEAN-TO-ROOF

ANGLE

TRUSSES
DETAIL

9

12

15

No.

(m) I 1 3,6,9,14 4 7,lO 12 16 2 5,8,11 I5 13 and size of fasteners I 3,6,9,17 12 4 7,10,13 I5 19.21 2 5.8.14 II I8 16 (see Tables RT RI Rlf R2 RI R5 Rl TI T2 T2f T4 WI 221 and 222).

L6.1
4 7 9 13 2 5.8 I2 10
NOTE-

For number

to bc used in this connection

262

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 221 THICKNESS
SPAN

OF GUSSET PLATE FOR STEEL ROOF
A-TRUSS GUSSET
PLATE THICKNESS

TRUSSES
LEAN-TO-ROOF TRUSS GUSSET PLATE THICKNESS (mm)

SPACING

W-d

Cm)

(mm)

9.0 9.0 12.0 12.0 15.0 15.0 18.0 18.0 24.0 24.0 30.0 30.0
NoTE--T~~

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0
plate thickness given above can be used

8
8 8 10 IO 10
10

8 8 8 10 10 IO -

I2 12 12
for tubular truss also in

case jointing is

done

through

gusset gussets.

,263

TABLE 222 FASTENER
TRUS MEMBER
SIZE WELDED GJNKE~TIOV BOLT

DETAILS FOR ANGLE
ho. OF BLACK

TRUSSES
SPLICE

!%O. OF FITrED

SPLICE ANGLE DETAILS

TACK WELQING Spacing

DIA Size Total Effective Weld per Angle (mm) 210 265 320 380 435 490 545 430 485 540 710 425 535 (mm) 12 12 16 16 20 20 20 20 22 22 24 22 24

B@TS f-S,,@le DoubieJ Angle Angle

h & Angle Angle ANGLE ( Length for Bolted Splice (mm) Effective 3 Length for Welded Splice (mm) 180 220 300 360 400 450 500 400 450 500 650 375 485

(mm) 4040X6 5050X6 6060X6 7070X 6 8080X6 9090X6 100100X6 8080X 8 9090X8 100100X8 130130X8 8080X 10 100100x10
NOTE-

(mm)
300 350 450 500 600 600 600 600 600 600

4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 7.5 1.5

4 5 4 5 4 4 5 4 4 5 5 4 5

5

4040X6 5050X6 6060X6 6060X6 6060X6 7070 X 8080 X 6060X6 7070 x 6080 X 9090X8 (1080 X 8080 x

6 6 8 8 iO 10

220 260 300 340 350 410 410 410 460 460 630 460 570

I. All shop connections are welded and field connections may be bolted or welded. 2. Fastener requirements shown above are to connect web members to gusset plates and for spiice connections in tie and rafter members whenever these members are discontinuous. 3. When rafter or tie members continue through the node, provide a nominal 4.5 mm weld over entire gusset length. 4. The length of welds required should be increased by twenty five percent in case of field welding. 5. Refer Fig. 25 for tack welding details. 6. Spacing and edge distance of bolts shall be as per IS 6OO-iO62 (28,2). 7. Fastener details have been worked on total strength of members joined for typification purposes. If further economy required, fasteners details can be worked out on actual forces in members.

SP : 38(S&T~i987

TABLE
TRUSS SPAN

223 CONNECTION 12 1

DETAILS 18 1 3.6.11 4 * 7 417 9 13 2 5 8 12 10

OF A-TYPE 24 I 3.6.9.14 4 * IO 7 I2 16 2 5,8 11 I5 13

TUBE TRUSSES 30 I 3.6.9.17 I2 4
l

(m)

9

DETAIL No. RT R1 Rlf R2 R3 R4 R4s RS R6 Tl T2 T2f T3 WI

I
6

3.8
4
l

l

NODE NUMBERS; 4 8 * 3 7 5

* + 6 10 2 5 9 7

7.10.13
l

I5 19 2 5,8,14 II I8 16

TABLE TRUSS SPAN (m)

224 CONNECTION 9 I 3,6,11 4 7 9 13 2 5.8 12 IO

DETAILS 12 I 3.6.9.14 4 7,lO 12 16 2 5.8.11 15 13

OF LEAN-TO

ROOF TUBE TRUSSES DETAIL No. RT RI Rlf R2 R4 R5 R-l I-1 T2 T2f T4 WI

IS. I 3,6,9,17 12 4 7,10,13 15 19 2 5.8.14 I1 18 16

NODE NUMBERS

NOTE-

For size of weld in gussetea connection see Table 225.

265

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE Is T~JBE

225 TUBE FASTENER

DETAILS
WEL~XD GIISSET CON!~~E(`~ION

PERIPHERAL WELD SIZE (mm)

n Size (mm) 3 3 3 5 5 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 Total Length> (mm) I30 185 240 180 225 320 310 400 385 470 540 64r 490 720 in case of field welding.

2OL 25L 32L 4OL 5OL 65L 8OL 90L 1001. IOOM 125M ISOM IOOH 150H NOTE-The length of welds required

6 7 7 6 6 7 7 8 8 10 IO 10 II II shorlld be increased by twenty

five percent

TABLE
DEPTH OF COLUMN SWTION (mm)

226 EXTERIOR

COLUMN

CAP AND SHOE ANGLE
COL~~MN CAP PI-ATE (mm)

DETAILS
SWE ANGLE COLUMN CAP CONNFCTIOS BOLTS h Black Bolts No. of

SHOE ANGLE SECTION (mm)

Dia (mm) 200 300 400 500 600
NOTE -

Bolts

2-ls~lOOlOO 2-ISAIOOIOO 2-iSA 2-1SA1lOllOX 2-ISAIIOI 10

X 12 X I2 X 15 15 X 15

220X220X 12 320X270X I2 420X270X I4 520 X 270 X 14 620 X 270 X 14

16 28 20 20 20

4 4 4 4 4

I. For details of columns not specified above use tne details given for the next higher section in the above table. 2. The length of shoe angle shall be same as length of column cap plate. 3. Refer Fig. 42 for drawing details.

266

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE
DEPTH OF COLUMN SECTION (mm)

227 INTERIOR

COLUMN

CAP

AND SHOE ANGLE DETAILS
SHOE ANOLE COLUMN CAP C~NNEI~I~N EoLrs

SHOE ANGLE SECTION (mm)

COLUMN CAP PLATE (mm)

Dii

Bolts 8 8 8 8 8

(mm) 200 300 400 500 fJO0
NOTE-

2-ISA100100 X 2-ISA100100 X 2-ISA110110 X 2-lSA1101 IO x 2-ISA110110 X

12 12 I5 I5 I5

220X220X 12 320X270X I2 420X270X 14 520 X 270 X 14 620 X 270 X 14

18 20 22 22 22

1. For details of columns not specified above use the details given for the next higher section in the above table. 2. The length of shoe angle shall be same as length of column cap plate. 3. Refer Fig. 43 for drawing details. -

TABLE
TYPE

228 CANTILEVER

COLUMN

BASE

DETAILS
t

DEPTH OF COLUMN SECTIONS(mm)

SLAB BASE SIZE (mm)*

ANCHOR kJLTS

ISLB I

ISMB

ISWB

ISHB

a

b

C

Dia (mm)

Total Number

175 200 225 250 275 .300 325 350 400

175 200 225

I50 175 200 225

I50 475 360 50 36 33 6

I1

250 275 300 350 400

250 300

200 225 250

600

450

50

50

39

6

Illi

350 400 450 450 500 550 450 500

300 350

700

IV

800 400 450 500 550 800

500

60

36

39

V V1 VII Vlll *Refer Fig. 44.

700 650 850

600 60 650 700

60 45 60 60

45 45 40 40

45 6 45 50 6 6

600

550 600 600

850

267

TABLE 229 CRANE COLUMN CAP PLATE DETAILS
DEFTH OF
CCBLIJMN SECTION (mm) (mm)

SHOE ANGLE

COLUMN

CAP

PLATE

SIZE

BLACK

BOLT

No. OF
BOLTS

DIA

225 250 MO 350

2-110110 x 2-l 10110x 2-110110 x 2-110110 x.

I5 I5 I5 15

325 X 210 X 14 350 X 225 x 14 400X240X14 450X240X 14

20 20 20 20

4 4 4 4

.NOTEZ- 1. Refer Fig. 42 for drawing details. .2. The length of shoe angle shall be same as length of column cap plate.

TABLE 230 CRANE COLUMN BASE PLATE DETAILS
DEPTH OF
COLUMN %Zl'lON (mm) SIZE OF SLAB A BASE

(mm)
C t

ANCHOR

bLT/

PLATE

a 350 370 400 420 470 520

b 350 250 300 320 320 350

Dia (mm) 28 28 32 32 32 32

No.

175 200 225 250 300 350

55 55 65 65 65 65

20 20 25 25 25 25

NOTE-- 1. Refer Fig. 46 for drawing details.

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE

231 A-TYPE

ANGLE

TRtJSS

WEIGHTS

5 Wind Zone = 100 b/m'
SPAN SLoPE
SPACING

TRUSS MEMBEp WEIGHT 0%) 197 216 208 224 220 258 291 317 326 370 361 434 517 585 537 6399 611 749 889 1009 913 1098 1059 1320 1364 1622 1485 1885 1720 2019

CbSSm

WEIGHT (kg) 59 65 83 67 66 77 79 86 88 100 97 II7 129 146 134 I60 I50 I87 196 222 201 241 233 290 273 324 297 377 404 249

PURLINS WEIGHT (kg) 414 762 414 762 414 762 497 914 497 9n 497 914 662 1219 662 1219 662 1219 828 1524 828 1524 828 1524 994 1829 994 1829 994 1829

SAGROD

WEIGHT (kid 6 9 6 8 6 8 8 II 7 II 7 II II I7 II I7 II Ii I5 23 I5 22 I5 22 I9 28 I9 28 I8 28

TIE RUNNER WEIGHT (kg) 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 85 148 85 I48 85 I48 II3 IY7 II3 197 II3 197 142 246 142 246 142 246

TOTAL WEIGHT (kg) 733

UNIT WEIGHT Ml m2) 18.1 Ll.3 19.0 21.5 18.8 22.3 17.3 19.8 18.1 20.7 18.9 A.5 17.3 19.6 17.6 20.2 18.7 21.5 18.9 20.7 19.2 21.4 20.8 23.3 20.1 23.6 21.8 24.3 24.3 24.8

@I

6-d

9.0

I in 3

I in 4 I in 5

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

II50 I68 II59 763 I203 934 1426 975 1493 1019 1574 1404 2114 1429 2183 I519 2320 2041 2975 2070 3082 2248 3353 2792 4219 2937 4365 3278 4471

12.0

1 in 3
I in 4 I in 5

18.0

I in 3

I in 4
I in 5

24.0

I in 3 I In 4 I in 5

30.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

269

SP :38(5&T)-1987

TABLE

232 A-TYPE Wind

TUBULAR

TRUSS

WEIGHTS

Zone = 100 kg/m* GrlssET WEIGHT 0%) 5 6 7 7 7 9 8 9 10 13 12 14 15 19 I7 24 20 29 29 34 32 42 40 49 45 60 56 70 M) 80 PIJRLINS WEIGHT (kg) 381 726 381 726 381 726 457 871 457 871 457 871 610 tl62 610 II62 610 I I62 762 1452 762 I452 762 I452 915 I742 915 I742 915 I742 TIE RUNNER WEIGHT (kg) 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 35 74 35 74 35 74 46 99 46 99 46 99 5x I25 58 I25 58 125 (kg) 513 903 544 929 556 962 676 1119 683 II90 744 I223 992 1649 IO28 I738 IO58 I875 1416 2311 1527 247 I I660 2575 I939 3136 2171 3358 2243 3549 (kg/m*) 12.7 16.7 13.4 17.2 13.7 17.8 12.5 15.5 12.6 :h.5 13 8 17.0 12.2 15.3 12.7 16.1 13.4 17.4 13.1 16.0 14.1 17.2 !5.4 17.9 14.4 17.4 16.1 18.7 16.6 19.7 TOTAL WEIGHT UNIT WEIGHT

SLQPE

SPACING

TRIXS MEMRERS WEIGHT

(m)

(m)
I in

0%) 104 122 133 147 I45 I78 188 190 193 257 252 289 332 394 366 478 423 610 599 726 687 878 812 975 921 I209 II42 1421 1210 1602

9.0

3

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

I m 4 I in 5

12.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

18.0

I in 3

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

I I
24.0

in 4 in 5

I in 3

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

I 1
30.0

in 4 in 5

I in/3

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

I

in 4

I in 5

270

SP : 38(S&T)-1!387

TABLE

233 A-TYPE

ANGLE

TRUSS

WEIGHTS

Wind Zone = 150 kg/m'
SPAN SLOPE

SPACING

Twss
MEMBERS WEIGHT

GUXSET

WEIGHT (kg) 59 70 68 73 71 82 86 86 94 100 98 117 139 I50 136 161 155 188 210 230 205 253 234 295 299 353 311 385 349 406

PURLINS WEIGHT (kg) 414 762 414 762 414 762 497 914 497 914 497 914 662 1219 662 1219 662 1219 828 1524 828 I524 828 1524 994 1829 994 1829 994 1829

SAGROD

WEIGHT (kg)

TIE RUNNER WEIGHT (kg) 57 98 57 98 57 98

TOTAL WEIGHT (kg) 733 1173 771 1183 786 1224 935 1448 1002 1493 1042 1574 1461 2165 1582 2207 1544 2343 2122 3070 2101 3161 2253 338C 2946 2,I 1n 3020 4405 3249 4541

UNIT WElGHl (kg/ m2) 18.1 21.7 19.0 21.9 19.4 22.7 17.9 20. I 18.6 20.7 19.3 21.8 18.0 20.0 19.5 20.4 19.1 21.7 19.6 21.3 19.5 22.0 20.9 23.5 21.8 22.9 22.4 24.5 24. I 25.2

(m) 9.0 I ih 3 I in 4 I in 5

Am) 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

(kg)

197 234 226 242 238 274 317 339 347 370 383 434 564 631 578 662 631 771 956 IO96 940 1130 1063 1342 1492 1663 1554 1917 I746 2032

12.0

I in

3

1 in 4 I in 5

8 11 7 II 7 II II 17 II 17 11 17 15 23 I5 22 15 22 19 29 19 28 18 28

57 98 57 98 57 98 85 148 85 148 85 148 113 197 113 197 113 197 142 246 142 246 142 246

18.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

24.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

30.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

271

SP : 3Q(S&T)-1987

TABLE 234 A-TYPE
Wind SPAN
SLOPE

TUBULAR
Zone=

TRUSS

WEIGHTS

IS0 kg/m' PCRLINS WEIGHT (kg) 381 726 381 726 381 126 TIE RLVSER WEIGHT (kg) 23 49 23 49 23 4c `. -3 19 23 49 23 49 TOTAL WEIGHT (kg) 533 927 552 943 570 979 697 1138 728 1195 750 I223 I045 I686 1057 1770 1146 I889 46 99 46 99 46 99 58 123 58 123 58 123 1488 2434 I637 249 I 1712 263 I 2074 3250 2252 3408 234 I 3586 (kg m') 13.2 17.2 13.6 Ii 5 44. I 18. I 12.9 15.x 13.5 16.6 13.9 17.0 12.9 15.6 13.0 16.4 14.1 17.5 13.8 16.9 15.2 17.3 15.9 18.3 15.4 18.1 16.7 18.9 17.3 19.8

SPACING

TRUSS
MEMBERS WEIGHT

GUSSET WEISlil

(m) 9.0 1 in 3 1 in 4 I in 5

(ml 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

(kg) 123 145 141 160 158 195 207 208 237 262 257 289 383 430 394 509 480 623 650 848 795 897 863 1030 1160 1323 1220 I472 1307 161 I

(kg)

12.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

10 10 II 13 13 I4 17 20 18 25 21 29 30 35 34 43 41 50 48 62 59 71 61 80

457 871 457 x71 457 871 610 1162 610 1162 610 I162 762 1452 762 1452 762 1452 915 I742 915 I742 915 I742

18.0

I in 3 I,in 4

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

1 in 5

24.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

30.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

272

SP : 3lw&T~1987

TABLE

235 A-TYPE Wind

ANGLE

TRUSS

WEIGHTS

Zone = 200 kg/m' PURLINS WEIGHT SAGROD WEIGHT TIE
RUNNER

SPAN

SLOPE

SPACING

TRUSS

MEMREjtS
WEIGHT

GUSSET WEIGHT

TOTAL WEIGHT (kg) 781 1216 792 1239 820 1258 992 1474 1024 1513 1074 1615 I521 2225 1538 22% 1633 2510 2247 3264 2156 3348 2348 3518 3131 4455 3202 4686 3439 4749

UNIT

WEIGHT (kg/ m2) 19.3 22.5 19.6 22.9 20.2 23.3 18.4 20.5 19.0 21.0 19.9 22.4 18.8 20.6 19.0 21.2 20.2 23.2 20.8 22.7 20.0 23.3 21.7 24.5 23.2 24.8 23.1 26.0 25.5 26.4

WEIGHT (kg) 70 80 73 86 79 90 91 91 94 I09 I04 I26 I53 170 I54 175 168 212 233 265 221 279 251 321 326 310 329 419 375 431 414 762 414 762 414 762 497 914 497 914 497 914 662 1219 662 1219 662 1219 828 1524 828 1524 828 1524 994 1829 994 1829 994 1829 6 9 6 8 6 8 8 II 7 II 7 II II I7 II I7 II I7 I5 23 I5 22 I5 22 19 28 I9 28 I8 28 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 50 57 98 85 I48 85 I48 85 I48 113 197 113 197 113 197 142 246 142 246 142 246

Cm)

Cm) I in 3 I in 4 I in 5 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

(kg)

9.0

234 267 242 285 264 300 339 360 369 429 409 466 612 689 626 731 107 911 1058 1255 1041 I326 II50 1410 1650 1982 1718 2164 1910 2215

12.0

I in 3 I in 4 1 in 5

18.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

24.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

30.0

I in 3 1 in 4 I in 5

273

SP :.38(S&T)_1987

TABLE 236A-TYPE TUBULAR TRUSS WEIGHTS
Wind
SPAN SLOPE

Zone

= 200

kg/m2 PURLINS WEIGHT (kg) 381 726 381 726 381 726 437 871 457 871 457 871 610 1162 610 1162 610 1162 762 1432 762 1432 762 1452 915 1742 915 1742 915 1742 TIE RUNNER WEIGHT (kg) 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 33 74 33 74 35 74 46 99 46 99 46 99 58 123 38 123 58 123 TOTAL WEIGHT (kg) 555 948 562 971 589 990 720 1187 743 1247 775 1309 1070 1756 1083 1846 1236 1890 1688 2540 1644 2576 1789 2690 2230 3427 2367 3581 2420 3564 UNIT WEIGHT (kg/ m2! 13.7 17.6 13.9 18.0 14.3 18.3 13.3 16.5 18.8 17.3 14.4 18.2 13.2 16.3 13.4 17.1 15.3 17.3 15.6 17.6 15.2 17.9 16.6 18.7 16.7 19.0 17.5 19.9 17.9 19.8

SPACING

TRUSS MEMBERS WEIGHT

GUSSET WElGHl (kg) 7 8 7 9 9 IO IO 12 12 14 13 16 19 23 20 27 24 31 36 44 37 44 42 31 35 69 65 75 64 75

W-4
9.0
1 in

(ml 3

(kg) 144 165 151 187 176 205 230 253 251 313 282 373 406 497 520 583 367 623 844 945 799 981 939 1088 1222 1493 1329 1641 1383 1624

1 in 4 I in 5

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.3 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.3 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.3 6.0 4.3 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

12.0

I

in 3

I in 4 I in 5

18.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

24.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

30.0

I in 3 I in 4 I in 5

274

SP : 38@&T)l987

TABLE 237 LEAN-TO ROOF

ANGLE

TRUSS WEIGHTS

Wind Zone = 100 kg/m'
SPAN SLOPE SPACING

TRUSs MEMBERS WEIGHT

GUssET WEIGHT (kg) 72 72 69 74 71 81 115 115 97 109 100 121 162 174 140 156 133 149

PURLINS WEIGHT (kg) 331 610 331 610 331 610 414 762 414 762 414 762 497 914 497 914 497 914

SAGROD WeIGHT h?)

TIE RUNNER WEIGHT (kg) 28 49

TOTAL

UNIT

WLUt3HT (kg)
677 980 663 988 672 1017 1020 1412 934 .3084 949 1440 1347 1870 1243 1781 1208 1748

WEIGHT (kg/ mY
16.1 18.1 16.4 18.3 16.6 18.8 18.9 19.6 17.3 19.2 17.6 20.0 20.0 20.8 18.4 19.8 17.9 19.4

Cm)

b-4
i in 3

(kg) 240 240 229 247 236 269 426 426 358 404 371 448 622 670 540 599 512 573

9.0

1 in 4
1 in 5

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

6 9 6 8 6 8 8 II 8 II 7 11 9 14 9 14 9 .I4

28 49 28 49 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98

12.0

I in 3

1
1
15.0

in

4

in 5

I

in 3 4 5

I in
I in

275

SP : 38(!$&T)-1987

TABLE 238 LEAN TO ROOF TUBULAR Wind
SPAN SLOPE SPACING

TRUSS

WEIGHTS

Zone = 200 kg/m* GUSSET WEIGHT (kg) 6 7 6 7 7 9 II 13 II 13 12 14 17 20 17 19 16 20 PUIlLINS WEIGHT (kg) 305 581 305 581 305 581 381 726 381 726 381 126 457 671 457 871 457 871 TIE RUNNIII~ WEIGHT (ks) 12 25 12 25 12 25 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 TOTAL WEIoIIT (kg) 452 778 467 765 469 801 659 1057 629 1053 663 I080 857 1357 846 1048 832 1852 UNIT W~GIIT (kg/m*) 11.2 14.4 II.5 14.2 11.6 14.8 12.2 14.7 11.6 14.6 12.3 15.0 12.7 15.1 12.5 14.9 12.2 15.0

TRUSS MIIMBIXS WEIC3HT (kg) 129 163 144 152 145 186 244 269 214 265 247 291 360 417 349 404 336 412

(d

(m)

9.0

1 in 3

1 in 4
1 in 5

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

12.0

1 in 3

I in 4
1 in 5

IS.0

1 in 3

I in

4

1 in 5

TABLE

239 LEAN-TO Wind

ROOF

ANGLE

TRUSS

WEIGHTS

Zone = 150 kg/m'
PURLINS WEIGHT (k8) 331 610 331 610 331 610 414 762 414 762 414 762 497 914 497 914 497 914 II 9 14 9 14 9 14 Ii 7 II 7 SAGROD WEIGHT

SPAN

SLOPE

SPACING

TRUSS MEMBERS (kg) 243 261 241 249 236 270 462 465 383 416 373 459 669 719 597 658 537 598

GUSSET WEIGHT

TIE RUNNER WEIGHT (kg) 28 49 28 49 28 49 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98

TOTAL WEIGHT

UNIT WEIGHT

(m)
9.0 1 in 3

(N
4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

(kg)

(kg) 6 9 6 8 6 8 8

(kg) 681 1002 686 991 672 1018 1066 1462 959 1399 952 1454 1411 1932 1307 1847 1237 1771

(kg/m*)
16.8 18.6 16.9 18.4 16.6 18.9 19.7 20.3 17.8 19.4 17.6 20.2 20.9 21.5 19.4 20.5 18.3 19.7

1 in 4 I in 5
12.0

73 73 14 75 71 81 125 126 98 112

1 in 3 I in 4 I in 5

101
124 179 187 147 163 137 153

15.0

I in 3
I in 4 I in 5

276

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE 24

LEAN-TO

ROOF

TUBULAR

TRUS!3 WEIGHTS

Wind Zone = ISO kg/m' SPAN SLOPE
SPACINQ TRUSS

MEMlnIRs
(m) 9.0 I in 3
(m)

GVSSET WElOIfT tke) 1 9 7 9 1 9` I3 14 "I I !4 13 I5 I8 22 I7 20 17 21

PURLINS

WEIQHT (kg) 305 581 305 581 305 581 381 726 381 726 381 126 457 871 457 871 457 871

TX8 RUNNER WEIQHT (k& 12 25 12 25 12 25 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 2J 49

TmAL WEIGHT (ko) 476 781 481 783 484 829 685 1078 673 1087 696 II03 891 1416 833 1354 856 1353

UNIT WslOHT (kg/ ml! 11.7 14.6 11.9 14.5 12.0 15.4 12.7 15.0 12.5 15.1 12.9 15.3 13.2 IS.7 13.1 IS.0 12.7 15.0

(W
152 172 157 168 I60 214 268 289 258 298 279 313 393 474 386 414 359 412

I in 4 1 in 5
12.0 1 in 3 I in 4 1 in 5

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

IS.0

I in 3

i in 4
I in S

TABLE

241 LEAN-TO Wind

ROOF

ANGLE

TRUSS

WEIGHTS

Zone = 200 kg/m'
PURLINS SAGROD

SPAN

SLOPE

SPACING

TRUSS MEMBERS (kg) 267 271 265 273 271 294 511 525 413 467 431 506 722 181 627 698 579 658

GUSSET

WEIGHT (kg) 81 81 75 82 77 88 132 I42 106 120 110 131 188 205 I58 174 146 163

WEIGHT (kg) 331 610 331 610 331 331 414 762 414 762 414 762 497 914 497 914 491 914

WEIGHT (kg) 6 9 6 8 6 8 8 II 7 II 7 II 9 14 9 I4 9 I4

TIE KIJNNER WEIGHT (kg) 28 49 28 49 28 49 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 57 98 7!2 1020 705 I(/.?2 7i3 1049 l!2:. ii c3ff I 997 1458 1019 1508 142;) 2018 1348 1878 J288. 1837
(kg

(ml 9.0 I in 3 I in 4

Cm) 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

rn:) i7.6 IS.9 17.4 Id.9 17.6 $9.4

1 in S
12.0 I in 3 I in 4 1 in S 158.0 I in 3

X.8 Zl.4 18.S 20.3 18.9 20.9 21.8 22.4 20.0 20.8 19.1 20.4

I in 4
I in 5

277

SP : 38(S&T)-1987

TABLE

242 LEAN-TO

ROOF

TUBULAR

TRUSS

WEIGHTS

Wind Zone = 200 kg/m'
SPAN SLOPE SPACING

TRUSS MEMBERS WEIGHT

GUSSET WEIGHT (kg)

PURLINS WEIGHT (kg)

TIE RUNNER WEIGHT (kg)

TOTAL WEIGHT (kg)

u$4IT WIkXIT (kg/m*)

(m) 9.0 I in 3

(kg)

1 in 4 1 in 5
12.0

4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0 4.5 6.0

162 181 182 186 190 226 312 342 261 319 296 372 440 494 403 474 417 474

8 9 8 8 8 10 14 16 13 15 14 16 20 23 19 22 18 22

305 581 305 581 305 581 381 726 381 726 381 726 457 871 457 871 457 871

12 25 I2 25 12 25 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49 23 49

487 796 507 790 515 842 730 1149 678 1109 714 1163 940 1437 902 1416 925 1416

12.0 14.7 12.5 14.6 12.7 15.6 13.5 16.0 12.6 15.4 13.2 16.2 13.9 16.0 13.4 15.7 13.7 15.7

I in 3
1 in 4

1
15.0

in 5

I in 3 1 in 4 I in 5

278

ELEm,(ON

of

SIOE

GIRTS

ALONG

KWS'A'

6

`8'

I

Iow

I
CROSS

,000

!
I

TYPICAL

SECTION

LIST y

Cf

MARKS

ELEVAWN SHOWING

ALONG GABLE

AXES FRAME

I d 8

DETAIL

OF

TRUSS

ELEVATION

ALONG

ROWS

A

&

!3

GENERAL

NOTES

1

_

I

I

I t

!-

PLAN

Al

BASE

LEVEL

V'EW

13-G

?-

.I
16 .,`

VIEW

I

DETAIL

OF

COLUMNS

t .
I
/'

I

3. -_ >

+

!.I +--

.,.*, .. . . _." m

A.

-t

Cl -M&RUNNER .Y *NOS. RUNNER 2~05. RUNNER Z-MS. RUNNER

REOD. MKCI. R -1 REM. L(KC). R-h REOD. MKD. R-2 REOD. MKCI. R-2x

AS OPI A5 DRN.t DPP.HAND

NOTED. To R-2

4-)(OS.RiJNNER -~DpyLYllD-eL 2-NJS. RUNNER

REOD .MKD. R-Bx REOD.UKD.R-9x

OPP. HANOI.IOR-8. amY 1. ynlcn. DPP. HANU TD R-O L

Z-MIS.

RUNNER

REQD.MKD.

I?; 12

AS [RN.

1 NDTED.

Z.NOS.

EACH

COWMN

BRACIYG

REOD.

MKD CB-I.

CB.2.

CB-3

4 CB-LA

AS DRN.

4-NDS.EACH

GABLE

END BRACING

I?EOD.MKO.

GCB-l,GCB-2

1 ltCB_)

AS IDRN. --

_ ___ ~~ PNOS. RUNNER REOD. MKD. R-13

A5 WN.

Z-N35

s/T

ANGLE REM

MKD

SA.:m. 12-tXJS.a)LUMN BRACING REODI. MKD. CB -L AS DRNc 2 m. GABLE EH) BRACING RnT). MKD.GC:B - 4

.-_"Yna

SECTlffl

2-

2 """ws$@ `IB-M5.Sffi KC REKLMKD. �R-5 AS DAN.

VlEW

L-4 DETAIL 6 OF UDE COLUMIN GIRTS. BRACIffi

c

EL :: !_I II II Ii l-l II II I
5,

II
il

,_-

._

J

56+%5.S&

KJO REQO MKD 5R-,

tx.5 I)RN.

WCS;

.L

4..-

.- _^____."_

.._""__ ,._^"

"". _.._

_I .

I"C

I"..L

"I ._. _

I~~IIb.,,"" ..___

..m

__

1 DETAIL 3-NC5 RRLY 2-NOS. I. ._-._ REPD. .. GLi Mkll. .. P-2 A5 ON. p-2x OF9 HANO. l'W-- .---- -I 5 I a /,`_ _ T, ."_. ,_-,_. I_ n=..h ,a .. * c 5 -mu. rn-, p3 l_miY. 1 , ,__. _". ,._" ,._. ,.,.. _. I

OF 6

ROOF PURLINS

BRACINGS

