NAT HIAF IS 10153 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Geils Ug wat su — Ryn-AdyT 


( Teel JAQ ) 


Utilization of Fly Ash — Guidelines 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.030.10 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH APT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 4 


Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 33 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Fly ash is a finely divided residue resulting from the combustion of ground or powdered coal/combustible waste 
and transported by the flue gases of boilers fired by pulverized coal. It is available in large quantities in the country 
from a number of thermal power stations and industrial plants using pulverised coal/waste as fuel for the boilers. 


At present there are hundreds of thermal power plants/waste to energy conversion plants in the country producing 
over 100 million tonnes of fly ash per annum. The ash content of most of the coal used in these plants is above 
35 percent. Since, low ash, high grade, coal is reserved for metallurgical industries, railways, etc., the thermal 
power plants have to utilize high ash, low grade, coal and by-product fuel from coal washeries. It has been 
estimated that the average ash content of coal which will be available for thermal power plants in the coming years 
will further increase. 


The use of fly ash as a pozzolana, a fine aggregate and for other allied purposes is well established in India. 
Investigations have proved the suitability of fly ash for various uses. Indigenous fly ashes for partial replacement 
of cement, as an admixture for concrete and as a fine aggregate for mortar and concrete have already been 
successfully tried out and greater attention is now being paid to fully exploit the potentialities of fly ash as 
construction material. 


Disposal of fly ash is a problem being faced by most of the thermal power plants where it is being produced. This 
material, however, may be utilized in a number of ways, some of which have been mentioned above. If proper 
means and methods are not adopted for utilization of fly ash the problem will increase in magnitude, due to its 
increased production, over the next few years. 


This standard was initially published in 1982 with considerable assistance taken from the literature of Central 
Building Research Institute (CBRI), Roorkee and Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), New Delhi. Over the 
course of time, uses and disposal methods of flyash has changed significantly. 


During this first revision, the recent developments with regard to standardized uses and their techniques have been 
explored and guidelines have been provided. 


The composition of technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 10153 : 2021 


Indian Standard 
UTILIZATION OF FLY ASH — GUIDELINES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard lays down guidelines for utilization 
of fly ash. 


1.2 Fly ash may be collected from the flue gases, in 
thermal power plants, by mechanical collectors or 
electrostatic precipitators or a combination of both. It 
may be removed by “wet system’ or ‘dry system’. The 
‘wet system’ involves mixing the fly ash with water 
and sluicing it to a settling tank or dumping areas. 
The ‘dry system’ involves removal of the fly ash in 
dry form either directly by screw feeders discharging 
into transport vehicles from the hoppers or by means 
of pneumatic conveying system for further utilization 
or storage. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate by dated 
or undated the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards. 


IS No Title 

456 : 2000 Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice 

712 : 1984 Specification for building limes 

1489 (Part 1): Portland pozzolana cement — 

2015 Specification: Part 1 Fly ash based 

2042 : 2006 Insulating bricks — Specification 

2541: 1991 Preparation and use of lime 
concrete — Code of practice 

2686 : 1977 Cinder as fine aggregates for use in 
lime concrete 

3466 : 1988 Specification for masonry cement 


3812 (Part 1): 


Specification for pulverized fuel 


2013 ash: Part 1 For use as Pozzolana in 
cement, cement mortar and concrete 

3812 (Part 2): Pulverized fuel ash: Part 2 For use 
2013 as admixture in cement mortar and 


concrete 


IS No Title 


4332 Series Methods of test for stabilized soils 


4926 : 2003 Code of practice ready-mixed 
concrete 

5817 : 1992 Preparation and use of 
lime-pozzolana mixture concrete 
in buildings and roads — Code of 
practice 

8229 : 1986 Specification for oil-well cement 

9142 (Part 2): Artificial lightweight aggregate 

2018 for concrete specification: Part 2 
Sintered fly ash coarse aggregate 
(first revision) 

10359: 1982 Code of practice for manufacture 
and use of lime-pozzolana concrete 
blocks for paving 

10360: 1982 Specification for lime-pozzolana 
concrete blocks for paving 

12894: 2002 Pulverized fuel ash-lime bricks — 
Specification 

13757: 1993 Burnt clay fly ash building bricks — 
Specification 

15648: 2006 Pulverized fuel ash for lime- 
pozzolana mixture applications — 
Specification 

16720: 2018  Pulverized fuel ash-cement 
bricks — Specification 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Fly Ash Concrete — Portland cement concrete in 
which a part of the cement has been replaced by fly ash. 


3.2 Ready Mixed Fly Ash Concrete — Concrete 
which is prepared and supplied to consumers in a 
plastic, unhardened, ready-for-use state. 


4 UTILIZATION OF FLY ASH 


4.1 Fly ash is a suitable raw material for a variety of 
products. It can be utilized without further processing 


IS 10153 : 2021 


also, provided it meets the requirements of the standards 
for such uses, if available. It can be utilized for the 
production of: 


a) Portland pozzolana cement (using fly ash as 
pozzolana), 


b) Cement-fly ash concrete and ready-mixed fly ash 
concrete, 


c) Precast fly ash concrete building units, 


d) Sintered fly ash light weight aggregate and 
concrete, 


e) Lime-fly ash cellular concrete, 


f) Cement/lime/silicate bonded and clay-fly ash 
building bricks/blocks/tiles etc, 


g) Portland cement clinker, 
h) Oil-well cement 
j) masonry cement, 


k) Various types of concrete for road and airfield 
pavement construction: 


1) lime-fly ash concrete, 

2) lean cement-fly ash concrete, 

3) cement-fly ash concrete, 

4) lime-fly ash soil stabilization, and 
5) lime-fly ash bound macadam. 


4.2 It can also be used as a suitable material for: 
a) embankment construction as a fill material, 
b) Bituminous concrete as a filler material, 

c) Low lying area as a fill material 

d) Abandoned mines as a filling material, 

e) Agriculture/waste land development, and 
f) Construction of dams. 


5 PORTLAND POZZOLANA CEMENT (USING 
FLY ASH AS POZZOLANA) 


5.1 Portland pozzolana cement (using fly ash as 
pozzolana) shall be manufactured either by intergrinding 
Portland cement clinker, fly ash and gypsum or by 
intimately and uniformly blending Portland cement and 
fly ash in accordance with IS 1489 (Part 1). 


5.2 The intergrinding method does not involve any major 
addition to the plant and equipment already available 
at a cement factory. The blending process requires 
installation of a suitable blender or homogenizer. In 
India, Portland-pozzolana cement (using fly ash as 
pozzolana) is being produced over the past few years 
by the intergrinding process. 


5.3 Most of the indigenous fly ash possess good 
pozzolanic activity and are suitable for use in the 
manufacture of Portland pozzolana cement (using fly 
ash as pozzolana). The Portland pozzolana cement 
(using fly ash as pozzolana) having its strength at 


par with that of ordinary Portland cement at 7 days 
and conforming to the other requirements of IS 1489 
(Part 1) can be used in place of ordinary Portland 
cement in construction works. 


6 CEMENT-FLY ASH CONCRETE AND 
READY MIXED FLY ASH CONCRETE 


6.1 The process of producing ready mixed fly ash 
concrete mainly consists of two operations as follows: 


a) Proportioning of fly ash concrete mix; and 
b) Batching and mixing of different ingredients. 


6.2 The fly ash concrete mix is specially proportioned 
in order to attain required 28 day compressive strength 
optimally, equal to that of the corresponding mix 
of plain cement concrete. A number of methods of 
proportioning fly ash concrete mix are now available 
to achieve equal 28 day compressive strength. The 
quality of ready mixed fly ash concrete depends upon 
the quality of its ingredients, their proportions and 
thoroughness with which these are combined. The 
mixing of different ingredients may be done either at a 
central mixing plant or during transit in a truck mixer. 
IS 456 provides the practice for plain and reinforced 
concrete. 


6.3 Ready mixed fly ash concrete has advantages such 
as better quality control and reduction in wastage, 
labour and supervision. As compared to plain cement 
ready mixed concrete, it is cheaper and there is a direct 
saving of cement up to 20 percent. IS 4926 provides the 
practice for ready mix concrete. 


7 PRECAST FLY ASH CONCRETE BUILDING 
UNITS 


7.1 The use of fly ash in the production of various types 
of precast building units such as concrete building 
blocks (solid or hollow), RCC transmission poles, 
columns, beams, hollow core slabs and door and 
window frames is also being explored. 


7.2 It was observed that breakage of these units during 
handling at the time of removal from the casting yard 
and subsequent stacking for water curing was more. 
The higher breakage in the fly ash concrete units could 
be, obviously, due to their having lower strength at 
one or two days when the units were removed. Fly 
ash concrete with 20 percent less cement, by mass, 
than the corresponding plain cement concrete can be 
so proportioned as to attain equal one-day compressive 
strength. With equal one-day strength precast fly ash 
concrete units can be lifted and handled in the same 
manner as the corresponding plain cement concrete 
units. 


7.3 Large number of precast hollow concrete building 
blocks, flooring and roofing units, such as cored units 


channel units and cellular units produced using fly ash 
concrete having 20 percent less cement, by mass than 
the corresponding plain cement have been found to have 
comparable strength and other structural properties. 


8 SINTERED FLY ASH LIGHTWEIGHT 
AGGREGATE AND CONCRETE 


8.1 Fly ash contains a large proportion of minute 
spherical glassy particles. When heated at 
1100 °C-1200 °C, these glassy spheroids soften and 
cohere to form a vitrified structure. The process of 
causing this cohesion is termed ‘sintering’ and the 
sintered agglomerates are called sintered fly ash 
lightweight aggregate (SFALA). 


8.2 The manufacture of SFALA mainly involves the 
following two operations: 


a) Pelletization or nodulisation of fly ash, and 


b) Sintering of fly ash pellets or nodules at 
1 100 °C-1 200 °C. 


8.3 The pelletization of fly ash may be done by feeding 
fly ash into a tilted rotating pan under a fine spray of 
water. The rotary motion of the pan causes the material 
to cascade and with this pellets are formed which are 
strong enough to withstand subsequent handling. 


8.4 Normally, fly ash contains sufficient amount of 
unburnt carbon to provide for the fuel required for 
sintering. If it does not, then, extra fuel in the form 
of powdered coal or coke is required. Similarly, if fly 
ash particles do not cohere to form pellets, additives 
such as shale and clay are added. Additives, if any, are 
thoroughly mixed in fly ash before pelletization. The 
sintering of the pellets may be done either in vertical 
shaft kiln or on a moving grate sintering strand. 


8.5 IS 9142 (Part 2) provides requirements for artificial 
lightweight aggregate for concrete namely sintered 
fly ash coarse aggregate. It is suitable for use in the 
production of structural lightweight concrete and 
precast lightweight concrete building units used as load 
bearing and non-load bearing elements. Due to higher 
strength to mass ratio, lower thermal conductivity, 
nailability, sawability and greater resistance to fire, 
SFALA concrete is suitable for use in the construction 
of high-rise buildings. Its use speeds up construction 
and lowers haulage and handling costs by reduction 
in mass of building components. The reduction of 
dead loads also brings about savings in costs towards 
foundations and steel. 


9 LIME-FLY ASH CELLULAR CONCRETE 


9.1 To produce lime-fly ash cellular concrete, quick 
lime (calcium oxide content 70 percent minimum, 
magnesium oxide content 3 percent maximum) fly ash 
(specific surface, 3 000 cm?/g; unburnt carbon content, 


IS 10153 : 2021 


5 percent maximum) and gypsum (CaSO,.2H,O 
content, 80 percent minimum) are taken in certain 
proportions and wet mixed in a high speed mixer 
to form a thin homogenous slurry. A small amount 
of aluminium powder (fineness: residue on 7.5 pm 
IS sieve one percent maximum) is then added and mixed 
into the slurry. Hvdrogen gas liberated by aluminium 
and lime reaction aerates the slurry which is poured 
into steel moulds to 2/3rd depth and left undisturbed 
to set. The setting takes place in 4-5 h. The stiffened 
material is cut into blocks of desired sizes which 
are subsequently autoclaved at a steam pressure of 
11-12 kg/cm’. After taking out from the autoclave the 
blocks are allowed to cool and are stacked for use. 


9.2 The properties of lime-fly ash cellular concrete are 
similar to the cellular concrete produced using cement 
and ground sand. It is lightweight, has good thermal 
insulation and fire resistance properties and stability 
under conditions of varying temperature and humidity. 
It can be produced with dry bulk density of 700 kg/m? 
or higher and the units produced are suitable for load 
bearing walls in buildings of 2 to 3 storeys and partition 
walls in multi-storeyed buildings. Its use speeds up 
construction, lowers haulage and handling costs and 
brings about savings in costs of foundations and steel 
by reducing dead weight. 


9.3 The production of cellular concrete using lime 
and fly ash in place of cement and ground sand costs 
comparatively less, as it eliminates the use of cement 
which is costlier than lime and saves the cost of 
grinding sand. 


9.4 Requirements for cinder for use as aggregates in 
lime concrete are given in IS 2686. 


10 CEMENT/LIME/SILICATE BONDED 
AND CLAY-FLY ASH BUILDING 
BRICKS/BLOCKS/TILES 


10.1 Good quality building bricks may be produced 
from fly ash using sodium silicate, cement or lime as 
binder (with or without accelerator). The mixture of fly 
ash, binder and coarse fillers such as bottom ash, cinder 
and sand in suitable proportions may be moulded into 
bricks under pressure. Except for sodium silicate, the 
other binders have to be mixed in dry state, followed by 
addition of water with/without accelerator. The sodium 
silicate bonded fly ash bricks are burnt at 1060 to 
1150 °C, but lime bonded fly ash bricks are autoclaved 
under saturated steam while the cement-bonded fly ash 
bricks are cured under water at ambient temperature to 
obtain the desired strength and are air-dried before use. 


10.2 The process of manufacturing clay-fly ash building 
bricks is similar to that of production of normal clay 
bricks except that a certain amount of fly ash is mixed 
in the clay before moulding bricks. The actual content 


IS 10153 : 2021 


of fly ash added varies according to the plasticity of clay 
and may range from 30 to 70 percent by volume, as the 
clay changes from moderately plastic to highly plastic. 
Fly ash acts as a good opening material and effectively 
eliminates drying cracks in the bricks produced from 
black cotton clays. The unburnt carbon present in fly 
ash provides extra fuel for burning during firing. The 
rate of fire travel during burning of clay-fly ash bricks 
in the brick kiln is also enhanced. Consequently, overall 
fuel consumption is reduced and production per season 
increased. The fly ash building bricks may be used in 
place of common burnt clay bricks for all types of brick 
masonry. 


10.3 Insulating and Semi-insulating Bricks 


Good quality insulating and semi-insulating bricks may 
be produced from fly ash using china clay, saw dust 
and molasses or spent lye as binder. The mixture of 
fly ash and other constituents in suitable proportions 
are soaked for about a week and moulded into bricks 
under slight pressure. The bricks are air-dried and 
burnt in kilns at 1 100 °C to 1 150 °C. These bricks 
having desired properties in accordance with IS 2042 
can be used for back face insulation of furnaces and 
other similar equipment. Insulating bricks can also be 
produced using the same procedure, after reducing the 
iron-oxide content of fly ash by suitable processing. 


10.4 IS 12894, IS 13757 and IS 16720 provide the 
requirements for Pulverized fuel ash lime bricks, burn 
clay fly ash building bricks and pulverized fuel ash 
cement bricks respectively. 


11 PORTLAND CEMENT CLINKER 


11.1 Fly ash compares well with clay as a source of 
silicon dioxide and aluminium oxide. It may be used 
in place of clay in the raw meal for producing portland 
cement clinker by the semi-dry process. Small pellets 
or nodules (diameter 12.5 mm or less) of the raw 
meal consisting of an intimate mixture of the required 
quantity of ground limestone and fly ash may be 
prepared in a tilted pan pelletizer under a fine spray of 
water. Any other type of nodulizer may also be used for 
nodulizing the raw meal. 


11.2 The nodules are fed into the rotary kiln and burnt 
at 1350 °C to produce portland cement clinker, which 
on cooling is ground with 4 percent gypsum by mass, 
to obtain portland cement. 


11.3 The production of cement clinker at 135 °C, instead 
of about 1450 °C normally employed, brings about a 
substantial saving in fuel consumption. In addition, it 
has been found that the use of fly ash in place of clay in 
the raw meal enables production of cement clinker with 
magnesium oxide content of 6 percent without causing 
unsoundness in the final cement. Thereby, it also helps 
in the utilization of magnesium limestone of marginally 


higher magnesium oxide content, which at present, is 
not used by the cement industry. 


12 OIL WELL CEMENT 


12.1 Oil well cement is used for cementing the steel 
casings of oil wells to the rock formation. The cement 
slurry is pumped down through the steel casing to 
points located in the annulus around the casing, in the 
open hole below or in permeable formation around. 
For satisfactory performance under conditions of high 
temperature and pressure, which in deep wells may be 
as high as 350 °C and 1 400 kg/cm’ respectively or even 
more, it is essential that the cement slurry has ample 
fluid time to enable proper placement before setting and 
then harden fairly rapidily to give sufficient strength to 
support the casing and resist corrosive conditions of 
sulphur bearing gases or water containing dissolved 
salts. 


12.2 Cement produced by intergrinding fly ash as 
admixture, Portland cement clinker, gypsum and other 
admixtures in suitable proportions has been found to 
conform to the requirements of an oil well cement. It 
may be commercially produced at cement works which 
are located within economic distance of thermal power 
stations. Such a fly ash based cement is reported to have 
been successfully used in cementing oil wells. 


12.3 Requirements for oil well cement are given in 
IS 8229. 


13 MASONRY CEMENTS 


13.1 Masonry cement is mainly intended for use in 
place of ordinary Portland cement in masonry mortars. 
It imparts, to the masonry mortars, much desired 
properties of high workability, plasticity and water 
retentivity. 


13.2 It has been shown that masonry cement 
conforming to the standard requirements can be 
produced by intergrinding 2 parts of fly ash, 2 parts of 
hydrated lime and 1 part of Portland cement clinker or 
5 parts of fly ash, 3 parts of Portland cement clinker and 
5 parts of granulated blast furnace slag with suitable 
quantity of gypsum and an air entraining admixture. 
The production of these masonry cements and their 
utilization in the building industry will ease pressure 
on the demand of Portland cement. 


13.3 Requirements for masonry cement are given in 
IS 3466. 


14 FLY ASH UTILIZATION IN ROAD AND 
AIRFIELD PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION 


14.1 Lime-Fly Ash Concrete 


14.1.1 Lime-fly ash concrete possesses significant 
flexural rigidity and thus offers superior load dispersion 


property in pavements as compared to conventional 
granular material, such as water bound macadam. 
Investigation have shown that when lime conforming 
to IS 712 and fly ash to IS 3812 (Part 1 and/or Part 2) is 
used for making lime-fly ash concrete of mix proportion 
1 lime, 2 fly ash, 3 sand and 6 coarse aggregate has 
an equivalancy factor of 1.5 in relation to water 
bound macadam and, therefore, permits a reduction of 
33 percent in the thickness of the layer replaced. In 
view of better load dispersion characteristics of lime 
fly ash concrete such bases or sub-bases are particularly 
suitable in areas having heavy rain-fall, poor drainage 
or weak subgrade for longer life and improved 
serviceability of the pavement. IS 5817 describes 
practice for preparation and use of lime-pozzolana 
mixture concrete in buildings and roads. 


14.1.2 Investigations have shown that the lime-fly 
ash concrete of mix proportion as given in 13.1.1 can 
be successfully used for making precast lime-fly ash 
concrete blocks for foot paths. These precast blocks, 
however, require a top bonded layer 10 mm thick of 
cement-sand mortar 


(mix 1:3 and w/o 0.55 by mass ) in view of low resistance 
to abrasion of lime-fly ash concrete. The suitable size 
of blocks is 30 cm x 30 cm x 10 cm. Instead of making 
precast blocks, lime-fly ash concrete can be rolled in 
situ. As in the case of precast blocks, in this case also 
the top mortar layer is to be laid simultaneously. 


14.1.3 Lime-fly ash concrete can also be used for 
making building bricks and hollow blocks. IS 2541 
describes the requirements for lime-fly ash concrete. 
IS 10359 describes the practice for manufacture and 
use of lime-pozzolana concrete blocks for paving. 
IS 10360 describes the requirements for lime-pozzolana 
concrete blocks. 


14.2 Lean Cement-Fly Ash Concrete 


Lean cement concrete tends to segregate, bleed, has 
low plasticity and cohesiveness when green. The 
addition of fly ash improves upon such shortcomings 
of lean concretes. In lean cement concrete, the cement 
content is already low, so partial replacement of cement 
by fly ash is not advisable. Studies have shown that the 
benefits of fly ash addition can be maximized in the case 
of lean concretes by resorting to partial replacement of 
fine aggregate by fly ash which permits use of larger 
quantities of fly ash. Such partial replacement of fine 
aggregate by fly ash also makes available additional 
quantity of binder material in the mix due to pozzolanic 
reaction between the lime released as a result of cement 
hydration and the fly ash, leading eventually to increased 
strength for the resultant concrete. Investigations have 
shown about 100-175 percent increase in compressive 
strength of cement-fly ash concrete in which 
50 percent of fine aggregate is replaced by fly ash over 
plain mixes (without fly ash) of equivalent proportions. 


IS 10153 : 2021 


Such concrete would be cheaper than plain concrete. 
Suitably designed mixes can be used as base or 
sub-base course in road and air-field pavement 
construction in place of conventional water bound 
macadam. It can also be used in building foundations 
particularly where water table is high. 


14.3 Cement-Fly Ash Concrete 


The laboratory, semi-field and full scale field 
experiments have shown that 15-20 percent cement 
by mass can be replaced by fly ash conforming to 
IS 3812 (Part 1 and/or Part 2) thereby affecting 
10-15 percent saving in the initial cost of construction 
besides releasing cement for other works. IS 456 
describes the practice for plain and reinforced concrete 
by using flyash. 


14.4 Lime-Fly Ash Soil Stabilisation 


Soil when stabilized with lime, fly ash can be used 
economically as sub-base both for roads and runways 
in place of granular materials. The Unconfined 
Compressive Strength (UCS) criteria shall be the 
design criteria for use in sub bases. When lime and fly 
ash are used for soil stabilization minimum requirement 
of UCS after 7 days curing shall be 700 kN/m? as per 
the requirements. The mix proportion shall be arrived 
at, for a particular fly ash, soil and lime by conducting 
UCS test in accordance with IS 5817. IS 4332 series 
of standards provide methods of sampling and tests for 
stabilized soils. 


14.5 Lime-Fly Ash Bound Macadam 


In conventional water bound macadam, non-plastic or 
low-plasticity materials like morrum with or without 
screenings are used as filler for the stone metal. When 
such water bound macadam is used in the upper layers 
of a road pavement, thin bituminous surfacings like 
surface dressing or premix (open graded) thereon, 
permits penetration of water into it. Fillers made of 
a mixture of lime, fly ash and sand/morrum/soil in 
suitable proportion are known to improve the situation 
as these have cementatious properties and do not soften 
in presence of water. The usual proportion for the 
filler mix is 1 lime: 2 fly ash : 9 sand/morrum/soil by 
mass. Studies have shown that load bearing capacity of 
such macadam will be superior to that of conventional 
water bound macadam. The conventional water bound 
macadam may be replaced by lime or cement stabilized 
fly ash-soil mixtures. It is expected that water bound 
macadam course constructed with lime-fly ash-sand as 
filler would have longer life and would contribute to 
better serviceability of the road. 


The mix proportion may be arrived by carrying out 
Unconfined Compressive Strength (UCS) tests on 
compacted samples in the laboratory. Stabilized 
mixtures with different lime and cement contents are 
moulded into compacted samples and cured for 7 days. 


IS 10153 : 2021 


The design criteria for use of stabilized fly ash-soil 
mixtures in base construction is minimum strength 
requirement of 1717 kN/m’ after 7 days moist curing. 
The lime or cement stabilized fly ash-soil mixture 
would provide longer life and would contribute to 
better serviceability of road. 


15 FLY ASH AS FILL MATERIAL IN 
EMBANKMENT CONSTRUCTION 


15.1 Number of field studies has indicated the feasibility 
of fly-ash as an alternative material for construction of 
embankments. The utility of fly ash in embankment 
saves huge quantify of good earth which otherwise 
would have formed top fertile layer of earth. 


15.2 However, ash is a very fine material and starts 
blowing with the wind when dry. As such it is important 
to encase it suitably with compacted earth/heavier 
material to avoid ash becoming airborne. 


15.3 Fly ash is of silt size and a non-plastic material. It 
has low specific gravity or low bulk density making it 
most suitable for construction on soft soils. Hence, the 
properties to be kept in view are grain size, density, shear 
strength, compaction characteristics and permeability. 


15.4 The moisture-density curve is flat indicating that 
its dry density is insensitive with moisture content. This 
property makes it possible to continue the construction 
of fly ash embankment layers during rainy season. 


15.5 The fly ash has better angle of shearing resistance 
compared to soil and it ranges between 25-38°. 
Consolidations tests have indicated that fly ash is 
having low compressibility index in the range of 
0.07 —0.05. Hence, fly ash is of low compressible nature 


and most of the settlement of fly ash embankment gets 
completed during construction itself. 


15.6 The fly ash has to be compacted at optimum 
moisture which is normally in the range of 15-30 percent. 
Because of its low density the material is suitable for 
locations where clayey soils get consolidated under 
overburden material. The permeability of compacted 
fly ash is low (0.05 x 107 to 8 x 107 m/s) so in cases 
where the water table is very high or surface water 
likely to percolate down the embankment it is advisable 
to provide for drainage a layer of coarse material 
300-450 mm thick below the fly ash. 


15.7 All these geotechnical characteristics makes it 
suitable for embankment construction. 


16 FLY ASH AS FILLER MATERIAL IN 
BITUMINOUS CONCRETE 


Bituminous concrete paving mixtures are usually 
designed with a small percentage of fine material like 
cement or lime dust mostly passing through 75 pm 
IS sieve. Fly ash compares well with conventional 
materials in respect of fineness. When fly ash is used 
as a filler due to the presence of unburnt carbon, the 
amount of bitumen required is a little more, but because 
of low cost of fly ash the resultant mix may be somewhat 
cheaper or at par. 


17 AGRICULTURE/WASTE LAND 


DEVELOPMENT 


Fly ash can be used for agricultural purposes specifically 
to optimize the water carrying capacity of soil. It can 
be mixed with top layer of agricultural soil up to one 
centimeter thick layer (that is, 100 tonne/hectare) to 
optimize its water carrying capacity for a better yield. 


IS 10153 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 33 


Organization 


In personal capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers’ Association of India 


Avantha Centre for Industrial Research, Yamunanagar 


Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 
Delhi Technological University, Delhi 
Development Alternative 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 


Fly Ash Mission, Department of Science and 
Technology, Ministry of Science, GOI 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 


Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment, 
Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 


Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services 


ITC Limited 
Ministry of Defence, DRDO, New Delhi 


Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 


Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr ANURADHA SHUKLA (Chairman) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
Dr H. S. Das (Alternate) 


Dr NisHt KANT BHARDWAJ 
SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR TRIVEDI 
SHRI P. SREENIVASA RAJU (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. KAMYOTRA 


SHRI GURUVITTAL 
DR NEERAJ SHARMA (Alternate) 


MRS SEEMA ARORA 
SHRI KAMAL SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR RAKESH MEHROTRA 
DR (SHRIMATI) ANUBHA MANDAL (Alternate) 


DR K. VIJAYA LAKSHMI 
Dr SOUMEN Malrty (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. PRASAD 
SHRI VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


Ms ARCHANA DATTA 
Ms SUCHISMITA MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


DRR. K. JosHni 


DR N. B. MAJUMDAR 

DR VIMAL KUMAR 

MRs SANCHITA JINDAL 

SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR KHANDELWAL 


SHRI T. K. BANDOPADHYAY 
SHRI GOPAL JHA (Alternate) 


DR N. J. SINGH 
SHRI A. A. PANJWANI (Alternate) 


DR M. P. SINGH 


SHRI NEERAJ CHANDRA 
SHRI SANDEEP MALHOTRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIB BEZBAROA 


AWAITED 
Dr S. Mary CELIN (Alternate) 


AWAITED 
SHRI E. THIRUNAVUKKARASU (Alternate) 


SHRI UDIT RATNA 
Suri P. K. Durta (Alternate) 


IS 10153 : 2021 


Organization 
National Council for Cement and Building Material, 
New Delhi 
National Solid Waste Association of India 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


PHD Chamber of Commerce 
Steel Authority of India Limited, New Delhi 


Steps Pvt Ltd 
Sulabh International Social Service Organization 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, M/o Urban 
Development and Poverty Alleviation, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri N. K. TIWARY 
SHRI M. SELVARAJAN (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIYA KUMAR SAHU 
Capt Mansu Minuas (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. JAIN 
Dr SUDHIR Dautya (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


DR MEENAKSHI KAKKAR 
SHRI SUNIL SINGAL (Alternate) 


SHRI T. RAGHAVENDRA RAO 
AWAITED 


CoL R. K. Jonri (RETD) 
DR SUNEEL PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 
Suri G. M. PaTEL (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. JOADDER 
DR SANTHOSHVIDYADHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRISHTI DIXIT 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 33 (17150). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


