(Reaffirmed 2012)

IS : 6074 - 1971

Indian Standard
CODE FOR FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS OF HOTELS, RESTAURANTS AND OTHER FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Functional
Chairman MAJ-GEN B. N. DAS Members DR N. K. D. CHOUDEURY Central Building Roorkee Research Institute ( CSIR ),

Requirements

in Buildings

Sectional

Committee,

BEG

12

Hepresenlilig Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta un:!

Dn K. R. RAO ( Alternate) Indian Institute of Architects MRS E. S. GHUMAN SHRI J. M. BANJAMIN ( Allernafc ) National Building Organization, New Delhi Snnr R. G. GOKHALE SARI K. R. JANI ( Alternate) In personal capacity ( 32 Alifiore Road, Delhi ) DR K. M. VW HEINZ All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health SIiRI N. h'ln.IriMDAR ( Directorate General of Health Services) SH~I A. V. RAO ( Alternate ) University of Roorkee, Roorkee PROF G. M. MANDALiA PROF RATTAN KUMAR ( Alfernate ) Nat ional Safety Council SHRI N. S. MAXKIKEH Directorate General of Observatories ( Ministry of SHRt S. .MAJUiXVER Tourism & Civil Aviation ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI J. V. MEHTA SIIRI S. K. GHOSH `( Alternate ) Voltas Limited, New Delhi SRRl 0. P. Pun1 Ministry of Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation SBHI H. J. RAMRAKHIANI Central Public Works Department Snar M. M. RANA Directorate General of Health Services New Delhi SH~IIJ. D. SKASTRI Institute of Town Planners ( India ), New Delhi StiltL SAVED S. SHAEI Sum D. P. SHARNA ( Alternate) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Sum K. C. SHIVASTAVA In personal capacity ( A-116 Vnsont Vihar, New Delhi ) SHXI R. L. SURI Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways) SWRI L. G. TOYE SHRI N. V. SHASTRI ( Alfernafe ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ofj%o Member ) SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SEIRI V. K. G~ONA Deputy Director (Architecture), ISI ( Continued on page 2 ) INDIAN MANAK STANDARDS BHAVAN 9, BAHADUR NEW DELHI INSTITUTION SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS:6074-1971
( Continued from page 1 )

Panel on Hotels and Restaurants, Conwer
Sn~r Sa~r M. M. RANA Mmbers K. KTJMAR

3DC

12 : P 2

Represtntiq Central Public Works Department Directorate General of Tourism ( Ministry of Tourism and Civil Aviation ) The Federation of Hotels and Restaurant Association of India

SaEr RAM PERSHAD SHRI L. c. NARELA ( Alternate)

Food Hygiene,
Chaimrm,

Sampling

and Analysis

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC

36

MAS-GEE M. S. BOPlEAI Members

Directorate General, New Delhi

Armed

Forces Medical

Services,

An- Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation), Faridabad INDIA SENIOR MARKETINQ OFFICZZ~ ( FRUIT PRODUCTS) ( Altsrna~e) Institute of Agriculturirl Research Statistics, New SgEr V. N. AMBLE Delhi SHRI K. S. KHISHN&N (Alterra&) Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of DR K. B~ccnr Health, Family Planning, Works, Housing & Urban Development ) SERI D. S. CHADHA ( Rhrnnte) PublMa$r~2,st to the Government of Tnmil Nadu, SHRX K. RALABUBHAMANIAN
AGRXCULTURAL

VIBER

TO

TREGOVERNMENT 01

MAEPETINQ

13~ S. C. CHAKRABORTY DR G. C. DAS DE P. K. DATTA DR P. K. KYMAL DR R. C. SINHA ( ./llirrnnlc ) DR Y. N. LAKSI~MAN DR N. A. N. RAO ( Alternate ) DR H. LAXMINA~A~A~A Srirti SGKTJMAW DE ( A~lrmalc) SEMI F. G. T. MENEZES S~PX D. M1s-n~

Public Analyst to the Government of West Bengal, Calcutta Corporation of Calcutta All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, Ministry of Food, Agriculture, ment & Co-operation Defence Food Research Defence ), Mysore

Calcutta

Community

Developof

Laboratory

( Minisrry

National Dairy Research Institute,

Karnal

Directorate of Sugar & Vanaspati (Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Development & Co-operation ) Pub!ic Analyst to the Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow ( Continued un page 22 )

2

Indian Standard
CODE FOR FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS OF HOTELS, RESTAURANTS AND OTHER FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 March 1971, after the draft finalized by the Functional Requirements in Buildings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Hotels, restaurants and other food service establishments are in exisThis standard has been prepared to tence in abundance in the country. guide the various municipalities and other organizations in promoting byelaws for the hygienic upkeep of hotels, restaurants and other food service establishments by laying down functional requirements of hotels. 0.3 This code covers requirements specific to the large food service establishments. However, the basic principles of hygiene underlying the technical advice in this code should be applied with appropriate modifications to ali food service establishments. 0.4 This code is subject to the provisions in the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and the rules framed thereunder, amended up to date. 0.5 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in diKerent countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this coumry. 0.6 Building Bye-laws Sectional Committee, (BDC 25) has already published the following Indian Standards which cover minimum provisions and requirements for buildings: IS : 1256-1967 IS : 4873-1968 Code of building Byelaws byelaws of cinema buildings

for construction

0.6.1 The present recommendation does not deal with the structural aspects but lays down only the functional requirements particular to Food Service Establishments which may be made use of for drafting specific recommendations and byelaws, by various municipalities concerned. 3

18 : 6074 - 1971 0.7 This standard at its different stages of formulation was also considered by the Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee ( AFDC 36 ) and the Hygienic Codes Subcommittee ( AFDC 36 : 5 ) and the comments received were fully kept in view while finalizing this standard. 0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS:2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the proper upkeep of hotels, restaurants 2. TERMINOT.OGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. functional requirements essential for and other food service establishments.

2.1 Food Service Establishments - Hotels, restaurants, dining rooms, coffee shops/houses, cafeteria, snack bars, canteens, refreshment rooms, hospital kitchens, flight kitchens, railway dining cars, soda fountains, icecream parlours, hotel messes, DHABAS and any other premises where food is prepared and/or served, hereinafter called `Establishments'. 2.2 Employeean establishment A person who handles food or drink and is employed where the food or drink is prepared and/or served. firm, corporation or association. liccnscd in

2.3 LicensCe - A person, the establishment.

to run

2.4 Authority Having Jurisdiction-The purpose of administering these byelaws may ofli<;ial to act on its behalf, hereinafter

local body which for the authorize a committee or an called `:lurhority/Competent

`~llt170rit~"
3. GENERA& COFYDITIONS

311 Obligations of Intending Licensee - The intending licensee shall make an application for the grant of a license under the local byelaws on the form prescribed by the authority. A suggested form of the application The application for the grant of a licence shall is given% Appendix A. be accompanied by a layout plan showing details of location, approach and distance from public sewerage, lavatories, urinals located in the vicinity.

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( mid).

IS : 6074- 1971 3.1.1 The intending licensee shall make an application for the grant of licence under these byelaws on the form prescribed by the authority. The application for the grant of licence shall be accompanied by a layout plan showing details of the food preparation and services area, the hygienic arrangements and the disposal of wastes. 3.1.2 Notwithstanding anything contained in these byelaws hereafter the licence when granted shall not absolve the licensee from the obligations arising out of any other provisions of the local byelaws or the Act or other legislation in vogue and the licence shall be liable to suspension, revocation or cancellation, if so, decided by the authority. 3.1.3 The licensee shall in no case exceed or violate or in any way infringe the limits of the particulars mentioned in Appendix A for which the licence is originally granted. 3.1.4 The licensed premises will mean and include preparation and service rooms, godowns, sheds, structures, enclosures and open spaces, etc. 3.1.5 The licence form shall be exhibited along with its letters of requirements or conditions, if any, communicated to the licensee for compliance in connection with the licence from time to time either prior to or after the grant of the licence in an easily visible part of the licensed premises and shall be produced for inspection purposes whenever so required by the competent authority. 3.1.6 The licensee shall inform the authority in writing at least a month in advance of the date of intended change or of the date of expiry of Iicence whichever is earlier of any intended change in the particulars mentioned in the licence. 3.1.7 The authority may at all reasonable hours, normally between sunrise and sunset enter into or upon any building or premises for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of these byelaws are being complied with. 3.1.8 The licence for carrying out a trade or business within the premises of a food service establishments shall not be granted if the trade or business is likely to interfere or deteriorate hygienic conditions of the food service establishment. 3.1.3 The licensee shall not keep or allow to be kept any article in connection with or any way related to the licensed commodity, trade process or operation or carry on or allow to be carried on any operation or process connected with or any way related to the licensed commodity, trade or operation or processes outside the licensed premises or on public Subject to the conditions mentioned above, the provisions road or street. of this clause shall not apply to the outside catering done by the licensee. 5

ISr6074-1971 3.1.10All exits of the licensed premises shall be kept clear of obstructions at all times. 3.1.11Any structural alterations or additions and/or the licensed premises shall not be carried out without the prior permission from the competent authority.
4. LIGENGE 4.1 A licence may be temporarily suspended in case notice for removal of defects, given by the authority is not complied with within a reasonable period specified by the authority in each case. 5. SITE 5.1 The food service establishments shall be located at a place where flies and vermins are minimum and kitchen and dining areas not within 10 m from the site where public garbage bins, public latrines and public urinals are located. In case of non-compliance with the above conditions, the licence to open a new food service establishment shall not be granted. 6. BUILDING 6.0 In addition to the recommendations in the code the building in which food service establishment is located shall also conform to the local building byelaws in force. 6.1 The building should be of a permanent nature and maintained in a proper state'of repair and cleanliness. 7. FLOORS 7.1 The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served and of all washing placed shall be of such construction as to be impervious, easily cleansed, smooth and in good repair. 7.2 All floors shall be kept clean and free from litter. Dustless method of floor cleaning shall be used, ail except emergency floor cleaning shall be done during the period when least amount of food and drink is exposed. 8. WALLS

8.1 The walls shall have a smooth, non-absorbent surface, free from cracks
and crevices to facilitate their efficient cleaning.

8.1.1 The walls of all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or utensils are washed shall have a smooth washable surface up to a minimum height of 2-O m from the floor.
6

IS : 6074- 1971 9. CEILING 9.1 Ceiling shall be clean, leak-proof and have a smooth non-absorbent surface free from cracks and crevices to facilitate their efficient cleaning. These should be such that they do not harbour vermin. 10. DOOR AND WINDOWS 10.1 In the absence of air-conditioning all openings to the outer air including doors, windows, sky lights shall be effectively screened with tight fitting screens free from holes with wire gauge conforming to IS: 1568The doors when not in use shall be kept in closed position. Self1960*. closing screened doors to the outer air shall open outwards. Other methods approved by the authority shall be employed to ensure the absence of flies. Xl. LIGHTING 11.1 Recommended values of illumination ment shall be as given in Table 1.
TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED

in various areas of the establishOF ILLUMINATION

VALUES

The lighting of some of these locations will be determined primarily by aesthetic considerations and the recommended illumination values as given in IS : 3646 ( Part II )1966* may be taken as a guide only. No.

St

AREAS

ILLUMINATION,

LUX

(1)
ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii) viii) ix) x) xi) xii) xiii) xiv)

(2)
Entrance halls Reception and accounts Dining rooms ( tables ) Lounges Bedrooms: a) Genera1 b) Dressing tables, bed heads, etc Writing rooms ( tables ) Corridors Stairs Laundries Kitchens Goods and passenger lifts Clockrooms and toilets Dining rooms: a) Tables b) Cash desks Self service-counters II Schedule for

i)

(3) 150 300 100 150 :% 300 70 100 200 +2E t200 100 300 300 values of and

Part *Code of practice for interior illumination: illumination and glare index. +Supplementary local lighting should be provided mirrors.

over kitchen equipment

*Specification

for wire gauze for general purposes.

7

12. VE'NTILAm[(4`N
mechanica

12.1 In case of ran-air-conditioned buildings the minimum standards of ventilation shall be maintained as given in Table 2.
TABLE 2 VENTILATION REQUIREMENTS NON-AIXCONDITIONED BUILDINGS ABC4
(2: AIR CHA.NOEi

FOR
PRR HOUR

Living rooms Dining and lounge Big kitchen Small kitchen Toilets

(3) 3 2-3 12 6 6

13. WATER

SUPPLY

Running 13.1 There shall be adequate supply of safe and potable water. water shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed. 13.1.1 Requirements as given in Table 3.
TABLE Sl.
NO. (1) i! Hotels (per (2)

for water supply for hotels and restaurants

shall be

3 HWH&ELt SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS AND RESTAURANTS
NON-AIWONDITIONEII

FOR

lh9CRlPPION

( LITIXICSPER DAY )

bed ) (per seat)

(3) 180 70 for an extra quantity of

ii)

Restaurants

Nl-JTE -- In hotels where laundry is provided arrangemmt 120 litres per bed shollld he made.

13.2 Storage of Water-For the storage of water, proper receptacles made of galvanized iron or other suitable material shall be used. Such receptacles shall he kept covered with tight fitting lids and shall have
The receptacles screw caps at the bottom for draining out residual water. shall be placed on a stand or a platform rasily accessible for the purpose The receptacles shall be examined and of maintenance and cleaning, cleaned regularly. 8

IS : 6074- 197i

13.2.1 If at any time, the wader from the tanks on analysis is found harmful, the licensee shall stop the use of stored water and make alternative arrangement till the water of the tanks is made safe and potable.
14. DRAINAGE X4.1 Adequate arrangements shall be made for satisfactory drainage of all sewage and waste water. Harmful waste water, such as water containing kitchen waste, &all be saticfactorily disposed of. The drainage shall be so designed as to cause no stagnation at the maximum discharge rate fur which the different units are designed.

14.1.1 The requirements
conform to the requirements

for firments for drainage and given in Tables 4 and 5.

sanitation

shall

14.2 Where no sewers exist, grease trap and soak pits shall be provided for liquid waste which will not be drained directly into the public surface Catch pits shall be properly covered with suitable cover and drains. Septic tanks conforming to IS: 2470 should be cleaned daiiy or oftener. (Part I )- 1963* or IS: 2470 (Part II)-l96+? shall be provided if required by rhe authority. 14.3 The gradient of the drains should be such that no water stagnates Where no sewerage is provided for the any where within the premises. final outfall, soak pits (rr CUSS pools to the satisfaction of the Authority should be provided. 15. KITCHEN 15.1 Kitchen shalt be sufficiently spacious and should be of a size in proThe portion to the average number of diners catered for at one meal, floor spice in the kitchen shall be calculated at the rate of0.5 me Min per In case of snack bars, soda fountains, etc, the service-cumdiner. dispensing area shall be treated as part of the kitchen. Sorl: 15.2

The requirements

of

15.1,

however,

da not

cover

mobile

catering

establiuhm~nts. Subjccf. to the requirements laid down in 15.1 the minimum size of the kitchen should not be less thnn 10 rnp and none of the sides less than 2.4 in.

15.3 Exhaust grease.

fans should

have

provisions

of grease

filters for collecting

*Code of practice fur design and construction

of septic tanks: Part ? Small installations

*Q&
instat:ation.

of practice iur design and conztroction of se!:+

tanks: Part II Large

9

TABLE 4

REQUIBEMENTS

OF DRAINAGE (Clause

AND SANITATION 14.1.1 )

FITMENTS

IN HOTELS

SL NO.

FITMENTS

FOR RESIDENTIA& FORPUBLIOROOMS PUBLIC AND STARS r-----A----For Females For Males (4) 1 per 8 persons omitting occupants of the room with attached water-closets; minimum of 2 if both sexes are lodged 1 in each watercloset

7

FOBNON-RESXDENTIALSTA~ (c------k-,----~ For Males For Females

'

m
i) Water-closets

(5)

(6)

(7)

1 per 100 ersons 2 per 100 persons 1 for 1-15 persons 1 for 1-12 persons up to 4 &I per- . up to 200 per- 2 for 16-35 persons 2 for 13-25 persons sons; and for sons; and for 3 for 36-65 persons 3 for 26-40 persons over 200, add 4 for 66.100 per- 4 for 41-57 persons over 400, add 5 for 58-77 persons at the rate of 1 at the rate of 1 sons 6 for 78-100 perper 250 persons per 100 persons sons or part thereof or part thereof

ii)

Ablution

taps

1 in each waterc!oset

1 in each watercloset

1 in each watercloset

1 i;fmTtch

water-

1 water tap with draining arrangements shall be provided for every 50 persons or part thereof in the vicinity of water-closets and urinals iii) Urinals 1 per 50 persons or part thereof Nil up to 6 persons 1 for 7-20 persons 2 for 21-45 persons 3 for 46-70 persons 4 for 71-100 persons

iv)

Wash basins

1 per 10 persons omitting the wash basins insta!Ied in the room suite

1 per water-closet and urinal provided

1 per water-closet provided

1 for 1-15 persons 2 for 16-35 persons 3 for 36-65 persons 4for 66-100 persons

1 for 1-12 persons 2 for 13-25 persons 3 for 2640 persons 4 for 41-57 persons 5 for 58-77 persons 6 for 78-100 persons

v)

Baths

1 per 10 `persons omitting occupants of the room with bath en suite 1 per 30 bedminirooms, mum 1 per floor --1

-

-

-

vi)

Slop sinks

-

E

vii)

Kitchen sinks and f dish washers

in

each

kitchen

+

NOTE INOTE 2-

Some of the water closets may be of European style if desired. It may be assumed that two-thirds of the number are males and one-third females.

TABLE

5

REQUtREMENTS

OF DRAINAGE

AND

SANtTATtON

FtTMENTS

XN RESTAPRANTS

ii

1 for 50 seats up to 2X! seats; and for "VCI( 200 scats, add at the rate of 1 per 100 seats or part ti1ereof 1 in each water-closet

(4) I for 50 seats up to 200 seats; and for seats, over 200 add at the rate of I per 100 seats or part thereof I in each water-closet arrangements in the vicinity -

(3

(61

for l-15 "persons 2 for 16-35 persons 3 for 36-65 pet sons 4 for t&t@0 pWsGnS

I

I for
2 for 3 for 4 for 5 for 6 for

1.12 13-25 264@ 41-57 58-77 78.100

persons persons persons persons persons persons

1 in eachwater-closet

1 in each water-closet
50 persons or part thereof

I u atcr tap with draining
I per 50 seats

shall be provided for every of water-closets and urinals. Nil up to 6 1 for 7-20 2 for 21-45 3 for 46-70 4 for 71.100 water-closet persons persons persons persons persons-

-.

iv) I*\

Wash basins Kitchm sinks dish washers Slop or se:vice
NOTE

c-----------1 and +___ __- .._. -.-

for

every

provided----------+

_..__ -_ ._-. _.. __

1 i n e a c 11 k i t c h e n -.j n
t

--.---_-------_t

vi)

sinks

+_-_---___.__
-l_-_~l-.._

1

1) e

r

e s t a

11

r a n

t ---_-_.--_--_---_.+

I-

Some of the water It may be assemrd

closets that

may be of European two-thirds

style,

if desired. and one-third females.

X\;OTP: 2 -

of the number

are males

IS : 6074 - 1971
shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities for its employees, conveniently located in the premises of the establishment; if possible, on the same floor to comply with the city plumbing code of laws. Toilets shared by other occupants of the building not employed by the licensee shall not be permitted. 15.5 Where exhaust or other mechanical ventilation is not provided there shall be an intervening room or vestibule between a toilet'room and a served or stored or in which room in which food or drink is prepared, Toilet room doors shall be provided with utensils are handled or stored. self-closing arrangement. Intervening room or vestibule shall be provided with tight fitting self-closing doors. 15.6 The toilet rooms posted conspicuously hands with soap and washing shall not be for the staff shall have permanent and legible signs in each toilet room directing employees to wash their water before resuming their work. Places for utensil considered as washing facilities for the personnel.

15.4 Every establishment

15.7 It is desirable to provide changing rooms for the workers with independent wash and toilet facilities. Required number of lockers may also be provided in the changing rooms for the workers to store their personal effects during the hours of work. 16. DINING

HALL

16.1 The floor area of the dining hall excluding the area occupied by the service counter and any furniture and fixture except tables and chairs shall be not less than 1 ms per diner. The surfaces of every table or board on which refreshments are served shall be of a non-absorbent impervious material except where table linnen is used.
16.2 Hand washing facilities such as running water and soap shall be provided by the licensee for the customers at a convenient place. Facilities for drying of hinds in a hygienic manner shall also be provided by the licensee. 17. DISHWASHING

ARRANGEMENTS

17.1 All eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleansed and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after each use, so that all such utensils ready for a service to customers are clean to sight and touch.
17.2 Equipment, that is too large to immerse may be treated: (a) with steam from a hose, in the case of equipment in which it is possible to confine steam, (b) by boiling water rinse, (c) by spraying or swabbing with chlorine solution of approved strength, or (d) separate area should be provided for pot washing with proper sterilization arrangements as given at (aj, (b) and (c) above. 13

IS : 6074 - 1971
X7.3 A schematic diagram given in Fig. 1 to 3. 18. for a proposed sink washing arrangement is

STORAGE

AND HANDLING

EQUIPMENT

18.1 All containers and utensils shall be stored at a height of not less than. 430 mm above the floor in a clean, dry place protected from flies, splash, dust, overhead leakage, and other contamination. Wherever practicable, containers and utensils shall be covered or inverted on a clean surface.
18.2 Drain boards, trays, and which is not readily corrodable. shelves shall have an impervious surface

I II III

WASti-WATER RINSE-WARM STERILIZE

WITH DETERGENT WATER

43'

10 49* C

WATER 7?

C [FOR `2 MMJTES)

SINK BOWLS AND SPLASHGA ALL INTERNAL CORNERS 19 mm COVE' USE OF SOLDER OR FILLET MATERIAL TO OBTAIN THE OESIREO INTERNAL RAOIUS NOT ACCEPTABLE

INTEGRAL DRAINBOARD PITCHED A MINIMUM 0 1 ,N 100 TOWARDS SINKS2

is a schematic diagram and does not indicate details. NOTE 1 -This NOTE 2 - The dimensions given are minimum recommended. All dimensions in millimetres.

Y

FIG. 1

HAND DISHWASHINGARRANGEMENTS 14

15:6074-1971

NOTEI- This is a schematic diagram and does not indicate details. NOTE2 - The dimensions given are the minimum recommended. All dimensions in tiillimetres. FIG. 2 SECTION THROUGH SINK
REMOVABLE STRAINER

BASHET -

DLE RIM

NOTE- These sinks hould be provided on soiled dish tables. They
are used for the disposal of left-over liquids and solids from soiled utensils. 3A Dump Sink

NOTR - Removable

scrapping

blocks

should be provided on soiled dish tables for disposal of waste solids. Garbage bins may be provided below. 36 Dish Table Rim

FIG. 3

DETAILS OF WASHING Suns 15

IS : 6074 - 1971 18.3 While handling the containers and utensils used for storage and service of food or drink, care shall be taken that the inside surfaces coming in contact with food or drink are not touched by hand. This applies also to other items of table-ware and cutlery. 18.4 Paper cups, plates, straws and other single purchased in sanitary cartons and stored therein used, and after removal from the cartons these in a hygienic manner. Laundered clothes and a clean place until used. service containers shall be in a clean, dry place until articles shall be handled napkins shall be stored in

18.5 Drinking straws and toothpicks shall be either wrapped or kept in sanitary dispensers protected from handling during fillings, storage and dispensing and from other sources of contamination. 19. STORAGE OF FOODSTUFF food shall be stored at the temperatures
STORAGE TEMPERATURES FOR FOODSTUFF STORAGE TEMPRRATU~E "C 0.00 -2.00 0.50 2.00 -1450 (3) to ,, ,, ,) 1.50 2.50 4.50

19.1 All perishable Table 6.
TABLE SL No. (1) i) ii) iii) iv) v) 6

as given in

NAMES OR ARTICLES
(2) Meat, meat products, poultry Fresh fish and sea food Dairy products and eggs Fresh fruit and vegetables Ice-creams

-0.50

,, -12.00

NOTE 1 - Potatoes need no refrigeration, but should be stored away from light. and sea foods shall be stored in separate compartments so as not to - NOTE2 -Fish affect other materials.

20. ACOUSTICS 20.1 Food service establishments (hotels, restaurants, etc ) shall adopt suitable noise control measures to provide adequate sound insulation against various noise sources which would cause disturbance to human If required by the authority, proper acoustical comfort and efficiency. treatment will be carried out to the areas where music or dance performances are to be carried out. 21. LIFTS 21.1 When lifts are provided, their installation, operation and maintenance shall conform to IS : 1860-1968*.
*Code of practice for installation, goods lifts (Jirst reckion ). operation and maintenance of electrir passenger and

16

IS : 6074- 1971

22. FIRE

SAFETY

REQUIREMENTi shall be and prehazard; itself;

22.1 General-Fire

safty of food service establishments considered from the following two aspects of the fire hazard cautions shall accordingly be provided against the same: a) possibility and of loss or damage to life, and refer to as personal

b) possibility of fire occurring refer to as internal hazard.

spreading

in the building

22.1.1 In order that the fire hazards namely personal hazards, internal hazards are minimized, building shall conform to general requirements given in 22.2 to 22.10. 22.2 All buildings and storey shall be provided or escapes. particularly buildings having more than one with liberally desigl:cd safe-fire-resistant exists

22.2.1 The
accessible alternative fire.

exits shall be so placed that they are always immediately and each is capable of taking all the persons on that floor as escape routes may be rendered unsuitable and/or unsafe due to as persons using the escapes fumes which may enter from

22.3 Escape route shall be well-ventilated are likely to be overcome by smoke and/or floor.

22.4 Where fire resisting doors are employed as `cut-offs' or fire breaks, they shall be maintained in good working order, free from any obstruction so that, they may bi readily opened to allow quick escape of any person or persons trapped in that section of the building, and also, when necessary prompt rescue work may be expeditiously carried out. 22.5 Electrical and/or mechanical lifts, while reliable under normal conditions may not always be relied on for escape purposes in the event The electrical supply to the building itself may be cut off or of fire. otherwise interrupted, or those relying upon mechanical drive may have the driving power available. 22.6 Lift shafts and stairn.ays serve as flues or funnels thus increasing the fire by increased draught and their designs shall be such as to reduce or avoid the possibility and consequent spread of fire. 22.7 Basements ( Including Sub-Basements ) - Where basements are necessary for a building and where such basements are used for storage, provisions shall be made for esc'apc of any heat arising due to fire and for liberating any smoke whit II may be caused. 17

,

IS : 6074 - 1971 22.8 It is essential that the fire resistance of the basement conforms to the highest order and all columns for separating the upper structure shall have grading not less than the standards laid down for Grade 3 (see Table 7 ).
TABLE 7 CLASSIFICATION OF STRUCTURAL FIRE IdAn COMPONENTS

GRADE
No.

TIME IR Hor;rts,
STAXIPARTI

MINI~IUDI FIHE

RESISTAXCEACAINST

AND CLASS OF FIRE LVHICK !iTRUCTVRAL EI.I~ENT n~iy WITHSTAND _.-_---h___---.._-_ Fire Load

in

Class of Fire (4) Very high High hIedium Low very low

kcal/cm"

(1)
1 2 3 4 5

(2)
6 4 2 1 t 1 100000 550000 275000

(3) and to -

o\`ez 550000 275 000

t9 1 100000

less than

22.9 First-Aid Fire Fighting Arrangements -First-aid fire fighting appliances according to IS: 2217-1963" shall be provided and periodically inspected by the appropriate authority. 22.10 The fire fighting appliances shall be distribut,ed over the building in such a manner so as to be readily available in case of fire in any part of the building and shall be maintained in proper working order as specified in IS : 2 190- 19627. Adequate technical staff trained in fire fighting shall be maintained by the licensee. 23. GAS INSTALLATION

23.1 In case the establishment is equipped with gas for cooking, heating, e:c, the installation shall conform to the local byelaws applicable to the installation of gas connections equipment. 24. STORAGE DISPLAY AND SERVING OF FOOD AND DRINK

24.1 All food and drink shall be stored and displayed in a manner as to be dust, flies, vermin, unnecessary handling, over-head protected from leakage, sewage hack flow, and other contamination. Presence of rodents, cockroaches, ants, or other vermins shall be considered as a violation of Food or drink shall not be stored or prepared beneath t!xse byelaws. over-head sewer or drain pipes. 24.2 All unwrapped food and drink glass or otherwise from public handling ___ --*Recommendations buildings. $&de of practice appliances. for providing first-aid for selection, installations

on display shall he protected by or other contamiuatiolL. Approved
fire fighting arrangements of porrable in first-aid public fire

and maintenance

18

IS:6074-1971
openings for self service may be permitted on counter fronts, but the direct line from the customers' breath to the displayed food shall be intercepted by glass or other partitioning, except in case of self service counters. 24.3 All food and drink shall be minimize the opportunities for and cracked ice shall not be by manual contact with all food or 25. GENERAL HYGIENE handled and served in such manner as to Serving of sliced butter contamination. direct contact with fingers or hands and drink shall be avoided as far as possible.

IN ESTABLISHMENT

25.1 No animals or birds shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared, stored or served. There shall be no cobwebs in any part of the establishment. 25.1.1 All enclosed spaces which provide harbourage for rodents shall be eleminated. All intersections between double walls and floors shall be of approved ratprotected against gnawing by rats, by the installation proof materials and ail openings in floors, walls, and ceilings through which pipes, cables or conduits pass, shall be properly sealed with snugly fitting collars or approved rat-proof material; and the propagation of rats and invasion/infestation of the premises by them shall be permanently prevented. When pesticides are used, care shall be exercised to prevent contamination of equipment, utensils and food. Under no circumstances, shall pesticides be used when the food is being prepared or served. Under no circumstances, sinks utensils be used for washing of hands. 26. EMPLOYEE HYGIENE and troughs for washing food or

26.1 Every person employed in the food service establishment shall be medically examined by an authorized registered medical practitioner and the examination shall include X-ray of the chest for tuberculosis. The examination shall also include :examination of stool for protozoa1 and helminthic infestation for those parasites which are transmitted by ingestion, for the presence of SaSalmonella, Shigella species and Vibric, choferae; urine; and blood examination for venereal diseases. Subsequently, the employee shall be medically examined once a year or more frequently, if necessary, to ensure that he is medically fit and free from communicable diseases. 26.1.1 It shall be impressed on all employees that they should notify the medical ofhcer/management, cases of fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentery, boils, cuts and sores and ulcers (however small ), and notifiable diseases occurring in their own homes and families. 19

IS : 6074- 1971 26.1.2 No worker who is suspected to be suffering from any of the disorders listed in 26.1.1 shall be permitted to work inside the establishment.
26.2 Employees shall keep their finger nails short and clean and wash their hands with soap or detergent before commencing work and each absence, specially after using sanitary conveniences. Towels used for drying hands should be clean. No worker shall allow his' hands or aiy part of his body or clothing to come into contact with the food, He should adopt strict hygienic practices so as to avoid adding any microbial contamination to the food. 26.3 All employees shall be inoculated and vaccinated against the enteric groups of diseases once a year and against smallpox once in two years. In ease of an epidemic all workers shall be inoculated and a record shall be kept. 26.4 No worker shall be allowed lo work without proper clothing. Employees shall be provided with clean uniforms ( preferably white ) or aprons or both and clean washable caps, where necessary. 26.4.1 The uniforms shall not be w3rn outside the establishment on just before starting the work and changed when leaving. but put

26.5 Eating, spitting, nose cleaning or the use of tobacco in any form or chewing betel leaves shall be prohibited where food is prepared or stored. Notice to this effect shall be prominently displayed and enforced. 26.6 Sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences shall be provided, maintained and kept clean in every establishment. The convenience shall be properly lighted. Seperate conveniences shall be provided for each sex. No convenience shall open directly into any work-room in the establishment. The conveniences shall always be maintained clean and in good repairs. 26.7 Sufficient wash basins with adequate provision of soap and towels, latrines and urinals in the prescribed manner should be provided (see 14.1.1), conveniently situated and accessible to workers at all times while they are at the establishment. 27.

ABATTOIR
shall conform to the

27.1 Abatroirs when providtd in the establishment requirements laid down in IS : 4393-1967*.
*Specification for basic requirements
for an abattoir.

APPENDIX A ( Clause 3.1 )
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF LICENCE Ward Old Licence No. Name of Licensee Premises Licensed -,
SL No. NATURE OF ARTICLES, TRADE OR OPERATION FEES DIMENSION OR -QUANTITY P I RS

9
ii) --iii)
iV * 1

I 1 -----

I=

I
---_ --

I-.

---- VI vi) vii) -I_ viii) ix) ._.._-x)

-.

_-_I

1
Total Deposit of Rst0 -

Security

Vi:lid fiom__._Date of Isane The Licence
SL X0. __. 9 _-FEES

Liceming

Authority

is hereby
RECEIVED RECEIPT

renewed:
VIDE
IJAW.

No.

Rs

P

p-__ ---___

LICE,NCE SIGNATURE/ VALID UP TO AUTHORITY

ii) --. . . iv)

-_____p
_____P___ -

__--

_
-

_ ~---)_-------

111) _____

I-21

IS:6074-1971
( Confinued from page 2 ) Members Representing SRRI S. N. MITRA Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta Da D. V. PARULEKAR Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay' MUNICIPAL ANALYST ( Alternate ) Da A. RAMACHANDRA RAO Corporation of Madras DR A. N. RAMACHANDRA RAO Central Food Technological Research Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore SHRI C. T. DWARRANATH ( Alternate ) COL R. R. RAO Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters LT.COL 0. P. KAPUR ( Afternate ) Da SHAM SIN~H SEKHON Department of Health & Family Planning, Government of Punjab SENIOR COMMERCIAL OFFICES Chief Catering Ofhcer, Northern Railway D; ;A$nr%:!i Statistics Department, ISI, New Delhi Health Department, Municipal Corporation LT-&IL b. 8. TYAQI DR A. G; AJWANI ( Alternate ) Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi SHRI P. c. VIN DR HARI BHA~WAN, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-I#& Mcmbcr ; Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary
SHnI s.

of Delhi

K. SuD
( Agri & Food ), IS1

Assistant Director

Hygienic
Convene7 MAJ-GEN M. S. BOPARAI Members

Codes Subcommittee,

AFDC 36: 5

Directorate General, .Armcd Forces Medical Services, New Delhi

Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of Health, Family Planning, Works, Housing & Urban Development ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) DIRECTOR ( HEAIXH ) (`orporation of Calcutta HEALTI~ O;RFIOER Naticanal Dairy Research Institute, Karnal DR H. LAXMINARASANA All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, DR N. MAJUMDAR Calcutta Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay DR D. V. PARULEKAR Corporation of Madras 13~ A. RAMACHAN~RA RAO Brilannia Biscuit Company Ltd, Bombay DR D. V. S. K. RAO OFFICER Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of MARK~TIXQ SENIOR Food, Agriculture, Community Development 8~ ( FRUIT PRODUCTS ) Co-operation ), Faridal~ad DEPUTY Snr.~on MARKETING OFFICER ( FRUIT PRC)DU~TS ) ( Alternate ) Food and Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Food, DR R. C. SINHA Agriculture, Community Development & Cooperation ) Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi SHRI P. C. VIN DR K. BACUXI

22

AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO

DECEMBER 1983

IS:6074-1971 CODE FOR FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS OF HOTELS, RESTAURANTS AND OTHER FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS Alterations ----a_ (Page 29, clause following: 26.1, line 7) - Delete the

'urine; and blood examination for venereal diseases.* (Page 20, otause 26.3) - Substitute the following for the existing clause: '26.3 All employees shall be inoculated against typhoid and paratyphoid A diseases on their first appointment and thereafter, once in every five years. In case of epidemics, all workers shall be inoculated. A record shall be maintained.'

._-___
printed at Offset Prtnting Centre,

New Delhi. India

/

AMENDMENT

NO.

2
TO

FEBRUARY

1986

IS : 6074 -1971 CODE FOR FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS OF HOTELS, RESTAURANTS AND OTHER FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS ( Page 7, clause10.1, lines3 and 4 ) - Substitute ` wire gauge conforming ming to IS : 156%1970*`J OY
( Page 7, foot-ttolk with ` * ' existing foot-note: ` *Spv3ication
( Pa,te for wire cloth
mnrk ) -

II

` wire cloth conforto IS : 1568-1960* `. the following for the

Substitute
(Jirsl

for general

purposes

reuision ) `.

8, c&se

12.1 ) -

Add

the

following

new

clause

after

this

clause: ` 12.2 In case of z&conditioned buildings, the design, installation of air-conditioning systems and equipment building for the purpose of providing and maintaining temperature, humidity, purity and distribution shall be as laid down in SP : 7 ( Part VIII/See 3 )-1983*. ' ( Pn,fe 8 ) -- Add the following ` *National
conditioning Btlilding Codu and heating. > of India

construction and installed in the conditions of air per rcqnircmcnts

foot-note:
VI II Buildin: scrviccs, Section 3 Air

1993: Part

( Page 9,`clause 14.2, lines 4 u~zd 5 ) - Substitute ( IS : 2470 ( Part I )1985* and IS : 2-$70 ( Part II )-1985t `fey ` IS: 2 170 ( Part I )-I963* or IS : 2470 ( Par!,,11 )-1964-l `.

( I'N:!C9: JiWrolcs ruiih ( * ' nd c t ' mztk ) li,r Lllc: exir;tirig~ I'ool-liol~::::
.' ' *&de construction

Sllhstitute
I';lrt II

tfic following
criteria trcatmcnt,and
//

or practiccl

for irl?tallation ( JE~OIKI reuisim ).

of

septic

tanks: Part

[ I)csign,

and

fCoclc ol`prncticc for irtvtallation of septic tanks: disposal or srptic: tank c:lIl\tcnts ( secorrd revision ). '
' C 1s

Secondary

one 16 : I(8;&9&

clause 21.1, line
`_

2 ) -

Substitute

` IS : 181iO-198O* ' for

the followiri,q for the ( Page 1G,,fint-??nte wilh ` * ' mark ) - Substitute existing foot-note: 4 I /' /' ` *Chic Of prxticc for installation, opcralion and rnnintcnnncc~ of vlvctric px.scn~cr and hoods lifts ( .rwor~d rri&iou ). '

( Page 18, clause 22.9, t `IS : 2217-1963* `i ( Page 18, clause 22.10, ` IS : 2190-1962t `,
ing

line' 2 ) line 4 ) -

Substitute Substitute

` IS : 2190-1979* ` IS : 2190-1979* Substitute

' for ' for

( Puga 18,fooknolcs with ( * ' and ` t ' mark ) for the existing foot-notes: /
installations

the followfirst-aid

` *Code of practice for seleltion, fire appliances ( second revision). ' ( Page 20,`clause ` IS : 4393-1967* `. ( Page 20,foot-note existing footy4te: r *Specification 27.1,

and maintenance

of portable

line

2 ) -

Substitute Substitute

` IS : 4i93-1979*

' for

with ` * ' mark ) -

the following for the '

/
for an abattoir

for basic requirements

( (firJf revision).

(

BDC 12 )

2
Printed at New India Printing Press. Khuria. India

