IS 14489:

1998

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEONOCCUPATIONAL SAFETYANDHEALTHAUDIT

ICS

13.100

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

Jat1uary 1998

Price Group

7

Industrial

Safety Sectional Committee,

CHD 8

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. by the Industrial

Due to the growing awareness of safety in the industrial sector and introduction of various Acts for implementing directives of the statutory bodies, the need has been felt to formulate this Indian Standard which will give a guideline to audit safety aspects in the industrial and other units of concern. While formulating this standard, utmost care has been taken to cover all the possible elements relating to safety. A separate checklist giving questionnaires of safety audit has been included and given in Annex C for the benefits of auditor and auditee. However, it may be reviewed from time to time for inclusion of newer elements which would be necessary due to the reasons intended for. A list of records to be maintained is also given in Annex B of this standard as guideline. This standard only gives a guideline for auditing industrial The composition of technical committee responsible unit for safety parameters. this standard is given in Annex D.

for formulating

IS 14489: 1998

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEONOCCUPATIONAL SAFETYANDHEALTHAUDIT
1 SCOPE This standard establishes audit objectives, criteria and practices, and provides guidelines for establishing, planning, conducting and documenting of audits on occupational safety and health systems at workplace. It provides guidelines for verifying the existence and implementation of elements of occupational safety and health system and for verifying the system's ability to achieve defined safety objectives. It is sufficiently general in nature to permit it to be applicable or adaptable to different kinds of organizations. Each organization should develop its own specific procedures for implementing this standard. This standard does not cover audit of environmental management system for which a separate Indian Standard IS/IS0 14001 is available. 2 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard, the definitions below shall apply. 2.1 Auditee An organization 2.2 Audit Team A team of persons designated as auditors who are suitably qualified and have experience to perform these audits.
NOTEThe auditor designated to lead the audit team and manage a safcety audit is called a `Audit Team Leader' (lead auditor).

2.7 Objective Evidence Qualitative or quantitative information, records or statements of fact which is based on observation, measurement or test and which can be verified. 2.8 Occupational Safety and Health Audit

A systematic, objective and documented evaluation of the occupational safety and health systems and procedures.
NOTES 1 Henceforth in this document only the words `OS&H' shall be used in place of the words `occupational safety and health' and only `audit' in place of safety and occupational health audit. 2 The audit typically applies to, but is not limited to. a snFeety system or elements thereof, and is applicable to process, products, or to services. Such audits are often called `safety system audit', `process safety audit', `product safely audit', `service safety audit'. 3 There are two types of audits, external and internal. External audits are those carried out by agrncies external to the auditee organization. Internal audit!. are those carried out by the employees designated by the managerncnt For this purpose. Such employees may be selected prcfcrably from amongst not having direct responsibility in ihe areas being audited no,- having responsibility for implcmcntation ofrccolnlncndationh. 4 One purpose of the OS&H audit is to identify the arcas fat improvement or corrective action. An audit should not be COW fused with `Periodic Safety Inspection' activities performed by plant personnel for the purpose of checking effcctivcness of implementation of Safety System.

given

to be audited.

2.9 Occupational

Safety and Health System

2.3 Client An organization which appoints auditing agency/team to carry out third party audit on its behalf. 2.4 Management Representation authorized to

The organizational structure, responsibilities, procedures, processes and resources specified by top management of an organization as required for implementing occupational safety and health objectives.
NOTES 1 The area%to be covered under the OS&H system arc given in Annex A. 2 The OS&H system should only be as comprehensive as is needed to meet the objectives.

The official of the auditee organization deal with the audit team. 2.5 Nonconformity The nonfulfilment 2.6 Observation

2.10 Organization of specified requirement. Company, corporation, firm, enterprise or institution or part or combination thereof whether incorporated or not, public or private, that has its own functions and administration.
NOTE This definition is as per IS0 14001 `Environmental management systems-Specification with guidance for use'.

A statement of fact made in the course of an audit and preferably substantiated by objective evidence.

IS 144x9 : 1998 2.11 Recommendation

3.3.1.2 Lead auditor's

responsibilities

Suggestion made by the audit team in the course of audit for improvement in the OS&H system.
NOTES 1 The definition covers the departure or absence of one or more OS&H system elements from specified requirements. 2 For organization with more than one operating unit; a single operating unit may he defined as an organization.

The lead auditor is ultimately responsible for all phases of the OS&H audit. The lead auditor should have management capabilities and experience and should be given authority to make final decisions regarding the conduct of the audit and any audit observations. The lead auditor's responsibilities also cover: communicating with client, auditee and other auditors regarding audit requirements; selection of other audit team members; preparation of the audit plan; and auditee's 3.3.1.3

3 AUDIT GOALS, OBJECTIVES RESPONSIBILITIES 3.1 Audit Goals

AND

Audits are normally designed to achieve of the following goals: -

one or more

interacting with the client management; submitting maintaining

to provide the auditee with an opportunity to assess its own OS&H system against a OS&H system standard and identify areas for improvement; to determine implemented requirements improvement; of the the conformity OS&H system with specified and identify areas for and

the audit report; and agreed time schedule.

Auditor's responsibilities

-

Auditors are responsible for: complying with the requirements; -

applicable

audit

-

to meet regulatory requirements.

NOTES 1 These audits may be periodic, or may bc: prompted by significant changes in the organization's OS&H system, process, product or service or by n nezd to follow up on corrective action as specified in 4.1.2. 2 Audits are not aimed at, nor should result in a transfer of the responsibility to achieve safety from auditce management to the auditing organization. 3 Audits are not acertification auditee organization. ofthe safety performance ofthe

planning and carrying out assigned responsibilities effectively and efficiently; documenting the observations; reporting the audit results; verifying the effectiveness of corrective actions taken as a result of the earlier audits (if requested by the client); retaining and safeguarding documents pertaining to the audit ensuring such remain confidential, a nd documents information with treating . privileged discretion; and Cooperating auditor. Independence and supporting the lead

-

3.2 Audit Objectives OS&H audits objectives: are conducted with the following -

To carry out a systematic, critical appraisal of all potential hazards involving personnel, plant, services and operation method; and To ensure that OS&H system fully satisfy the legal requirements and those of the company's written safety policies, objectives and progress.

3.3.1.4

of the auditor

-

Auditors should be free from bias and intluences which could effect objectivity. All persons and organizations should respect and support integrity of the auditors. 3.3.1.5 Auditor's activities The lead auditor should: define the requirements of each audit assignment, including selection of team; with applicable comply other requirements and directives; auditing appropriate and involved with an audit the independence and

3.3 Roles and Responsibilities
3.3.1 3.3.1.1

Auditors Audit team

It is desirable to have the OS&H audit team comprising of two or more auditors; with different specialized backgrounds which are complimentary. One of the auditors should be designated as the lead auditor and should have overall charge and responsibility. 2

-

plan the audit, prepare working documents brief the audit team;

IS 14489 : 1998 plan the field visit; report critical immediately; nonconformities to the auditee encountered in provide all resources needed for the audit team in order to ensure an effective and efficient audit process; provide access to the facilities and evidential material as requested by the auditors; co-operate with the auditors to facilitate achievements of audit objectives; and determine and initiate corrective actions based on the audit report. METHODOLOGY

report any major obstacles performing the audit; and

report on the audit results clearly, conclusively and without undue delay.

Auditors should: remain within the audit scope; exercise objectivity; collect and analyse evidence that is relevant and sufficient to permit the drawing of conclusions regarding the audited OS&H safety system; remain alert to any indications of evidence that can intluence the audit results and possibly require more extensive auditing; be able to answer such questions as presented; ensure that the procedures, documents and other information specifying requirements describing or supporting the required elements of the OS&H system are known, available, understood and used by the auditee's personnel? ensure that all the documents and other information used to describe the safety system adequate to achieve the required OS&H objectives? and act in an ethical manner at all times. Client

4 AUDITING

1.1 Initiating the OS&H Audit 4.1.1 AL&t Scope The client in consultation with lead auditor makes the final decisions on which OS&H system elements, physical locations and organizational activities are to be audited within a specified time frame. The scope and depth of the audit should be designed to meet the client's specific information needs. The~standards or documents with which the auditee's OS&H system is required to comply should be specified by the client. This may include the relevant legal requirements; concerned and other relevant Indian Standard and the requirements specified by the auditee (see 4.1.3). Suflicient objective evidence should be available to demonstrate the operation and effectiveness of the auditee's safety system. The resources committed to the audit should be sufficient to meet its intended scope and depth. The audit will cover the objectives laid down and may also contact with individual workers to ascertain their perceptions about the existing OS&H system, to gain their involvement, to encourage comments and suggestion relating to safety and invite cooperation to bring the company to an approved OS&H standard. 4.1.2 Audit Frequent)

-

-

-

3.3.2

The client: determines the need for and the purpose of the OS&H audit and initiate the process; selects the auditing organization; agrees in consultation with the lead auditors the genera1 scope of the audit such as what OS&H system standard or document is to be selected as reference and the time schedule; receives the audit report; and determines taken. what follow-up action is to be

-

3.3.3 Auditee The auditee's management should:

inform relevant officials and staff about the objectives and scope of the audit; appoint one or two officials to coordinate/ liasion with audit team and responsible officials to accompany members of the audit tea-m during their visit to respective departments;

The need to perform an audit is determined by the client, taking into account of specified or regulatory requirements and any other pertinent factors. Significant changes in management, organization, policy, techniques or technologies that could affect the OS&H system, or changes to the system itself and the results of recent previous audits, are typical of the circumstances to be considered when deciding audit frequency. It is desirable that organizations have acombination of external and internal OS&H audit system. While the external audit in respect of organizations may be

3

IS 14489 : 1998 conducted once in two years, or as specified by any statute, the frequency of internal audit may be set once in every year. Records of accidents and dangerous occurrences should be examined and used to identify high risk areas and activities and consequently the frequency of internal audit may be increased. 4.1.3 Preliminary review of auditee's description specified requirement of OS&H system: and 4.2.2 Audit Team Assignments Each auditor should be assigned specific OS&H system elements or functional departments to audit. Such assignments should be made in consultation with the auditors concerned. 4.2.3 Working Documents of the Audit Team

As a basis for planning the OS&H audit, the lead auditor should review for adequacy the auditee's specified requirements and recorded description of the methods for meeting the OS&H system requirements (such as the safety manual or equivalent). If this review reveals that the system described by the auditee is not adequate to meet the requirements, further resources should not be expanded on the audit until such concerns are resolved to the satisfaction of the client, the lead auditor and, where applicable, the auditee. While it is desirable to have a well defined set of specified requirements and recorded description; in their absence; audit may be conducted with reference to legal requirements and concerned Indian Standards. 4.2 Preparing the OS&H Audit

The documents required to facilitate the auditor's investigations, and to document and report results, may include: check-lists used for evaluating OS&H system elements (normally prepared by the auditor assigned to audit that specific element), and forms for documenting supporting evidence for conclusions reached by the auditors.

Working documents should be designed so that they do not restrict additio~nal audit activities or investigations which may become necessary as aresult of information gathered during the audit. Working documents involving confidential or proprietary information shall be suitably safeguarded by the auditing organization. 4.2.4 Questionnaire of Preliminary Information

4.2.1 Audit Plun The audit plan should be finalized after consultation with lead auditor and the client and communicated to the auditors and auditee. The audit plan should be designed to be flexible in order to permit changes in emphasis based on information gathered during the audit, and to permit effective use of resources. The plan should include: the audit objectives and scope; identification of reference documents (such as the applicable OS&H system standard and the auditee's description and specified requirements of their safety system); size of the audit team as specified at 3.3.1.1; identification audited; of the organizational units to be

The audit team would send to the auditee management a questionnaire seeking information about various elements of OS&H system as given in Annex A. This would be filled in by the auditee, plan and returned for study by the audit team before the field visit. 4.3 Executing the OS&H Audit

This would include a field visit with the auditee organization by the audit team which would cover the following activities. During this field visit, the concerned officials of the auditee would accompany the team during their visits around the plant. 4.3.1 Opening Meeting The purpose of an opening meeting is to: introduce the members of the audit team to the auditee's senior management; review audit; the scope and the objectives of the

-

provide a short summary of the methods and procedures to be used to conduct the audit; establish the official communication between the audit team and the auditee; links

the schedule for audit activities; the schedule of meetings auditee management; the list of documents team; to be held with

to be pursued by the audit and the expected date

confirm that the resources and facilities needed by the audit team are available; fix a schedule departments; of visits to individual plants/

audit report distribution of issue.

4

IS 14489 : 1998 discuss the auditee's senior management; the areas of concerned and suggested areas of focus by the audit team; confirm the time and date for the closing meeting and any interim meetings of the audit team and the auditee's senior management; clarify any unclear details of the audit plan. comings in the areas such as the maintenance and testing of critical equipment. The auditor should make recommendations to the auditee for the improvements to the OS&H system. In case of an organization whose OS&H system specified requirements/description are well developed; it would be sufficient to point out nonconformities with the requirement. However, when these are not well laid down, it becomes ~a11 the more important to make recommendations. These recommendations are of two types: specified of the for improvement in the system's requirements; and for more effective implementation specified requirements of the system.

-

-

4.3.2 Presentation by auditee management on organization, manufacturing processes; organization structure and specified requirements of the~OS&H system. 4.3.3 Examination 4.3.3.1 Collecting evidence

Evidence should be collected through interviews, examination of documents, and observation of activities and conditions in the areas of concern. Clues suggesting nonconformities should be noted if they seem significant, even though not covered by check-lists, and should be investigated. Information gathered through interviews should be tested by acquiring the same information from other independent sources, such as physical observation, measurements and records (see Annex B).
NOTE - A questionnaire for performing safety audit has been given in Annex C for guidance only.

It is up to the auditee to determine the extent, the way and means of actions to improve the OS&H system as per recommendations of the audit team. However, the recommendations regarding compliance with statutory and legal requirements are to be fully implemented. 4.3.5 Closing Meeting with Auditee At the end of the OS&H audit, prior to preparing the audit report, the audit team should hold a meeting with the auditee's senior management and those responsible for the functions concerned. The main purpose of this ineeting is to present audit observations and recommendations to the senior management in such a manner so as to ensure that they clearly understand the results of the audit. The lead auditor recommendations, significance. should present observations and taking into account their perceived

4.3.3.2

Audit observations

All audit observations should be documented. After all activities have been audited, the audit team should review all of their observations to determine which are to be reported as nonconformities. The audit team should then ensure that these are documented in a clear, concise manner and are supported by evidence. Nonconformities should be identified in terms of the specific requirements of the standard or other related documents against which the audit has been conducted. Observations should be reviewed by the lead auditor with the responsible auditee manager. All observations of nonconformities should be intimated to the auditee and acknowledged by it. It should be remembered that purpose of audit is not to comprehensively check implementation of each safety system element. The purpose is to sample/test check the implementation of each element of the OS&H system. Therefore, the information is to be corrected for a few cases of nonconformity in respect of each element; as a basis for evaluating implementation of that element. However, recommendations are not only to correct the observed nonconformities, but the implementation of the element as a whole. 4.3.4 Audit Recommendations The desired end result of a OS&H audit is the identification of primarily unrecognized hazards, in the light of experience and early recognition of short 5

The lead auditor should present the audit team's conclusions regarding the OS&H system's effectiveness in ensuring that objectives will be met. Records of the closing meeting should be kept. 4.4 OS&H Audit Documents 4.4.1 Audit Report Preparation The audit report is prepared under the direction of the lead auditor, who is responsible for its accuracy and completeness. 4.4.2 Report Content The audit report should faithfully reflect both the tone and content of the audit. It should be dated and signed by the lead auditor. It should contain the following items, as applicable : An executive summary of introduction, objectives overview of the site, management's OS&H the report presenting and methodology, plant description, system, worker's

IS 14489: 1998 perception of management's commitment towards safety and the major conclusions and recommendations; the scope and objectives of the audit; the and details of the audit methodology, identification of audit team members auditee's representative, audit dates; auditee, and in accordance requirements. with any regulatory

5 OS&H AUDIT COMPLETION Th e audit is completed report to the client. upon submission of the audit

-

identification of the reference documents against which the audit was conducted (safety system standard, auditee's safety manual, etc); observations of nonconformities good practices; as well as

6 ACTION FOR IMPLEMENTATION OS&H AUDIT REPORT

OF

-

audit team's judgement of the extent of the auditee's compliance with the applicable OS&H system standard and related documentation; the system's ability objectives; and the recommendations to achieve for improvement. defined

The auditee is responsible for determining and initiating corrective action needed to correct a nonconformity or to correct the cause of a nonconformity. The auditor is only responsible for identifying the nonconformity. The auditee should prepare an action plan for implementation of audit report; specifying action by concerned departments and time limits for action. This may be in consultation with the auditing organization. One of the most important follow-up actions is the communication to appropriate personnel in the auditee organization of the substance of the audit report, the agreed recommendations for action and, where no action is agreed (although it may have been recommended in the course of the audit) the reasons for this decision. If needed, the auditing organization can be engaged to do a follow-up audit reviewing implementation of recommendations.
NOTE The auditing organization should keep the client informed of the status of corrective action activities as found by the follow-up audit. After verification of corrective a&on implementation, the auditing organization may prepare a follow-up report and distribute it in :I mnnner similar to the original audit report.

-

4.4.3 Report Distribution The OS&H audit report should be sent to the client signed by the lead auditor. Any additional distribution should be determined by the client. Audit reports containing confidential or proprietary information shall be suitably safeguarded by the auditing organization and the client. The audit report should be issued as soon as possible. If it cannot be issued within agreed time period, the reasons for~the delay should be given to the auditee and a revised issue date established. 4.4.4 Record Retention Audit documents should be retained by agreement between the client, the auditing organization and

IS 1448931998

ANNEX
ELEMENTS
I.

A
AND HEALTH SYSTEM (OS&H)

(Clauses2.1 and 4.2.4)
OF OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY

Occupational

safety & health policy

in OS&H Management and promotional measures for 5. Motivational OS&H 6. Safety manual and rules 7. Compliance with statutory requirements 8. New equipment review/inspection 9. Accident reporting analysis investigation and implementation of recommendations hazard including assessment IO. Risk identification 11. Safety inspections 12. Health and safety improvement plan/targets health 13. Firs-t aid facilities - occupational centre 14. Personal protective equipment 15. Good housekeeping

2. OS&H organizational set-up 3. Education and training participation 4. Employees

16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21.

Machine and general area guarding Material handling equipment Electrical and personal safeguarding Ventilation, illumination and noise Work environment monitoring system of occupational diseases Prevention including periodic medical examination 22. Safe operating procedures 23. Work permit systems protection and fighting 24. Fire prevention, systems plans (on-site/off25. Emergency preparedness site) 26. Process/plant modification procedure 27. Transportation of hazardous substances 28. Hazardous waste treatment and disposal 29. Safety in storage and warehousing 30. Contractor safety systems 31. Safety forcustomers (including material safety data sheets)

ANNEX B (Clause 4.3.3.1)
TYPES OF RECORDS TO BE EXAMINED DURING 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. THE SAFETY AUDIT

OS&H policy Safety organization chart Training records on safety fire and first-aid Record of plant safety inspections Accident investigation reports Accidents and dangerous occurrences statistics and analysis 7. Record of tests and examinations of equipment and structures as per statutes procedures for various 8. Safe operating operations 9. ~Record of work permits of flammable and IO. Record of monitoring explosives substances at work place and testing records of fire 11. Maintenance detection and fire fighting equipment f2. Medical records of employees 13. Records of industrial hygiene surveys (noise, ventilation and levels, illumination levels, airborne and toxic substances, explosive gases) 14 Material safety data sheets

I. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

On-site emergency plans and record of Mock Drills Records of waste disposal Records of effluent discharges to the environment Housekeeping inspection records Minutes of safety committee meetings Approval of layouts; and other approval from statutory authorities Records of any modifications carried out in plant or process Maintenance procedure records Calibration and testing records Shut down maintenance procedures In service inspection manuals, records including that of material handling Safety budget Inspection books and other statutory records Records of previous audits Safety in transportation of hazardous substances

7

IS 14489 : 1998

ANNEX

C

( CZause4.3.3.1 )
SAFETY AUDIT QUESTIONNAIRE HEALTH
I.

AND SAFETY POLICY

19. 20. 21.

Does the organization has a health and safety policy? (if yes, please attach one copy) 2. Do you have any corporate safety policy ? (if yes, please attach one copy) 3. Who has signed the health SafeEy policy ? (indicate his position) 4. Whether it is prepared as per guidelines of the statutory provisions ? 5. When was the safety policy declared and adopted ? 6. How many times it has been updated till now ? 7. Whether the policy is made know to all ? 8. Whether the safety policy was scrutinized by outside expert agency ? 9. What was the last date of updation ? IO. Does it find a place in the annual report ? SAFETY & HEALTH (A) Safety Department
II.

22. 23. 24. 25.

How are the members of safety committee (s) selected ? (elected/nominated) How often are the meetings of safety committee(s) held ? What are the subjects? Are the problems discussed in the meetings ? (Attach a copy of agenda and minutes of the last meeting) How are the recommendations of the committee(s) implemented ? Are the minutes of the safety committee(s) meetings circulated among the members ? Are the minutes forwarded to the trade union(s) and chief executive and occupier? How the management and trade union play their active roles in supporting and accepting the committee(s) recommen- dations ? How are the safety committee(s) members apprised of the latest developments in safety, health and environment ?

26.

ORGANIZATION

(C) Safety Budget 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. What is the annual safety budget? How much percentage is this budget of the total turnover of the company. How much budget has utilized till date ? Is the safety budget adequate ? How is the safety budget arrived at ? What is the pattern of expenditure for the last five years ? What are the approved sanctions for the expenditure in this budget ? Does this budget get reflected in the annual report of the company ? ACCIDENT REPORTING, TION AND ANALYSIS 35. Whether the accident years for reportable accident available ? INVESTIGA-

12. i)

ii) 13. 14.

15. 16.

Does the factory has a safety department ? If yes, furnish the following information : Head of the safety department: a) Name b) Designation c) Qualification d) Experience e) Status Strength of the safety department including safety ofticers and staff. Does the head of safety department/ safety officer report to the chief executive ? How often are the safety officers retrained in the latest techniques of total safety management ? What is the frequency of retraining ? What additional duties the safety officer is required to do ? What is the power of safety officer vis-a-vis unsafe condition or unsafe act? (s)

data for the last three and non-reportable and -and

36.

Is there any system of classifying analyzing the near-miss incidents accidents ? Give the details. Are all near-miss incidents reported and investigated ? For how many years reports retained? By whom the accident maintained ?

(B) Safety Committee 17.

37. 38. 39.

and accidents

18.

Does the factory has a safety committee(s)? Give details of their types, structures and terms of reference. Is the tenure of the safety committee(s) as per the statute?

are the investigation statistics and data are

8

IS 14489 : 1998 40. 41. 42. 43. How is the top management apprised of these data ? Is the accident statistics effectively utilized ? If yes, how ? What nature of injuries occurred during the last three years ? How do you ensure implementation of the recommendations to avoid the recurrence of the incidents and accidents ? SAFETY INSPECT-IONS 44. 45. 46. 47. What type of safety inspections are carried out and what are their frequency ? Is there any system of internal inspection ? Who does the inspections ? Are the check-list prepared for these inspections ? (Specify item-wise, for example, housekeeping, tire protection, etc). To whom the recommendations are submitted SAFETY E-DUCATION AND TRAINING (A) Training 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. Is there any training department ? Is there any programme of induction training ? Mention the duration of induction training for each category of employees. Whether the assessment of the trainee worker is done or not ? infrastructural facilities with What audio-visual support are available for training ? Do the programmes cover the plant safety rules, hazard communication and any other special safety rules or procedures unique to the plant or specific departments ? Whether the training programmes are conducted in the local language ? Whether visits to safety institutions/ organizations are arranged ? 71. 62. How many employees have been trained in safety and health in the last five years ? Give break up with details. How many man-days/hours are used in training the employees? How do you ensure that the training is put to use by the employees trained in safety and health. What is the training plan for the next two years ? Give details. What documentation system has been established regarding safety and health training ? Motivation IPromotion

63. 64.

65. 66.

(C) Safety Communication/ 67. 68. 69. 70.

48.

72. 73.

54.

14. 75.

55. 56.

Does the factory has safety suggestion schemes ? Give details. Does your factory participate in National Awards/Suggestion schemes ? Has your factory been awarded during last five years? Are safety contests organized in the factory? Give details. What are the publications of your organization? Do they include information on safety and health subjects? Is the literature on safety and health made available to the employees? How is the safety and health publicized inyour factory? i) Bulletin boards? ii) Post serious accidents'? iii) New letter? iv) Others? Specify Does the organization celebrate safety day/week or organize safety exhibition? When was the last safety day/week celebrated? FIRST AID

76. 77. 78. 79. 80.

(B) Periodic Training/Retraining 57. 58. Are all the employees trained and what is the frequency of such training ? Do the training programmes cover safety and health aspects and if so how much (in terms of number of sessions/hours) ? Do the trained supervisors train their own employees in safety and health aspects ? Is the retraining performed whenever new hazards/process changes are followed/ introduced? How are the senior management personnel trained in safety and health ?

59. 60.

Are adequate number of first aid boxes provided ? Give location details ? Is there any first aid/ambulance room ? Are qualified/trained first aid's available in each shift? How many qualified/trained first aide's are available at each plant/department ? How many persons are trained/given refreshers training in first aid in a year? OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH CENTRE

81. 82.

61.

Whether occupational safety and health center is provided or not ? Does it conform to the provisions of the existing legislation ?

9

IS 114x9 : 1YYS 83.

84. 85.

Are the Medical Attendants/Doctors available in each shift ? Is ambulance van available in each shift ? Any liaison with the nearest hospital(s) ? Give details. GENERAL WORKING CONDITION

104. 105. 106. 107.

Whether dust/fumes/hot process ? Give details.

air is generated

in the system

Isthere any exhaust dilution ventilation in any section of the plant ?

Whether any ventilation study has been carried out in the section(s) to check the record ? Are periodic/preventive maintenance of ventilation system carried out and record is maintained ? Does any ventilation system exhausted air in work areas ? Is the work monitored ? environment recirculate assessed the and are and

(A) 86.

Housekeeping

Are all the passages, floors and the stairways in good condition ? 87. Do you have the system to deal with the spillage ? 88. Do you have sufficient disposable bins clearly marked and whether these are suitably located ? 89. Are drip trays positioned wherever necessary ? 90. Do you have adequate localized extraction and scrubbing facilities for dust, fumes and gases ? Please specify. 91. Whether walkaways are clearly marked and free from obstruction ? any inter-departmental 92. Do you have competition for good housekeeping ? elaborated good 93. Has your organization housekeeping practices and standards and made them known to the employees ? 94. Are there any working conditions which make the floors slippery ? If so, what measures are taken to make them safe ? 95. Does the company have adequate measures to suppress polluting dust arising out from road transport?

108. 109. 110.

Whether personal protective equipment given to workers exposed to dust/fumes gases ? Give details.

(D) Illumination

111. 112.

Was any study carried out for the assessment of illumination level ? Is there any system of periodical cleaning and replacing the lighting fittings/lamps in order to ensure that they give the intended illumination levels ? Are the workers subject to periodic optometry tests and records maintained? Give details. HAZARD IDENTIFICATION CONTROL AND

113.

114. 115.

Are all the hazardous areas identified

?

(B) Noise 96. 97. 98. 99. Are there any machines/processes generating noise ? Specify. Was any noise study conducted ? Which are the areas having high-level noise ? Haveengineering and administrative controls been implemented to reduce noise exposure below the permissible limits ? Is there a system of subjecting all those employees to periodic audiometric test who work in high level noise areas ? Whether the workers are made aware of the ill-effects of high noise. Whether any personal protective equipment along with ear muffs/plugs are provided and used. 116. 117. 118. 119.

What are the types of hazards (physical- noise, heat, etc, and chemical-fire, explosion, toxic release, etc) ? What steps have been taken to prevent hazards ? Give details. Are there any safety inter-locks, trip system ? Give details. Are these tested periodically Please specify. these

alarms and

? How often ?

100.

Are there any ambient monitoring devices with alarms for leakage of hazardous materials ? Give details. Are safety audit or HAZOP or any other studies carried out and the recommendations implemented ? Give details. What has been the major modification done in plant/process and has the approval of the competent authority concerned ? What decision and monitoring equipment are available and used for checking the environmental conditions in and around the plant ? Give details.

120.

101. 102.

121.

122.

(C) Ventilation 103.

Whether not?

natural

ventilation

is adequate or

10

IS 14489' : 1998 TECHNICAL ASPECT Procedures 145. 146. 144. Are the contractor's workers provided with the required PPE ? Who is responsible ? Give details. Are the PPE conform to any standard ? Give details. Give the details of PPE and also specify the responsibility for their inspection and maintenance ? FIRE PROTECTION Indicate on a plant layout the location. number (Quantiy) and types of portable fire extinguishers available. 148. Are the fire fighting system and equipment approved, tested and maintained as per relevant standard ? and maintenance 149. What is the inspection schedule of the above extinguishers ? Who performs these functions ? 150. Which areas of the plant are covered by fire hydrants ? Indicate the locations of the hydrant points and how the required pressure maintained in the system and ensured. water 151. What is the capacity of dedicated reservoir for supply to the hydrants ? What is the source of water ? i) How is the power supply to the fire 152. hydrant pump ensured ? ii) What is the alternate source of supply in case of power failure ? Give details. with the fire 153. Are all personnel conversant prevention and protection measures ? Give details. 154. What percentage of plant personnel and staff and officers, have been trained in the use of portable fire extinguishers ? Give details. 147. 155. 156. 157. 158. 159. Do you have fixed or automatic fire fighting installation(s) in any section of your plant? Are the fire alarms adequate obstruction ? Do you have fire department details. and free from ? If yes, give mock drills

Safe Operating 123. 124.

125.

126.

127.

128. 129.

Are written safe operating procedures available for all operations ? Whether the written safe operating procedures displayed or made available and explained in the local language to the workers ? Whether the safe operating procedures are prepared jointly by the plant and safety departments ? What system is used to ensure that the existing safe operating procedures are updated ? Give details. Have the workers been informed of the consequences of failure to observe the safe operating procedures ? Are contractor workers educated and trained to observe safety at workplace ? Whether contractor's workers are permitted on process/operations ? Give details. WORK PERMIT SYSTEM

130. 131. 132.

What necessary type of work permits exists in your factory ? Give details. What are the hazardous chemicals handled? Are the keys kept for individual locks which are used for electrical lock outs with the supervisor concerned ? WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM

133. 134.

135. 136. 137.

138.

Is identification done for various types of wastes ? Give details. Are these quantities less than those specified by the hazardous wastes. (Management & Harrdhg Rules, 1989) ? What are their disposal modes ? What are the systems/measures adopted for controlling air/water/land pollution? What is the system of effluent treatment plant and whether it is approved by the competent authority? How are the treated effluent used? PERSONAL MENT (PPE) PROTECTIVE EQLJIP-

What is the system for conducting ? Give details.

139.

140. 141. 142. 143.

Has a list of required PPE for each area/ operation been developed and the required PPE is made available to the workers ? Are the safety department and the workers consulted in the selection of PPE ? Have the workers been trained in proper~use of PPE ? What is the system of replacement/issue of PPE ? What are the arrangements for safe custody and storage of PPE provided to the workers? 11

Do you have any mutual aid scheme with any of your neighbouring industry or any local organization(s) ? Give details of the existing fire resistant walls and doors. Do you have any system of colour coding for all the pipelines for hazardous chemical ? Give details including marking of flow directions. Are there any safe containers for the movement of small quantities of hazardous chemicals ? Give details.

160. 161.

162.

IS 14489 : 1998 163. 164. Are all self-dosing fire doors in good condition and free from obstructions ? How many major and minor incidents/fires were there in the factory during the last five years ? Give department/plant-wise. the fires/incidents been Have all investigated and corrective actions taken ? Give break up. EMERGENCY 166. 167. 168. 169. 170. PREPAREDNESS 185. 182. Are adequate earthing arrangements made at the terminal points where hazardous chemicals are handled through pipes ? anti-static charge devices fitted Are wherever necessary ? Whether these devices are periodically checked and maintained by a qualified person ? PRESSURE UNFIRED) VESSELS (FIRED AND

183. 184.

165.

171.

172. 173. 174. 175.

Is there an on- site emergency plan for your factory ? (attach a copy of the plan) What is the frequency of conducting mock drills of on-site emergency plan? What are the number and location of emergency control centre, assembly points? Whether emergency team or the key personnel identified ? Are suitable and adequate protective and rescue equipment available ? How is the emergency rescue team trained to use these equipment ? How is the emergency communication with local bodies and other organizations ensured? Give details. Is any alternate power source identified ? Give details. What is the medical emergency response system ? Give details. Are you a member of any MUTUAL-AIDSCHEME of your area? If so give details. How many emergency alarm system(s) is/are available ? Give details. PLANT LAYOUT CLASSIFICATION AND AREA

186.

187.

188.

189. 190. 191. 192. 193.

Give details of the plants, piping and vessels which are operated at a pressure greater than the atmospheric pressure ? How is it ensured that the working pressure inside the pressure vessels/pressure plants will not exceed their maximum working pressure for which it is designed? What means of isolating the pressure vessels or means to prevent rise in pressure are installed ? What standards/codes of practice are adopted for design, fabrication, operation and maintenance of the pressure vessels and records maintained? How are the pressure vessels tested `? Give details. Is there any competent person for testing these pressure vessels ? Give details. How are the recorded results verified ? Give details of safety devices available for these pressure vessels ? Whether log book for pressure vessel and pressure plant has been maintained ? NEW EQUIPMENT REVIEW

176.

177.

What is the system of classification of hazardous zones in the plant for electrical installations ? Please specify. Whether periodic inspection and preventive maintenance of electrical installations is done by a qualified person and record is maintained ? Whether plant layout classification has been appropriate place (s) ? STATIC ELECTRICITY with area displayed at

194.

What is the system for effecting any change in plant, equipment or process? the existing Whether it is approved by the appropriate competent authority ?

19.5. Whether the P & I diagrams and other related documents are updated accordingly? LIFTING 196. 197. 198. MACHINES & TACKLE are marked tests

178.

Whether all the lifting machines with their S.WL.? Are all documented

examinations and the in the prescribed form ?

179.

180. 181.

Whether the process(s) and equipment generate and accumulate static charge have been identified ? Give details. Whether all such equipment are properly bonded and earthed? How is electrical resistance for earthing circuits maintained ? Are periodic inspections done and recorded ? 12

Are all the examinations and tests carried out and certified by competent person(s) ? Give details. Are adequate lifting tackles provided at all the places where it is required ? Give details. Are the trained operators engaged operating the equipment ? Give details. for

199. 200.

IS 14489 : 1998 201. 202. such system of training What is the operators ? 4re all the lifting machines and tackles naintained in good conditions and record maintained ? MOBILE VEHICULAR 203. 204. 205. 206. EQUIPMENT TRAFFIC AND 220. 221. 222. 223.
I10 they practice this ?

207. 208.

Are all the mobile equipment in goodcondition ? Are trained drivers engaged for fork-lift trucks ? What is the system for identifying these drivers from other drivers ? What system do you adopt to assess their standard of driving as poor/fair/ satisfactory/ good ? Are there adequate number of warning signs/signals ? Are the hazards associated with transportation within the plant identified and safety measure taken ? Give details. ACCESS

224. 225.

10 workers follow safe procedures for storage ,f materials ? Whether contractor workers are trained in safety ? What is the system for handling over plant to :he maintenance department and receiving sack ? 1s the system consistently applied ? What is the system for the preventive and predictive maintenance and how do you Ensure its effectiveness ? Give details. TANK STORAGE VESSEL AREA

226. 227.

209. 210. 211.

212.

213.

Is adequate safe access provided to all places where workers need to work ? Are all such access in good condition ? Are portable access platforms necessary ? If yes: i) Are these sufficient ? ii) Are these regularly inspected ? iii) Are these readily available? iv) Are these provided with toe-boards and railings ? Oiling and greasing points: i) Are these located and extended to safe place clear of moving parts ? ii) Are these easily accessible? iii) Are these liable to drip into walkways? iv) Whether such workers were trained and whether they are provided with fit-tight clothings and register is maintained ? Are all drain covers in good condition and fitting flush ? MATERIAL HANDLING

214. 215. 216. 217. 218. 219.

facilities storage Are there adequate available ? Are these areas clearly defined ? racks and steel ages in good all Are condition ? Have you adequate equipment for handling materials ? Do the workers know the hazards associated with manual material handling ? Where manual handling is necessary, are the workers been trained ?

Whether it is pressure vessel or not. Give storage vessels designation (exceeding threshold quantities specified in MSlHC, Rules 1989). 228. Give the names of storage materials in each of them. 229. What are the vessel sizes (capacity in tonnes)? 230. What is the material of construction for each vessel and what standards followed in designing/fabricating the vessel? pressure and 231. What are the operating temperature? 232. What are the vessels location? (Please indicate on-site plan or plot plan) 233. Indicate whether vessels are above ground/ underground. 234. If any of the tanks storing flammable material, whether electrical installations are flameproof or not? 235. Are these storage vessels bundedidyked'? 236. If yes, what is the capacity of the bunds/dykes'? 237. Are the vessels properly bonded and earthed and whether periodically checked and record maintained? 238. How are vessels isolated in the event of a mishap? Are the vessels fitted with remotely controlled 239 isolation valves? Are vessels provided with emergency vent, 240 relief valve, bursting disc, level indicator, pressure gauge, overflow line? Where do such vZnts discharge? 241 Are the vessels provided with alarms for high, 242 level, high temperature and high pressure? for 243. Are stand by empty tanks provided emptying in case of emergencies? 244. What are the provisions made for fire fighting/tackling emergency situations around the storage vessels? 245. Has any consequence analysis been carried out for these vessels? (If yes, give details)

13

IS 14489 : 1998 246. 247. 248.

What periodical testings are carried out on the vessels to find out the integrity of the vessels? Whether these tests are certified approved competent persons? by the

ROAD 261. 262. 263. 264. 265. Does the company employ_licenced vehicle of its own/outside sources? Are the loading/unloading procedures on- site and safety precautions displayed? Are loaded tankers or trucks parked in a specific area on-site? Do all truck and tanker drivers carry TREM card or instruction booklet? Do all truck and tanker drivers get training in handling emergencies during transport? RAIL 266. 267. 268. What hazardous materials are transported by rail? Does the company have a direct siding on site? Are tankers or others wagons used in transportation? PIPELINES 269. 270. 271. 272. 273. 274. 275. What materials are transported to and from the site by pipeline`? underground or Are the pipelines overground? protection measures Are corrosion employed in pipelines? Whether intermediate booster pumps are used? What is the maximum, minimum and average transfer rates? Are the pipelines extended in the public domain? Are the pipelines dedicated for each type of chemicals? Are the pipelines fitted with safety equipment such as leak detectors, automatic shut-off valves, etc? What is the frequency and method of testing of the pipeline? Is there written procedure for tackling leakages in pipeline?

Whether log sheets are filled up on daily basis for recording the parameters of these vessels? ON-SITE AREA GAS CYLINDERS STORAGE

249. 250. 251. 252. 253.

What are the various gas cylinders used in the plant? (give details). What are the storage facilities? What are the measures taken for combating any emergency in the cylinders storage area? Are valid licenses available for storing all these cylinders? Whether integrity test certificates are obtained from the suppliers of the cylinders? COMMUNICATION ADOPTED IN PLANT SYSTEM available in all plant provided with

254. 255. 256. 257. 258.

Are public addresssystem areas?

Are public address systems uninterrupted power supply?

Whether public address system is checked periodically for its proper functioning? Is there any hot line provided to fire station`? What is the means of communicating emergency in the plants? TRANSPORTATION

259.

What potentially hazardous -materials are transported to or from the site (including wastes)? What i) ii) iii) modes of transport are used: Road`? Rail? Pipelines?

276.

260

277. 278.

14

IS 14489 : 1998

ANNEX
COMMITTEE
Industrial Safety

D

( Foreword)
COMPOSITION
Committee,CHD 8

Section4

Representin,q

SHRI K. C. GlNTA Members SHRI PREM BAWUA SHRI B. VIJAY K~MAR (Rlternccte) SHRI BHAGWATI PRASAD SHRI SATISI-ICHANDER (Alternure) DR A. K. BORAL SIIRI R. SRINIVASAN (A/&r-flute) DR D. R.CHAWLA SHRI M. K. BANERJEE (Alrernute) DIRECTOR(MINES SAFETY) SHRI A. K. R~DRA (Alrejncrre) SHRI V. K. GOEL SHRI M. L. AHUJA (A!ter/lcJte) SHRI J. P. GOENKA SHRI N. DUITA SHRI M. KANT
(Alft~tt~te)

National Safety Council, Mumhai Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. Bangalorc Employees State Insurance Corporation, Calcutta Ministry of Defence(DGQA), New Delhi

Department of Industrial Policy nnd Promotion, New Delhi Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanhad Central Boiler Board, New Delhi Mining, Geological and Metallurgical Institute of India, Calcutta

Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumhai Office of the Development Commissioner (.%I), New Delhi Standing Committee on Safety for Steel Industry, SAIL, Ranchi Directorate General Factory Advice Services and Lahour Institute, Mumbai Factory Inspectorate, Government of Maharashtra, Mumbai Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur Central Mining Research Institute, Dhanbad Standing Fire Advisory Council, New Delhi Airport Authority of India (National Airport Authority), New Delhi

SHRI KIRIT MARU (Alternute) SHRI G. S. KASHYAP DR V. K. JAIN SHRI K. SENGUPTA (Atre,no/e) SHRI M. K. MALHOTRA SHRI H. N. MIRASHI DR A. S. GHOSHAL SHRI R. H. BIIALEKAR (Alternate) SHRI A. K. ACHARYA SHRI P. K. NAIR (Alferrrufe) SHRI S. K. MUKHERJI SHRI A. K. GHOSH (Alrerncrte) SHRI L. C. GU~TA SHRI H. S. RAWAT (Alterncue) SHRI S. NARAYAN SHRI M. SRIVASTAVA SHRIS. N. MATH~JR(Alrernclte) SHRI H. N.Gu~A SHRI R. P. BHANUSHALI (Akrnufe) SHRI M. R. SAMPATH SHRI 0. N. DAGA (A/~cvNcJ~~) DR S. SADULLA SHRI G. SWAMINATtiAN REPRESENTATIVE (Akrnute)

Bhahha Atomic Research Centre, Mumhai Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas (Oil Industries Safety Directorate), New Delhi National Safety Council, Mumbai Indian Cotton Mills Federation, Mumhai Central Leather Research Institute. Chennai Confederation of Indian Industries, New Delhi Indian Space Research Organization. Shriharikota National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad Larsen and Touhro Ltd (ECC Consumers Group), Chennai Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member)

SHRI P. N. SANKARAN SHRI V. K. SRIVASTAVA (Alternure) SHRI G. P. YADAV SHRI N. JAIPAL (Alternate) SHRI R. K. PODDAR DR R. S. RAJACOPALAN, Director (Chem)

Member-Secretmy SHRI S. MAZUMDER Joint Director (Chem), BIS

( Confinurd ONp~,qe I6

)

15

Code of Practice on Industrial

Safety Subcommittee,

CHD 8:4

SHKI

H. N. GuPT.4 M~lUlXl~,i
M. K. MALHOTRA K. JAIN K. SENGIIWA (Almxcm)

National Safety Council. Mumbai Directorate General Factory Advice Services and Lahour Institute. Mumhai Standing Committee on Safety for Steel Industry, SAIL. Ranchi Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur (Altetmrf birectornte General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad
SAFETY) (~//m~fe)

SHRI DR V.

SHKI

DR A. S. GIIOSHAI. SIIKI DIREcTOR R. H. HIIALEKAR

(MINES

SCIRI A. K. RClURA StiRi SHRI

H. N.
SHRI

MIKASHI

S. K. MUKHERIEE A. K. GHOSH SRIVASTAVA (/t/fc'mtrW)

Factory Inspectorate. Government of Mahnr:L<htra, Mumbni Standing Fire Advisory Council, New Delhi Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas (Oil Industries Safety Directorate), New Delhi
(~/tC,W/e)

SIIRI

M.

SHRI

S. C. GUPTA

REPRESENTATIVE SIIRI R. K. POnlIAR

DR S. CHATTOPADHYAY SIIRI K. K. DUFTA (Altemccte)

Confederation of Indian Induscrics, New Delhi Larsen and Toubro Ltd (ECC Consumers Group), Chcnnai Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi Engineers India Ltd., New Delhi Standards Alkali, Mumbai Fertilizers Association of India, New Delhi National Thermal Power Corporation, New Delhi
(/tfteWfUW)

,&PRT.SI.NIATlVE SHRI A. K. ROHATGI

DR S. NAND SHRI A. H. LAL SHRI P. CIIINNA

DR P. K.GIIOSII SHRI H. N. DK T. SRIIIAKI K. CIIATTER1T.E (A/tcr.rwrc)

Atomic Energy Regulatory ICI India Ltd, Calcutta Ministry of Environment

Board, Mumbai

REPRESEWATIVE

and Forest, New Delhi

16

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly -Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. CHD 8 ( 730 ).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 IO 002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 38 41 85 61 91 20

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI I 10 002

1

Eastern

: l/l4 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700 054 : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022

337 84 99,337 { 337 86 26,337

Northern

1 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13

60 38 43 60 20 25

235 02 16, 235 04 42 1 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95, 832 78 58 8327891.8327892

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400 093

Marol,

Andheri

(East)

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHU$%ANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

