IS 15198:2002

Wmv7m5

m

Ti-wm famw * VIRJ-IIRI'2
Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

Wldi?

Ics 01.040.03; 03.100.30

0 BIS 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August 2002

Price Group

6

Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Counci 1. Human Resource Development (HRD) is part of Human Resource Management (HRM) function of an organization, focused at development of employees through a wide range of interventions including Recruitment, Training, Career Planning, Job Enrichment, Job Rotation, Job Enlargement, Competence Building -- Knowledge, Skills and Attitudes, Organizational Behaviour -- Communication, Team BuiIding, Interpersonal Relations, Performance Management including Reward and Recognition. HRD focuses on enhancing employee capacity, better quality of work life and achievement of organizational goals and objectives through increased organizational effectiveness. The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. This standard has been prepared for the guidance of all organizations to assist them in the correct interpretation of terms used in HOman Resource Development. It is hoped that this glossary of terms will help in establishing a generally recognized usage and eliminate ambiguity and confusion that might arise from individual interpretation of terms. This standard is intended mainly to cover definitions of terms relating to human resource development, and it does not necessarily include all the legal meanings of the terms.

IS 15198:2002

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN I-K.JMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
1 SCOPE This standard is intended to define and explain the terms commonly used in Human Resource Development, 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.1 Absenteeism -- An employee being away from work on a working day or during working hours. 2.2 Accountability -- Reportability of the individual, group or organization regarding its function to the authority. 2.3 Action Learning -- A process by which individuals take on tasks to act on and change. 2.4 Action Research -- It is intervention for achieving better results through experimenting with new ideas. 2.5 Alienation -- A feeling of dejection, loss of a sense of identity and detachment. 2.6 Aptitude -- Natural orientation to acquire and utilize types of knowledge or skills. 2.7 Aptitude aptitude. Test -- Device to assess a person's 2.16 Brainstorming -- A group process for encouraging uninhibited generation of ideas commonly used in real problem solving situations. 2.17 Business Game -- A technique based on simulation of real life business situations having multiple applications. 2.18 Career Planning -- A conscious and planned process for the development of employees of an organization with a view to utilize their full potential. 2.19 Case Study -- A method to study, contemplate and discuss a real life business situation to define vital questions that need to be answered in a given situation. 2.20 Change -- In the context of HRD, this term applies to forces that bring in dynamic effects in organizations such as attitudinal change and behavioral change.
NOTES 1 Aftirudirrulchange -- Change in employee's thoughts, feelings and values. 2 Behavioral change -- Manifestation of change in feelings, thoughts and values of employee (s) through written, verbal m body language.

2.8 Assertiveness -- Ability to express one's point of view in a candid manner without evoking negative feelings in others. 2.9 Assertiveness assertive. Training -- Learning
to be

2.21 Change Agent -- A person or group, which initiates or facilitates, desired changes in the organization. 2.22 Coaching -- A planned process aiming at improving on employee's capabilities through instructions and evaluations. 2.23 Collective Bargaining -- A process of negotiation and joint discussion between authorized representative of management and trade union related to conditions of service. 2.24 Commitment -- A sense of obligation and dedication of an employee towards an organization. 2.25 Communication -- Transference and understanding of ideas, information and opinion. a) b)
-- Communication carried out through prescribed channels. Informal communication -- Communication arising out of personal relationship between two or more people. Vertical channel of communication -- An upward or downward communication between different hierarchy of employees in an organization. Formal communication

2.10 Attitude -- A state of mind related to feeling, thinking or behaviour of an individual. 2.11 Audio-visual Aids -- A tool for training through the use of sound and picture.
NOTE -- Audio-visual aids include overhead projector (OHP), computers, etc.

2.12 Authority -- The power formally vested in a person by an organization to make decisions. 2.13 Autonomy -- Freedom to make certain decisions and act without reference to higher authority. 2.14 Behaviour -- Manifestation of feeling, attitude and values through written, verbal or body language. 2.15 Body Language -- A form of non-verbal communication based on body movementi expression/ gestures. 1

c)

IS 15198:2002 d)
Upward channel of communication --

confidentiality, self-judgement and self-determination. 2.39 Creativity -- Ability to generate new and useful ideas. 2.40 Credibility -- Dependability/trust individual/institution. of an

Communication from subordinate to superior in an organization. e]
Downward channel of communication --

Communication from superior to subordinate in an organization. Q
Horizontal channel of communication --

Communication between people holding same or similar position in an organization. 2.26 Competence -- Demonstrated ability to apply knowledge and skills. 2.27 Competition -- A situation where an individual or a group of people strive to do better than others. 2.28 Conflict -- Disagreement or diverse opinions due to factors related to resources, ideology, philosophy, psychology; may be with others or within oneself. 2.29 Conflict Management -- A process understanding and resolving the conflict. 2.30 Consultation -- A process information, opinion and viewpoint. of

2.41 Credibility Gap -- Variance in the degree of trust and understanding between two or more individuals/institutions. 2.42 Decision Making -- A process of choosing out of the given alternatives, the one whkh gives optimum results based on wisdom, intelligence and available information. 2.43 Refreezing -- A process of preparing an individual or a group to shed preconceived notions and inhibitions to receive HR interventions. 2.44 Delegation -- A process of giving authority and power in an organization. 2.45 Delphie Technique -- Consensus of group of experts from within and outside, based on subjective and objective results. 2.46 Development -- A process for improving competency and capacity of employees in an organization. 2.47 Disciplinary Action -- A process of taking departmental action against an employee for committing an alleged act of misconduct. 2.48 Discussion Method -- A training method in which learning takes place through information sharing and debate. 2.49 Down Sizing -- Planned reduction in manpower. 2.50 Ego -- An individual's self-perception. 2.51 Ego State -- A state of mind of an individual's self-perception. In transactional analysis there are three ego states, namely, parent, adult and child. 2.52 Emotion -- A type of behaviour exhibiting ones feelings.
employees 2.53 Employee Participation -- Involving in activities of organization and decision making process.

of seeking

2.31 Controlling -- A process of measuring and correcting the deviation from expected work performance and behaviour. 2.32 Cooperation -- Individual or group efforts, concerns and attitudes towards meeting organizational objectives. 2.33 Coordination -- It is process of integration of efforts of individuals to achieve organizational goals. 2.34 Core Values -- Basic values of an individual/ institution which are uncompromising in nature and do not change frequently. 2.35 Corporate Culture -- It is a sum total of values, beliefs, attitudes shared by people working in an organ ization. 2.36 Corporate Strategy -- A plan of action by an organization to meet the challenges keeping in mind its inherent strength and weaknesses and likely opportunities and threat to achieve corporate objectives. 2.37 Corporate Values -- The philosophical and ethical values, beliefs, attitudes and standards explicitly and implicitly shared and adhered to by the company personnel for achieving organizational objectives and mission. 2.38 Counseling -- Face-to-face facilitation process with a view to increasing self-awareness and deciding how to improve. The principles followed in counseling are rapport building, empathy, objectivity, listenin-g, 2

2.54 Employer-Employee Relations -- A harmonious relationship between the employer/ management and the workforce of the organization based on shared responsibility. 2.55 Employee Satisfaction -- A sense of contentment among the employees in relation to their expectation from the organization. 2.56 Employees Productivity -- Making one's best

IS 15198:2002 efforts in performing the assigned tasks. 2.57 Evaluation of Training -- Assessing the impact of training in relation to the defined objectives. 2.58 Executive Development -- A conscious and planned process of preparing executive for taking higher responsibilities. 2.59 Exit Interviews -- A method of obtaining feedback from an employee Ieaving the organization in order to improve organizational effectiveness. 2.60 Employee's Expectancy -- A level of employees desire from the job. 2.61 Expectation -- The degree of responsibility anticipated from others. 2.62 Experiential Method -- A learning process in training by sharing work experience. 2.63 Faculty -- In the context of HRD, this term refers to members involved in the process of imparting training. 2.64 Feedback -- Process of obtaining information about various systems in order to evaluate their operation and make corrections whenever necessary. 2.65 Fish Bowl Method -- A syndicate method in which a small group consisting of a person each drawn from other groups, consider problems and make decisions while the other participants of the groups act as observers. 2.66 Frustration -- A negative state of mind of an individual/group bringing dejection and alienation. 2.67 Goal -- A description of a condition which will exist as the desired result of an action plan. 2.68 Goal Setting -- A process of establishing goals to be achieved in a specified time with specified , resources. 2.69 Grapevine -- An informal channel communication based on hearsay information. of people having no predetermined roles and relations but sharing common object ives. 2.73 Group Discussion -- A process where number of individuals having common norms deliberate on some identified issues to bring about a common consensus. 2.74 Group Dynamics -- Forces operating in a group which influences its behaviour. 2.75 Guidance -- Method of improvement of an employee by giving direction. 2.76 Hierarchy -- Structure with different vertical levels having a clear line of authority. 2.77 Human Resource Accounting (HR Accounting) -- A means of accounting for people as an organizational resource and a measure of cost incurred towards recruitment, selection, training and development of human assets. 2.78 Human Resource Audit (HR Audit) -- A method of assessing the contribution of human resource to an organization and their weakness to achieve organization objective. 2.79 Human Resource Information System (HR Information System) -- A periodic communication of future plans, changes in HR policies/practices of the organization to all concerned. 2.80 Human Resource Utilization (HR Utilization) -- Effective deployment of human resource for achieving the organization's objectives. 2.81 Human Resource Development (HRD) -- A continuous process to upgrade and develop information, knowledge, skill, behaviour, performance and potential of employees. 2.82 Human Relations -- Understanding, trust and interaction between two or more people. 2.83 Human Excellence -- A sense of achievement or actual achievement of the employees to contribute the best of their potential to organization. 2.84 Human Value System -- A set of shared values promoting trust and understanding among employees. 2.85 Hygiene Factor -- Those working conditions and conditions of work which may lead a person to a stage of no dissatisfaction from a stage of dissatisfaction. 2.86 In-basket Game -- A form of training which attempts to simulate the working situation by setting the trainees realistic tasks with a view to develop capabilities. 2.87 Incident Method --A varjation of the case study 3

2.70 Grievance -- A complaint relating to work or environment. 2.71 Grievance Redressal -- A process of resolving the grievance (s) of an employee (s). 2.72 Group -- Collection of a number of individuals for achieving common objective by sharing common norms and depending on each other. a)
Formal group -- A group of people having

b)

structured relationship, well defined tasks and sharing common norms to achieve common objectives. Informal group -- A collection of two or more

IS 15198:2002 in which a small team or group analyze the case to reveal the critical facts. 2.88 Induction -- A process of interaction between a newly appointed employee and the organization with a view to facilitating adjustment in the organization.
2.89 Induction Plan -- Systematic exposure of a new entrant to various aspects of an organization. 2.90 Industrial Relations -- Relations between employer and employee and different sets of people in an industry.

2.104 Job Enrichment --A process of motivating employees by providing additional responsibi 1ities so as to make the job more rewarding and satisfying. 2.105 Job Evaluation -- A process of determining the relative economic worth of jobs. 2.106 Job Redesign -- A process of changing the job structure to achieve a new performance objective for overall improvement in the quality of work. 2.107 Job Rotation -- A process of planned transfer to a different job to broaden employees exposure and increase their knowledge and skill. 2.108 Job Satisfaction -- Contentment derived from the job and the work environment. 2.109 Job Stress -- Tension, anxiety relating to performance of a job. 2.110 Joint Decision Making -- A process of making collective decision with the employee on sharing equal issues and organizational responsibilities for the same. 2.111 Joint Management Council -- A participantive forum for joint decision making at the organizational level. 2.112 Leadership -- The process of influencing people's behaviour so that they strive willingly and enthusiastically for the attainment of organizational goals. The various styles of leadership are given below: a) Autocratic -- Style of leadership with a high degree of ego, self-assertion, high concern for task and low concern for people.
-- Participative style of leadership with equal concern for task as we] i as people. Laizer-faire -- Style of leadership with least interference with high concern for people and low concern for work. Democratic

2.91 Information Sharing -- A process of imparting and sharing information relating to plans, changes and other organization related activities with employees. 2.92 Innovation -- A process of finding out new and desirable methods, procedures and other aspects for the betterment of the organization. 2.93 Institution Building -- A long-term strategy for the development of an organization with active involvement and participation of all its members.
2.94 Integration

-- Harmonization of activities and synthesis of views, ideas and beliefs.

2.95 Inter-union Rivalry -- Conflicts and differences existing between two or more trade unions. 2.96 Interpersonal Competence -- Knowledge and skill to understand relations and successfully resolve disputes between individuals and group. 2.97 Interpersonal Relations -- Interaction between two or more people. 2.98 Interview Method -- A process of seeking information through face-to-face interaction. In the context of HRD, generally used for recruitment and promotion. 2.99 Intra-union Rivalry -- Conflicts and differences existing within the same trade union. 2.100 Job -- All the work carried out by a worker or a group of workers in the completion of their prescribed duties and grouped together under one title or definition. 2.101 Job Analysis -- The process of determining and recording pertinent information relating to the nature of a specific job. 2.102 Job Description -- A written statement covering the duties and responsibilities of a job. 2.103 Job Enlargement -- Providing variety of functions to be performed at the same horizontal level to reduce monotony and broaden the perspective. 4

b)

c)

2.113 Learning -- Enhancement of knowledge, skill and change in behaviour occurring as a resu It of training, insight, experience and practice.
NOTE --Cognetic learning is defined as learning through one's experience.

2.114 Learning Curve -- The curve showing relationship between training time and the performance of trainees. 2.115 Learning Environment -- A congenial atmosphere in an organization which facilitates acquisition of knowledge and germination of new ideas.

IS 15198:2002
2.116 Lecture

Method -- A training methodology giving theoretical and conceptual input of a subject by an individual speaking to the trainees. 2.117 Line Function -- Activities directly related to achievement of primary objectives of the organization. 2.118 Management by Objectives (MBO) -- A process of setting quantifiable time-bound targets and achieving these with willing cooperation of employees. 2.119 Management Development -- Planned efforts to improve managerial abilities and effectiveness. 2.120 Management Education -- Formal education in basic principles and practices of management.

b) Intrinsic motivation -- Motivation created through internal rewards. 2.131 Need -- An urge to acquire and use any goods or services. 2.132 Negative Reinforcement -- It is an external and undesirable behavioral motivation which an individual gets from the organizational environment. 2.133 Negotiation -- A process of joint discussion between union and management or employees and employer to share the fruits of the organization and for achieving industrial harmony. 2.134 Occupational Health Programme -- Preventive medical measures for keeping employees in sound health. 2.135 Organization -- A collective human endeavour to accomplish common objectives through defined roles and relationships.
Formal organization -- A structured organization with established chain of command and roles assigned to individuals. b) Informal organization -- An unstructured organization without established chain of command and assigned roles or where norms are decided by the members themselves. -- An organ izat iona I c) Flat organization structure with least possibl~ number of hierarchy.

2.121 Management Game -- A training method in which participants group into teams, consider a sequence of problems in the form of simulation and make decisions. 2.122 Management Training -- Systematic development of knowledge, skill and attitude, with a view to enhancing performance and potential of executives. 2.123 Managerial Grid -- A model representing different styles of leadership indicating task and people orientation.
NOTE -- This is sometimes also referred to as leadership grid.

a)

2.124 Manpower Planning -- To forecast and assess, both qualitative and quantitative, needs of human resource in an organization. 2.125 Mentoring -- A process of inducting a new employee in the work culture of an organization under the supervision and guidance of an experienced senior. 2.126 Method Improvement -- A scientific analysis of existing work procedure with a view to find out the most economical and effective way of doing a work. 2.127 Method Study -- A systematic recording and critical examination of existing and proposed ways of doing work, as a means of developing and applying easier and more effective methods and reducing costs. 2,128 Mission -- A broad policy statement for fulfillment of the declared objectives of the organization. 2.129 Morale -- State of mind of employees reflecting level of enthusiasm, satisfaction and willingness to work together. 2.130 Motivation -- An urge/drive of an individual to put one's best to accomplish organizational goals and objectives. a)
Extrinsic motivation -- Motivation created through external rewards.

d)

Matrix organization

-- An organizationa I structure wherein a set of individuals is accountable to two or more people.

2.136 Organization Hierarchy -- [t is a structured vertical relationship between people having assigned role and working for achievement of organizational goals. 2.137 Organizational Climate -- A sum total of physical and psychological environment of an organization. 2.138 Organizational Development -- It is a systematic, integrated and planned intervention to improve organizational effectiveness. 2.139 Organizational Structure -- An organ izat ion clarifying the relationship among the people, their role and organizational goals. 2.140 Participation -- Involvement of employees in organizational activities. 2.141 Participative Forum -- Formal and informal forums providing opportunities for interaction and involvement of employees. 5

[S 15198:2002
2.142 Participative Management -- A style of management based on involvement of employees in various activities of the organization.

objective activity to find out the extent to which requirements related to agreed productivity norms have been met. 2.158 Productivity Bargaining -- A process of negotiation and joint discussion between authorized representative of management and trade union related to productivity norms. 2.159 Programmed Learning -- Trainee teaching himself through a prepared text in stages -- mastering one step and then going to other leading to a goal. 2.160 Promotion -- A process of placing an employee on a job carrying higher duties and responsibilities. 2.161 Psychoanalysis -- Psychotherapeutic technique based on bringing out of unconscious meaning of words, actions and mental images. 2.162 Psychometric Test -- Psychological tests designed using mathematics, for measurement and applications in psychology particularly mental testing. 2.163 Punishment employee. -- Punitive action against an

2.143 Perception -- An individual's sensing, understanding, learning and behaving in a given situation. 2.144 Performance Appraisal -- A systematic evaluation of employees with respect to performance on the job and his potential for development. 2.145 Performance Counseling -- A process of helping an employee by a senior in analyzing performance and other job behaviour in order to increase effectiveness in the job.
2.146 Personality -- Unique combination of physical,

human and social qualities of an individual.
2.147 Placement -- It is a process of assigning a position to an individual in an organization according to his knowledge and skill, with a view to put the right person on the right job.

2.148 Positive Reinforcement -- It is an external and desirable motivation which an individual gets from the organizational environment. 2.149 Potential -- Capability of an individual or a group to perform a given job.
2.150 Potential Appraisal -- A process of assessment

2.164 Quality Circle -- [t is a small group of people doing similar work, meeting voluntarily and regularly, to identify and analyze work-related quality and their problems, recommending/implementing their solutions themselves.
2.165 Quality of Work Life -- Itrelates to factors

of the capability and capacity of an employee with a view to assigning higher responsibilities.
NOTE -- Potential appraisal is a part of performance appraisal.

contributing to job satisfaction, well being, welfare, productivity and delight of an employee. 2.166 Questionnaire Method -- It is a technique of collecting information with the help of a structured questionnaire seeking written responses from the respondents.
2.167 Reactive Approach -- Action taken to deal with a situation subsequent to the occurrence of the event.

2.151 Potential Development -- A process of imparting knowledge, enhancing skill, changing attitude with a view to assigning higher responsibilities and duties.
2.152 Power -- Ability to influence others' opinion and behaviour arising out of knowledge, competence or position.

2.153 Proactive Approach -- An anticipatory plan of action for the situations likely to arise in future. 2.154 Problem Solving -- A process of facilitating managers to diagnose issues and arrive at solution thereof. -- Productivity is the measure of efficiency of utilization of resources. It can be quantitatively expressed as the ratio of the output in terms of the goods/services and the input in terms of the resources used. 2.156 Productivity Agreement -- A mutually arrived consensus through collective bargaining relating to productivity norms in an organization. 2.157 Productivity Audits -- Systematic and
6 2.155 Productivity

2.168 Recognized Union -- A union which has been granted formal recognition by the management. 2.169 Recruitment -- It is a positive process of encouraging prospective candidate to apply for a job. 2.170 Redundancy -- A superfluous resource; in the context of HRD, it refers to surplus manpower. 2.171 Refreezing -- A term used in Kurt `Lewin's learning model, refers to the process of consolidation and stabilization of the new knowledge, skills and behaviour styles acquired during a training programme. 2.172 Registered Union -- A union registered under
Trade Union Act, 1926.

IS 15198:2002

-- Refers to conditions which may be introduced into learning situations to increase the probability that a given response will reappear in the same situation. 2.174 Relaxation -- A psychotherapeutic proces"sof getting rid of stress and strain. 2.175 Responsibility -- An obligation to discharge one's assigned task in the best possible manner. 2.176 Retirement -- Cessation of active service on reaching the age of superannuation. 2.177 Retrenchment -- `Retrenchment' means that the business itself is being continued but that a portion of the.staff or the labour force is discharged as surplus 2.178 Reward -- Appreciation for good work. 2.179 Right Sizing -- A planned optimization of manpower. process of

2.173 Reinforcement

specially created environment which reproduces important conditions of the working situation, in which formal instruction can be followed and an opportunity given for practicing and applying the skills learnt in workshop or classroom. 2.191 Skill -- Operational competence to perforlm a job. 2.192 Small Group Activity -- A group with a high degree of cohesiveness, understanding and clarity of roles with a view to improve or enhance the ability to achieve assigned task. 2.193 Staff Organization -- Activities facilitating/ supporting the line function. 2.194 Succession Plan -- System of replacement at higher managerial levels. 2.195 Suggestion Scheme -- A suggestion scheme is a management supported scheme through which the employees can offer their ideas. voluntarily for rectification of deficiency, improvements leading to better method of work andfor financial savings. 2.196 Supervision -- A process of over viewing the performance or conduct of a subordinate. 2.197 Supportive Behaviour -- A positive behaviour to encourage an employee to perform and conduct better with a view to learn and improve. 2.198 SWOT Analysis -- Procedure for analyzing strength, weakness, opportunities and threats of an organization. 2.199 Syndicate Method -- A small group of trainees formed to consider and to report on a question, problem or exercise set as a part of the training course. The object of the exercise is t,opromote learning by intraand inter-group analysis and discussion. 2.200 Transactional Analysis (TA) -- Itis a method of examining communication between two or more persons in light of their ego states (see also 2.51). 2.201 Target -- An identified goal to be achieved by an individual or a group of individuals in a given time frame. 2.202 Task -- A set of jobs which an employee performs in any organization. 2.203 Team -- A group with a high degree of cohesiveness, understanding and clarity of roles working together to achieve assigned goals. 2.204 Team Building -- A process of bringing cohesiveness, understanding and clarity of roles and allowing people to work together to achieve assigned goals. 7

2.180 Role -- A set of expectations of how the occupant of a particular position in an organization ought to behave. 2.181 Role Analysis -- [t is a process of analyzing the role to describe and list out various functions and activities in a job. 2.182 Role Efficacy -- It is the effectiveness of an individual occupying a particular role in an organization. 2.183 Role Play -- It is a training technique in which trainees assume an identity other than their own to deal with real or hypothetical situations. 2.184 Selection -- A process of choosing the right person for the job. 2.185 Self-actualization -- A stage of highest motivation wherein one achieves the highest level of one's potential. 2.186 Self-development -- A process of growth and learning for an individual by personal efforts. 2.187 Self-management -- A stage in management where one understands one's responsibilities and conducts accordingly. 2.188 Sensitivity Training/Sensitivity Labi'T Group -- Unstructured group training with no agenda or stated goals. It aims at developing sensitivity within people towards thoughts, feelings and behaviour of other persons and through this, improve upon one's human interactions. 2.189 Shop Council -- A participative forum to discuss and solve problems and issues at the shop level. 2.190 Simulation
-- The training provided

in a

IS 15198:2002 2.205 Team Work -- A concerted group effort for achieving organizational goal collectively utilizing individual's knowledge, skill, competence and potential. 2.206 Training Programme -- It is a structured set of sessions/modules airned at achieving desired Iearnihg. 2.207 Training Programme Objectives -- A set of measurable learning outputs, related to the training programme. 2.208 Training Program me Session -- Specific time schedule relating to programme content(s).
Programme Module -- An 2.209 Training independent unit(s) of training programme sessions aimed at achieving training programme objectives.

2.220 Training Plan -- Identification and projection of the employees' needs in terms of upgrading their knowledge, developing skill and modifying attitude as per the requirements of the organization. 2.221 Understudy -- It is a process of assigning responsibility to an individual for a specific role or project, under the guidance of a supervisor, with a view to grooming him for higher position. 2.222 Union -- The Trade Unions Act, 1926 (India) defines trade union as follows: `Trade Union' means any combination, whether temporary or permanent formed primarily for the pu~ose of regulating the relations between workmen and employers or between workmen and workmen, or between employers and employers or for imposing restrictive conditions on the conduct of any trade or business and includes any federation of two or more trade unions. 2.223 Values conviction.
-- Moral

2.210 Training Programme Content -- A set of topics and issues related to a training programme. 2.211 Training Program me Design -- A planned training programme package containing aims, learning objectives, sequencing of contents and methodology.
Programme Evaluation -- A 2.212 Training systematic process of assessing the impact of programme objectives which is carried out during the training programme or later on. Programme Logistics -- A 2.213 Training systematic way of providing intlastructure and support services for conducting training programme.

philosophy

based on

2.224 Vision -- Ability to foresee and plan according to future needs.
-- It is 2.225 Wage and Salary Administration management of reward and compensation policy of an organization.

2.226 Wage Negotiation -- A process of discussion between the authorized representative of employees and management for wage and salary revision. 2.227 Work Culture -- A set of values and norms shared among employees in an organization. 2.228 Work Ethics -- A set of norms expected to be followed by employees in an organization. 2.229 Work Ethos -- A set of norms shared by people at their work places. 2.230 Work Life -- Span of employ$e's working time throughout his career. 2.231 Work Measurement -- Application of techniques designed to establish the time for a qualified worker to carry out specified job at a defined level of performance. 2.232 Work Stations -- A team of employees entrusted with the task of managing given work place. 2.233 Work Study -- A generic term for those techniques particularly method study and work measurement, which are used in the examination of human work in all its contexts, and which lead systematically to the investigation of all the factors which affect the efficiency and economy of the 8

2.214 Training Programme Sequencing -- Systematic arrangement of training programme sessions in relation to training programme objectives.
2.215 Training Program me Methodology -- The way of imparting learning inputs. Some of the methods are lectures, discussions, case study, role play, in-basket game, etc.

2.216 Transcendental Meditation (TM) -- It is a technique of understanding and a process of self development by reaching out to one's subconscious. 2.217 Total Quality Management (TQM) -- Management approach of an organization, centered on quality, based on the participation of all its members and aiming at improving performance in all aspects of organization. 2.218 Training Budget -- Allocation of funds for training activities.
Needs -- Assessed training 2.219 Training requirements for better performance and development of potentials.

IS 15198:2002

situation being improvement.

reviewed

in order

to effect

-- A sum total of 2.235 Working Environment working conditions (including physical faci lit ies), interpersonal relations and quality of supervision at

2.234 Worker's Participation -- Involvement of workers in the decision making process of the organization.

the place of work.

1s 15198:2002

ANNEX A (Forewor@)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4
Organization Representative(s)

In personal capacity (3/48, Sector D, Pocket 3, Vasant Kunj,
New Delhi 110070)

(Chairmen) SHRI T. K. GUFTA SmuG. S. DEEP
SHRI BABOLAL TODI (Alternate) SHJU R.AnvCHUGH
SHJUAVIKMITRA

All India Management Association. Chandigarh All India Manufacturers' Organization, Mumbai Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi Bharat Heavy Eiectricals Limited, New Delhi Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee Deputy Directorate General of Management Studies, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi G. Management Services Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhl Indian Statistical Institute, New Delhi Institute of Secretariat Training & Management, New Delht Institute of Technology Managemetr~ Mussorie Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon

SHJUA. ROY (Alternate)
SHRJD. K. SHARMA

Smu P. K. JINOAL (Alferna[e) SHRIG. C. SOFAT (Alternate) SHIU AJAY SINGH SHRiG. C. JIT BRIGM. L. GARG (Alternate) WINGCDRA. K. DSUNGRA
Ssnu V. K. JAIN (Alternate) SHRIM. K. BHARDWAJ

PROF R. K. SACHDEVA DR J. M. MAHAJAN (Alternate) SHRIA. D. GUF-TA V. C. AGRAWAL SHRJ
(Alternate) SHJU A. K. RAUMAR

PROF ARVrND SSTH (Alternate) PROF.S. S. HANDA
SW K. P. THOMAS (Alternate) Smu S. S. YADAV

BRJGR. C. Suru (Ahernate) SHRJ V. K. DEVGAN
SHRJR. B. MADHEKAR (Alternate 1) SHJU S. MITTAL Mu S. BOSE(Alternate 11)

DRDO, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi Ministry of Railways, Vadodara National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai National Productivity Council, New Delhi Naval Headquarters, New Delhi Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata Peico Electronics & Electrical Ltd, (Philips), Mumbai Steel Authority of India Limited, New Delhi

SINGH SHRIRAJWANT
(Alternate) SHJU NARSSH KUMAR SW

K. M. THOMAS (Alternate) SHRJS. C. AGNIHOTRI

DRTHOMAS MATHEW SHJU A. K. VOHRA &OR SHSEL KANT CMOR P. L. BAIAJ(Ahernafe)
Smu A. K. SINGH (Ahernare) SHRJ N. M. SESHADRJ

SHJU P. s. RAo
(Alternate) SHJU E. R. BATLIWALA SHRJT. TIWARJ (Alternate) SHJU R. P. SINGH

(Continued

on page I 1)

10

IS 15198:2002
(Cmrfinuedfrorn page 1O) Organization Representative(s)

The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India, New Delhi BIS Directorate General

%uukf. K. ANAtw (Alternate) Ssnu D. C. BAJAJ Director& Head (MSD) Ssrru P. K. GAMRHIR, [Representing Director General (Ex-oficio)]

Member Secretmy GOSWAMJ Smu SANJAY

Deputy Dkector (MSD) BIS

Panel on Glossary of Terms in Human Resource Development, MSD 4/P- 11
[n personal capacity (80/67, Malviya Nagar, New Delhi 11O(.J17) .go4i. com India (Pvt) Ltd, New Delhi Indian Farmers Fertilizer Co-operative Limited (IFFCO), New Delhi in personal capacity (37, Sector 37, Arun Vihar, Noida 20 J303) Indian Airlines Limited, New Delhi Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi Indian Society of Training and Development, New Delhi Institute of Management Technology, New Delhi National Productivity Council, New Delhi DR O. P. MINOCHA (Convener) SIUUMA~ PJUIHA CHATlElrL5E SsuuD. BHAmACHARYA MAJ-GEN (Rsm) (DR) SI.IWJNDAR KUMAR !+rraKAPIL KAOL DRLm MOJWOPAOHVAY DR SUNJL ABROL DRVESNA SETHJ Smu O. P. GUPTA

11

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright B]S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and siztx., type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications.), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MSD 4 (83).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375,323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841 { 3378499,3378561 { 3378626, 3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATINA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2

