LS 72448

(Part

8 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

BASICTESTINGPROCEDURESAND MEASURINGMETHODSFOR ELECTROMECHANICALCOMPONENTS FORELECTRONICEQUIPMENT
PART 8 CONNECTOR
TESTS (MECHANICAL ) AND MECHANICAL CONTACTS AND TERMINATIONS TESTS ON

UDC

621-38.038+621*31 : 620.17

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI 110002 March 1992 Price Group 4

Electromechanical

Components

for Electronic

Equipment

Sectional Committee,

LT 07

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 8 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, finalized by the Electromechanical Components for Electronic Equipment Sectional been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. after the draft Committee had ( Mecha-

The object of this standard ( Part 8 ) is to lay down uniform methods of tests for connection nical ) and mechanical tests on contacts and terminations of Electromechanical Components.

This standard ( Part 8) is based, without any technical change, on IEC Pub 512-8 ( 1977) `Electromechanical components for electronic equipment, Basic testing procedures and measuring methods : Part 8 Connector tests ( Mechanical ) and Mechanical tests on contacts and terminations' and TEC Pub 512-8B ( 1980 ), Second supplement to publication 512-8 ( 1977 ), issued by International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). In reporting the result of a test or-analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calctilated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

Is 12448 ( Part 8 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

BASICTESTINGPROCEDURESAND MEASURINGMETHODSFOR ELBCTROMECHANICALCOMPONENTS' FORBLECTRONICEQUIPMENT
PART 8 CONNECTOR TESTS (MECHANICAL) AND MECHANICAL CONTACTS AND TERMINATIONS TESTS ON

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 8 ) covers test methods for connector test ( mechanical ) and mechanical test on contacts and terminations. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed necessary adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. 9000 Title

3.2 Test Method Select 20 percent of the contacts ( but not less than six contacts ) at random for the test. At least one contact shall be near the periphery and one near the centre of the component. For components having six contacts or less, all contacts shall be used for the test. Specified axial force shall be applied to the contact in both directions consecutively. This force shall be reached by gradual increase at a rate not to exceed 10 N s until the specified value is reached. This maximum value shall be maintained during 10 s. After the contact is seated on the retention member, the contact movement shall be measured. The allowable axial displacement of the contacts in relation to the insert, while the force is applied and after the force is removed, shall be stated in the detail specification. 3.3 Final Measuremen~ts The specimen shall be visually examined in accordance with IS 12448 ( Part 2/Set 1) : 1988. 3.4 Requirements The amount of axial displacement of the contacts in relation to the insert, while the force is applied and after the force is removed, shall not exceed the amount specified and there shall be no damage to or loosening of parts such as. would impair the operation of the component. 3.5 Details te be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified:

below

are

Basic environmental testing ( Part 19/Set 1 ) : procedures for electronic and electrical items : Part 19 1986 Test U : Robustness of terminations and integral mounting devices, Section 1 Test Ual : Tensile (jimt revision ). 12448 ( Part 2/Set 1988 1) : Basic testing procedures and measuring methods for electromechanical components for electronic equipment : Part 2 General examination, electrical continuity and contact resistance tests insulation tests and voltage stress tests, Section 1 General requirements

3 TEST 15a : CONTACT RETENTION IN INSERT 3.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard method to assess the ability of the contact retaining system to withstand the axial mechanical stresses likely to be encountered during normal usage. 3.1 Preparation of the Specimen The specimen shall consist of a component with all contacts installed according to the detail specification. Loosen or remove any accessories which are not essential for the contact retaining system.

a) Preparation

of the specimen; Mounting of the specimen; b) Force to be applied and its application cl point; d) Allowable displacement; and Any deviation from the standard test method.

e>

1

lS1244s(Part8):1992 4 TEST 15b : INSERT RETENTION IN HOUSING ( AXIAL ) 4.0 General The object of this test'is to detail a standard method to assess the ability of the insert retaining system to withstand the axial mechanical stresses likely to be encountered during normal usage. 4.1 Preparation of the Specimen The specimen shall be prepared and mounted in accordance with the detail specification. Cable fittings and accessories shall not be fitted. 4.2 Test Method An axial force or test pressure as specified shall be applied to the insert in both directions consecutively. The force or pressure shall be increased steadily at a rate of approximately 50 N/s or 5 kPa!s, respectiveiy up to the specified value and held at that value for 1 min. Where air pressure is used, there is a danger of contacts and/or inserts being ejected at high velocity.
W,4RNING -

5.2 Test Method With the housing of the component securely clamped, a specified torque shall be applied to the insert by a suitable test fixture. The torque shall be increased steadily at a rate of approximately 0.5 Nm/s up to the specified value and held for 1 min. 5.3 Final Measurements There shall be no movement of the insert in relation to the housing as to cause permanent displacement of the insert that would impair the operation of the component. 5.4 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified:

a) Preparation of the specimen; b) Mounting of the specimen;
of the test fixture; Torque to be applied and applicable 4 direction; Requirements for final measurements; and f) Any deviation from the standard test method. Detail c>

4.3 Final Measurements The specimen shall be subjected to visual examination in accordance with IS 12448 ) Part 2/ Set 1 ) :1988. 4.4 Requirements There shall be no damage to or displacement of the insert from its original position in the housing such as would impair the operation of the component. 4.5 Details to be Specified `When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified : a) Preparation of the specimen; b) Mounting of the specimen; c) Force or pressure to be applied, method and point(s) of application; and d) Any deviation from the standard test method. 5 TEST 15c : INSERT RETENTION IN HOUSING ( TORSIONAL ) 5.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard method to assess the ability of the insert retaining system to withstand the torsional stresses likely to be encountered during normal usage. 5.1 Preparation of the Specimen The specimen shall be prepared and mounted in accordance with the detail specification. Cable fittings and accessories shall not be mounted on the component. 2

e>

6 TEST 15d : CONTACT INSERTION, RELEASE AND EXTRACTION FORCE 6.0 General The object of this test is to detaiLa standard method to determine the forces required to insert contacts into and extract contacts from their normal position in a component. 6.1 Preparation of the Specimen The specimen shall consist of a component and associated contacts. All contacts shall be wired with cable/wire as specified in the detail specification. All contacts shall be installed, except those to be used for the test. Cable fittings and accessories shall not be mounted on the component, Where applicable, retention devices shaI1 be indexed to the release position. The component shall be mounted securely in a suitable clamping device and in a position suitble for performing the measurements. 6.2 Test Equipment The test equipment appropriate a> shall consist of: insertion and extraction tools; 9 a suitable device for holding the components; and a suitable device for measuring the c) forces.

lS12448(Part8):1932 6.3 Test Method Select 20 percent of the contacts ( but not less than six contacts ) at random for the test. For components having six contacts or less, all contacts shall be used for the test. At least one contact shall be near the periphery and one near the centre of the component. 6.3.1 Insertion Force The insertion tool, with the contact, shall be inserted in the approved manner, maintaining axial alignment and applying sufficient force to insert the contact into its normal position. This insertion force shall not exceed the value stated in the detail specification. Ascertain that the contacts ted and locked. The release and extraction sured by suitable means. are correctly inser10 TEST 16a : PROBE DAMAGE 10.0 General The object of t~his test is to verify that the elastic system ensuring the contact will not be subject to deterioration in case of insertion of a test probe. 10.1 Test Conditions forces shall be meaThe female contact shall be embedded in the appropriate~connector insert and locked to prevent its rotation in the insert during the test. 10.2 Requirements for the Test Pin The test pin shall conform requirements: to the following 8 -TEST 15f : COUPLED STRENGTH TEST ( FOR PUSH-PULL CONNECTORS ) Under consideration. 9 TEST 15g : INSERTION ALIGNMENT ( EDGE-SOCKET CONNECTORS ) Under consideration..

6.3.2 Release and Extraction Force

The extraction too shall be engaged in the normal manner for the purpose of releasing the contact, while maintaining axial alignment. The releasing shall not exceed that stated in the detail specification. While maintaining axial alignment, apply sufficient force to the wire and/or tool to extract/ eject the contact from the component. The extraction force shall not exceed the value stated in the detail specification. 6.4 Final Measurements The specimen shall be subjected to visual examination in accordance with IS 12448 ( Part 2/ Set 1 ) : 1988. 6.5 Requirements There shall be no damage normal operation. 6.6 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specifycation, the following details shall be specified: that would impair

a) The diameter

shall be equal to the maximum diameter of the actual pin of the connector increased by O-13 mm ( 0.005 iq ) for actual pin diameters greater than 0.89 mm ( O-035 in ) and by 0.076 mm ( 0,003 in ) for actual pin diameters less than O-89 mm ( 0.035 in ); steel and

b) The pin shall have a spherical end; and
cl It shall be made of hardened
shall have a polished surface. 10.3 Test Method A test pin, of dimensions specified in 10.2, is inserted into the female contact to a depth OE 3/4 A ( see Fig. 1 ). The axis of the female. contact is kept horizontal during the test. The test pin is held by a test device enabling a cons-tant bending moment to be applied to the female contact. With this device free and unsupported the connector is rotated slowly through 360" about its longitudinal axis in such ~a way that the force is applied uniformly over the entire internal surface of the female contact with the extremity of the test pin. This operation is repeated with the test pin inserted to a depth l/2 A and then to a depth l/4 A (seeFig. 1 ). 10.4 Test Requirements CONTACT After this test, the female contact shall fulfil the gauge retention force requirements specified in Test 16e ( see 14 ).
3

4 Preparation,
specimen;

mounting insertion

and wiring of the and release the extraction and extracstandard test

b) Appropriate
tools; Maximum c>

insertion, tion forces; and from conditions.

4 Any deviation

7 TEST 15e : GROUNDING

RING HOLDING FORCE Under consideration.

IS 12448 ( Part 8 ) : 1992

1 NSERT

INWLATING

MATERIAL

TEST PIN SOCKET CONTACT

I I I I I I I

1 =k

I

A A

5

I I

0

NOTES 1 A= Depth from front end of female contact insert face to bottom of female contact bore excluding curvature at the bottom of the bore. 2 Spacers of suitable length and profile may be fitted over the test pin to achieve the specified depth.
FIG. 1 CROSS SECTIONOF TEST PIN INSERTION

10.5 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: a) Dimension A : Minimum depth of female contact bore, measured from the hard face of the insert; b) Shape and dimension of the test pin; 4 Value of the moment to be applied; and 4 Any deviation from the standard test method. 11 TEST 16b : RESTRICTED 11.0 General The object of this test is to verify that an oversize pin cannot be inserted into the female contact. 11.1 Test Method A test gauge of specified dimensions applied. shall be ENTRY

11.2 Test Requirements The test gauge shall not enter the contact. 11.3 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: a) Details of the test gauge;
. b) Force to be-applied; and

c) Any deviation method.

from

the

standard

test

12 TEST 16c : CONTACT STRENGTH Under consideration. 13 TEST 16d : TENSILE STRENGTH ( CRIMPED TERMINATION ) Under consideration. 4

IS 12448 ( Part 8 ).: 1992 -14 TEST 16e : GAUGE RETENTION FORCE w(RESILIENT CONTACTS ) -14.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard method to measure the holding capability of resilient contacts by means of gauges. 14.1 General Requirements The size and weight of the gauges to be used shall be specified by the detail specification. 14.2 Test Methods 14.2.1 Method A, Using Individual-Contact Gauges a) Female contacts Each contact maximum size three times, minimum size applied. to be tested shall have a gauge engaged and separated after which the appropriate retention-force gauge shall be to withstand the mechanical stresses likely to be applied during normal assembly operations. 15.1 Test Method The terminations shall be tested in accordance with Test U of IS 9000 (Part 19jSec 1 to 5 > : 1986. 15.2 Final Measurements Visual ~examination 2/Set 1 ) : 1988 ] 15.3 Requirements There shall be no damage which would impair normal operation. 15.4 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: a) Applicable tests; b) Method of preparation and mounting of the specimen; c) Test conditions, such as values of the forces, number of bends, etc; and d) Any deviation from the standard test method. 16 TEST 16g : MEASUREMENT OF CONTACT DEFORMATION AFTER CRIMPING 16.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard method to assess the ability of contacts to withstand the crimping operation without deformation beyond specified limits. 16.1 Preparation of the Specimen The sample shall consist of twenty ( 20 ) specimens ( contact-wire assemblies ) for each specified barrel size. Ten ( 10 ) specimens shall be fitted with the largest wires and ten ( 10 ) with the smallest wires specified. The lead length shall be not less than 100 mm ( 4 in ). Care shall be taken to use the specified crimping tool. The following details shall be recorded for each specimen: - tool part number, - setting or die part number, - positioner locator part number ( if used ). 16.2 Test Method The contact shall be held in a collet shaded area shown in Fig. 1, that the can be rotated around the longitudinal permit measurements at the specified in the contact axis to points.
r Test la of IS 12448 ( Part

L

b) Male contacts Each contact to be tested shall have a minimum size gauge engaged and separated three times, after which the appropriate maximum size retention-force gauge shall be applied. 14.2.2 Method 3, Using Multiple-Contact Gauges a) The component sizing gauge shall be engaged and separated three times. b) The individual-contact retention-force gauge shall then be applied to each of the test contacts. 14.3 Test Requirements `The contacts tested shall support the weight of the contact retention-force gauge in a vertically .downward direction. 14.4 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: a) method of mounting and preparation of the specimen and whether the contacts are to be wired, etc; b) the number of sizings, if other than three; c) the number of contacts to be tested; d) details of the gauges and test jigs to be used; and e) any deviation from the standard test method. -15 TEST 16f : ROBUSTNESS OF `TERMINATION 15.0 General .The object of this test is to detail a standard method to assess the ability of the terminations
5

Is 12448( Part 8): 1992
DIAL INOlCAtOR PROBE PLACE0

MALE CONTACT DIAMETER X = 2 X Male contact

HOLOING

AREA

Y = Approximately
indentation.

diameter, and half the distance between the end of the crimp

barrel

and

the near

edge

of the crimp

FIG. 2 CONTACTHOLDING AREA FOR DEFORMATIONMUSURBMBNT
/ DIAL INOICATOR

S'JPLR

PREClSlON

COLLET

FIG. 3 TYPICAL TEST ARRANGEMENT FOR DEFORMATION MEASUREMENT
A suitable test arrangement is shown in Fig. 2. The precision of the collet shall be such that the run-out of a steel gauge pin of approximately l-6 mm ( 0.063 in ) diameter measured 13 mm ( 0.512 in ) from the face of the collet shall not exceed O-013 mm ( O*OOO 5 in ).

16.4 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specifi-cation, the following details shall be specified: a) Wire type and size and crimping tool to be used, b) Maximum value of total indicated readings of deformation, and c) Any deviation from the standard test method. 17 TEST 16h : INSULATION GRIP EFFECTIVENESS ( CRIMPED CONNECTIONS ) 17.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard' met,hod to assess the ability of an insulation 6

Indicator readings shall be taken at the points specified in Fig. 1, before and after crimping. The total indicated reading ( TIR ) is the total excursion of the indicator when the contact is rotated through 360". Half of this measure is the deformation. 16.3 Requirements The total indicated reading within the specified limits. ( TIR ) shall be

IS 12448 ( Part 8 ) : 1992 grip to hold the insulation of a cable/wire specified conditions. 17.1 Preparation of the Specimen under cable/wire so that any damage to the conductor can be observed. This may be done by stripping the insulation from the far end of the cable/ wire and applying a tensile load between the bared conductor and the crimped terminal. 17.4 Requirements The specimen shall withstand the specified number of cycles of the winding test. The insulation shall not be damaged in a manner that could impair its function and should remain in position in the insulation grip. When the conductor damage examination is carried out, the conductor of the cable/wire shall not show any damage in the zone of the insulation grip. 17.5 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: a) Preparation of the specimen; b) Cable/wire, type, size to be used; c) Type of die setting of crimping tool; d) Tension to be applied; e) Number of cycles of the winding test to be performed; f) Visual examination by magnification, if required; g) Conductor damage examination, if required; and h) Any deviation from the standard test method. 18 TEST 16i : CONTACT PRESSURE Under consideration. I9 TEST 16j : MINIMUM Under consideration. NORMAL FORCE

`The specimen shall consist of a crimp contact or a terminal end and the specified cable/wire and shall be prepared in accordance with the detail specification. The unstripped cable/wire of a length not less than 100 mm shall be fitted to the insulation grip. The crimp contact/terminal end shall then be crimped in the normal manner but the cable wire shall be held by the insulation grip only. 17.2 Test Method 17.2.1 Winding Test A mandrel having a diameter equal to that specified for the flexibility test of the relevant wire shall be used. `The crimp contact/terminal shall be held tangential to the mandrel. The wire shall be wound around the mandrel for -at least one turn and shall be in contact with the mandrel where it enters the insulation grip. Sufficient tension, as specified in the detail specification, should be applied to the wire to keep it in contact with the mandrel. A test made by first winding the wire in one direction, as shown in Fig. 4a and then in the opposite direction. as shown in Fig. 4b shall be considered to be one cycle. The total number of cycles shall be .as specified by the detail specification. 17.3 Final Measurements 17.3.1 The ++pecimen shall be visually examined using magnification, unless otherwise specified -by the detail specification. 17.3.2 When specified by the detail specification, the conductor shall be withdrawn from the

7

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is -governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, tosting and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use oft he Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau ~of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards

B1S is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, lY86 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goodo and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BlS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the courseof implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

Lndian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No LT 07 ( 1094 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Dare of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manan Bhavan, 9 Bhadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western
: SC0 445-446, Sector

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone ( 331 01 13 75 31 87 86 62

35-C, CHANDIGARH MADRAS

160036 600113

53 38 43 235 02 16 632 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, : Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

( East )

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHURANESHW AR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDFRABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printin@ Press. Khuria. India

