NAT ATH IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


wetter aver uarert ent siae enu en 
ferm * A * * — ta ife 
HTT 2 arated Us Valera hehe 
(FAT FRAT ) 


Concrete Structures for Retaining 
Aqueous Liquids — Code of Practice 


Part 2 Plain and Reinforced Concrete 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 23.020.10; 91.010.30; 91.080.40 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4$ freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 8 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


The design and construction methods in reinforced concrete and pre-stressed concrete structures for retaining 
aqueous liquids are influenced by the prevailing construction practices, the physical properties of the materials 
and the climatic condition. To lay down uniform requirements of structures for the retaining liquids giving due 
consideration to the above mentioned factors, this standard has been published in four parts. The other parts in 
the series are: 


Part 1 General requirements 
Part 3 Prestressed concrete 
Part 4 Design tables 


This standard was first published in 1965 and subsequently revised in 2009. The second revision has been 
brought out with a view to keeping abreast with the rapid development in the field of construction technology 
and concrete design and also to bring further modifications in the light of experience gained while applying the 
earlier version of this standard. In this revision, the title of the standard has been modified from ‘Concrete 
structures for storage of liquids — Code of practice: Part 2 Reinforced concrete structures’ to ‘Concrete structures 
for retaining aqueous liquids — Code of practice: Part 2 Plain and reinforced concrete” for better representation 
of the contents of the revised standard. 


While, the common methods of design and construction have been covered in this standard, for design of structures 
of special forms or in unusual circumstances, special literature may be referred to or special systems of design 
and construction may be permitted on production of satisfactory evidence regarding their adequacy and safety by 
analysis or test or by both. 


In this standard it has been assumed that the design of liquid retaining structures, whether of plain, reinforced or 
pre-stressed concrete is entrusted to a qualified engineer and that the execution of the work is carried out under the 
direction of a qualified and experienced engineer. 


The concrete used in liquid retaining structures should have low permeability. This is important not only for 
its direct effect on leakage but also because it is one of the main factors influencing durability, resistance to 
leaching, chemical attack, erosion, abrasion, frost damage; and the protection from corrosion of embedded steel. 
The standard, therefore, incorporates provisions in design and construction to take care of this aspect. 


The requirements of IS 456 : 2000 ‘Plain and reinforced concrete — Code of practice (fourth revision)’ and 
IS 1343 : 2012 ‘Prestressed concrete — Code of practice (second revision)’, in so far as they apply, shall be deemed 
to form part of this standard except where otherwise laid down in this standard. For long term performance of 
the structure, use of dense, nearly impermeable and durable concrete, adequate concrete cover without macro 
defects in cover concrete, proper detailing practices, control of cracking, effective quality assurance measures in 
line with IS 456 and good construction practices particularly in relation to construction joints should be ensured. 
Designer should take appropriate measures to the need for chemical resistance while dealing with liquids or 
sewage/effluents. 


Following are the significant modifications incorporated in this revision: 


a) Scope and provisions of the standard have been updated to reflect the applicability of the standard to 
concrete structures retaining all aqueous liquids. 


b) Design recommendations are generally applicable to the retaining of aqueous liquids having temperature 
not exceeding 50 ?C, and the same has been indicated. 


c) Working stress method of design has been removed. 
d) All the design provisions, as per limit state method, have been updated and made comprehensive. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


CONCRETE STRUCTURES FOR RETAINING AQUEOUS 
LIQUIDS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 2 PLAIN AND REINFORCED CONCRETE 


( Second Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 2) lays down requirements 
applicable specifically to design of plain and reinforced 
concrete structures, intended for storage or retaining of 
aqueous liquids. A concrete structure or member can 
function as liquid retaining, when the amount of liquid 
permeating through its thickness, under hydraulic 
gradient, is practically negligible. 

The recommendations are generally applicable to the 
storage/retaining of aqueous liquids having temperature 
not exceeding 50 ?C and no detrimental action on 
concrete and steel or where sufficient precautions have 
been taken to ensure protection of concrete and steel 
from damage due to action of such liquids. 


1.2 This standard does not cover the requirements for 
concrete structures for storage/retaining of hot liquids, 
hazardous materials and liquids of low viscosity and 
high penetrating power, such as petrol, diesel and 
oil. This standard also does not cover dams, pipes, 
pipelines, tunnels and damp proofing of basements. 


This standard does not cover all the requirements of 
pressurised tanks, floating structures and tanks having 
the additional requirement of gas tightness. The 
selection and design of coatings and linings are not 
covered in this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


Title 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 


IS No. 
456 : 2000 


Title 
Code of practice for design 
loads (other than earthquake) for 
buildings and structures 
Dead loads — Unit weights of 


building materials and stored 
materials (second revision) 


IS No. 
875 


(Part 1) : 1987 


(Part 2) : 1987 
(Part 3) : 2015 
(Part 4) : 1987 
(Part 5) : 1987 


Imposed loads (second revision) 
Wind loads (third revision) 
Snow loads (second revision) 
Special loads and combinations 
(second revision) 


1343 : 2012 Prestressed concrete — Code of 


practice (second revision) 


1893 (Part 2): | Criteria for earthquake resistant 


2014 design of structures: Part 2 Liquid 
retainng tanks (fifih revision) 
3370 Concrete structures for retaining 


aqueous liquids — Code ofpractice 


(Part 1):2021 General requirements 


(second revision) 
(Part 4) : 2021 


3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


Design tables (first revision) 


Design and construction of reinforced concrete liquid 
retaining structures shall comply with the requirement 
of IS 3370 (Part 1) and IS 456 unless otherwise laid 
down in this standard. 


4 DESIGN 


4.1 General 


Provisions shall be made for conditions of stresses that 
may occur in accordance with principles of mechanics, 
recognized methods of design and sound engineering 
practice. In particular, adequate consideration shall be 
given to the effects of monolithic construction in the 
assessment of axial force, bending moment and shear. 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


4.2 Loads 


4.2.1 All structures required to retain liquids should be 
designed for both the full and empty conditions, and 
the assumptions regarding the arrangements of all types 
of loading should be, such as to cause the most critical 
effects. 


They should be designed to withstand the loads 
that they would be subjected to during their service 
life. Loads, such as dead load, imposed load, 
earthquake load, wind load, earth pressure, snow load 
(where applicable) and liquid load should be 
considered in the design. Additionally, the loads during 
constructions should also be considered during the 
design. 


4.2.2 Dead Load (DL) 


Dead loads shall be calculated in accordance with 
IS 875 (Part 1). Earth covering and plants on the roof 
may be taken as dead load. Due consideration should 
be given in the design to the construction loads from 
plant and heaped earth which may exceed the intended 
design load. 


Sometimes, a provision is made to erect a masonry 
wall on the liquid retaining structure. Such dead loads, 
which may or may not be present, are called provisional 
dead loads (DL ) and need separate considerations. 


4.2.3 Imposed Load (IL) 


Imposed loads (live loads), such as weights of fixed 
equipment (installation, operation, and maintenance), 
material stored and normal live loads due to personnel 
and other transient loadings shall be assumed in 
accordance with IS 875 (Part 2). With equipment, 
its allowance for impact or its action under dynamic 
conditions shall also be considered. 


For example, heavy equipment, such as pump sets may 
be temporarily placed near the centre span of a floor 
during installation or maintenance, even though its 
final location may be elsewhere. Weights of concrete 
bases for equipment may be included in the loads, and 
consideration should be given to weights of piping, 
valves, and other equipment accessories that may be 
supported by the floor slab and beams. Alternately, 
conservative value of uniform imposed loads may be 
used in the design. 


4.2.4 Earthquake Load (EL) 


Earthquake loads may induce large horizontal and 
overturning forces in the structures and shall be 
calculated in accordance with IS 1893 (Part 2). 
See also Table 1. 


4.2.5 Wind Load (WL) 


Wind loads shall be assumed in accordance with 
IS 875 (Part 3). 


4.2.6 Earth Pressure (EP) 


Allowance should be made for the effects of any 
adverse earth pressures on the walls, according to 
the compaction and/or surcharge of the soil and the 
condition of the structure during construction and in 
service. 


For pressure on wall, the appropriate active earth 
pressure coefficient should be chosen considering the 
fact that in most cases the displacement (or deflection) 
possible are much smaller than that require to achieve 
active pressure state. Earth pressure coefficient should 
be in between the values at rest and at active state, but 
shall not be less than 0.5 in any case. 


No relief should be given for beneficial soil pressure 
effects on the walls of liquid retaining structures in the 
full condition. Relief in bending moments in wall due 
to simultaneous action of water pressure inside and that 
due to earth pressure (only up to half the active pressure 
of soil) from outside the wall may be made, provided 
that, 


a) there is no risk of slip in the embankment or fear 
of a reduction in the earth pressure arising from 
shrinkage or future excavations or any other 
cause; and 


b) the earth pressure allowed by way of relief in is 
the minimum which can be relied upon under the 
most unfavourable conditions possible, including 
those under which the reservoir is to be tested for 
water tightness. 


4.2.7 Snow Load 


Snow loads, where applicable, shall be assumed in 
accordance with IS 875 (Part 4). 


4.2.8 Liquid Load (FL) 


It is the effect of mass or pressure of the liquid to be 
considered in the design. It includes the dead storage, 
liquid pressure as well as the static and dynamic effect 
of liquid mass, wherever applicable. 


Liquid load should account for the actual density of the 
liquid retained. Aqueous solutions or suspensions may 
have higher densities and the weight due to deposited 
silt, grit, accumulated sludge, lime, etc, should be taken 
into account. 


In any combination, liquid load should be calculated at 
zero, partial and full condition so as to achieve the most 
critical load combination. Each tank shall be designed 
and also checked for tank empty condition. Free board 
of 150 to 300 mm may be considered. However, 
higher freeboard may be required for large horizontal 
tanks and the same shall be decided from hydraulic 
considerations. 


The maximum level of liquid considered in tank for 
its basic operations is called full supply level (FSL) or 
working top level (WTL) of liquid. 


The quantity of liquid shall be assumed up to the 
following levels, in the calculation of liquid load: 


a) Full Supply Level (FSL) Including Dead 
Storage — FSL shall be considered for limit state 
of serviceability. However, in load combinations 
having wind and/or earthquake loads, liquid load 
shall be considered up to FSL only, in case of 
limit state of collapse as well. 


b 


— 


Level Under Maximum Overflow Rate or 
Maximum Top Level (MTL) — MTL shall be 
considered for limit state of collapse. 


4.2.8.1 The internal pressure of liquid shall be assumed 
to act at the centre of thickness ofthe retaining circular 
wall in contact with the liquid, unless impermeable 
lining is applied. The external pressure of liquid shall 
be assumed to act at outer surface of structure. 


4.2.9 Loading effects due to temperature occurs when 
thermal expansion of a roof forces the walls of an 
empty structure into the surrounding backfill causing 
passive soil pressure. This effect may be reduced 
by providing a sliding joint between the top of the 
wall and under side of the roof which may be either 
a temporary free sliding joint that 1s not cast into a 
fixed or pinned connection, or a permanently sliding 
joint of assessed limiting friction. Movement of a roof 
may occur also where there is substantial variation in 
the temperature of the contained liquid. Where a roof 
rigidly connected to a wall this may lead to additional 
loading in the wall that should be considered in 
the design. Structures above the ground are more 
vulnerable to stresses resulting from temperature 
variations than those below ground. 


4.2.10 A structure subject to groundwater (or uplift) 
pressures should be designed to resist floatation, 
especially when it is empty. Design of each member 
shall also account the pressure due to groundwater 
in suitable critical load combinations [see 8.2 (c) of 
IS 3370 (Part 1)]. 


4.2.11 The concrete, on drying loses moisture and 
contracts in size. This contraction (drying shrinkage), 
if restrained, produces tensile stresses that may exceed 
the tensile strength of concrete and cause cracking. 


4.2.12 The junctions between various members 
(between wall and floor) intended to be constructed 
as rigid should be designed accordingly and effect of 
continuity should be accounted in design and detailing 
of each member. 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


4.3 Method of Design 


4.3.1 General basis of design shall be in line with the 
requirements of IS 456, except where stated otherwise 
in this standard. Structural elements that are not exposed 
to retained liquid shall be designed in accordance with 
the requirements of IS 456 and IS 1343, as applicable. 


4.3.2 While designing the liquid retaining concrete 
structure, plastic redistribution of moments as per 
IS 456 shall not apply. For design of flat slab, estimate 
of bending moments as per direct design method of 
IS 456 shall not apply. Bending moments and stresses 
shall be worked out based on the coefficients given in 
IS 3370 (Part 4). 


4.3.3 Additional provisions for design of floors, walls 
and roof shall be as given in 5, 6 and 7, respectively. 


4.4 Limit State Design 


4.4.1 Limit State Requirements 


All relevant limit states shall be considered in the 
design to ensure an adequate degree of safety and 
serviceability. 


4.4.1.1 Limit state of collapse (ultimate limit state, 
ULS) 


The recommendations given in IS 456 shall be 
followed. 


4.4.1.2 Limit states of serviceability (SLS) 


a) Deflection — The limits of deflection shall be as 
per IS 456. 


b) Cracking — The maximum calculated crack 
width due to direct tension, flexure, restrained 
temperature and moisture effects shall not 
exceed 0.2 mm with specified cover. For 
aesthetics, aggressive conditions, or more severe 
exposures, owner may specify or designer may 
choose limiting crack width lower than 0.2 mm 
(see 4.4.3). 


4.4.1.3 Partial safety factors 


a) For loads (y) — The values given in Table 1 
should be used. 


b) For materials (y) — The values should be taken 
as 1.5 for concrete and 1.15 for steel. 
4.4.1.4 Load combinations 


The various load combinations given in Table 1 shall 
be used. Any additional load combination, if required, 
may be chosen by the designer. 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


Table 1 Load Combinations and Partial Safety Factors, y, for Loads 
[ Clauses 4.2.4, 4.4.1.3 (a) and 4.4.1.4 ] 


Load Case Limit State of Collapse Limit State of Serviceability 
DL IL EP FL WL/EL (see Notel) DL IL EP FL WL/EL (see Note 1) 
(1) 2 QO 4 6) (6) (7) (9 (9 (Q0 (11) 
1 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 - 1.0 10 10 1.0 _ 
2 1.2 _ 1.0 1:2 1.4 10 - 0.7 1.0 0.3 
3 0.9 - 1.0 1.0 1.4 
4 1.4 _ 1.0 _ 1.4 
5 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 
NOTES 


1 Wind and earthquake loads should be considered one at a time and not simultaneously. 


2 For any load combination, the partial safety factor for liquid load (FL) may be further reduced if it is expected to give more 
critical design action at a section of a member. Liquid load may vary from zero (tank empty) to 1.5 in a combination. Same holds 


true for earth pressure in load combinations. 


3 Earthquake base shear shall be worked out for a load combination 1 DL + 1 FL + 1 IL. * 0.7 IL, where IL. is the 
imposed load due to storage and JL is the provisional imposed load such as equipment load. The earthquake base shear 
(or force action), as determined, shall be multiplied by the load factor as given in Table 1, for further combination with other 


loads. 


4.4.2 Basis of Design 


Design and detailing of reinforced concrete shall be 
as specified in IS 456 except where stated otherwise. 
Additionally, the following shall apply: 


a) Shear strength of a member subjected to design 
direct tension in combination with bending 
moment — The design shear strength of concrete 
given in Table 19 of IS 456 shall be multiplied by 


the following factor: 


-8x —— 


eee uel ae 


where 
P = design direct tension, N; and 


A= gross cross-sectional area of concrete, 
š T 
mnm? 


For member subject to direct tension, the critical 
section for shear force should be taken at face 
of support and not at a distance d from face of 
support (22.6.2.1 and 40.5 of IS 456 shall not 
apply). If shear force exceeds the shear resistance 
of concrete, stirrups shall be designed to take shear 
and spacing of such stirrups shall not be more than 
half the effective depth of member, but not less 
than 75 mm. 


b) Shear strength of a member at the construction 
joint reduces in comparison to that at any section 
on the monolithic concrete and depends largely on 
interface roughness and cleanliness of the surface 
at the time of placing second phase concrete. 


c) Where there is need for higher shear resistance, 
combination of shear key, dowels and diagonal 


reinforcement may be adopted and accordingly 
designed to meet the shear requirement. 


4.4.3 Crack Widths 


Crack widths due to the temperature and moisture 
effects shall be calculated as given in Annex A for 
immature concrete and Annex B for mature concrete. 


4.4.3.1 A reinforced concrete member subjected to 
direct tension and flexural tension may be deemed to be 
satisfactory in the absence of crack width calculations, 
if stresses in steel reinforcement under limit state 
of serviceability does not exceed the values given in 
Table 2. 


For walls and slabs, the crack width requirement of 
0.2 mm may be deemed to be satisfactory, in the absence 
of crack-width calculations, 1f for given reinforcement 
bar, the diameter, bar spacing and stress in high 
strength deformed steel reinforcement under limit state 


of serviceability does not exceed the values given in 
Table 3. 


Table 2 Maximum Tensile Stresses in Steel 
Reinforcement (SLS) 


( Clause 4.4.3.1 ) 


SI. Limiting Maximum Stresses (N/mm?) 
No. . Plain Round Mild High Strength 
i mm) Steel Bars Deformed Bars 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 0.1 85 100 
ii) 0.2 115 130 


Table 3 Maximum Tensile Stress in Steel 
Reinforcement for Crack Control in 
Walls and Slabs (SLS) 


( Clause 4.4.3.1 ) 


SI. No Diameter Centre-to-centre Maximum 
of Steel Spacing of Stress, Max 
Reinforcement Reinforcement, (N/mm?) 
(mm) Max (mm) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 10 or 12 75 155 
ii) 12 or 16 100 150 
iii) 16 or 20 125 148 
iv) 20 or 25 150 145 
v) 20 or 25 175 142 
vi) 25 or 28 200 140 
vii) 32 200 135 


4.4.3.2 The liquid retaining structures may be classified 
in relation to the degree of protection against leakage 
required as given in Table 4. It should be noted that all 
concrete will permit the passage of small quantities of 
liquids and gasses by diffusion. 


Table 4 Classification of Tightness 
( Clause 4.4.3.2 ) 


SI. No. 
(1) (2) (3) 


Leakage to be limited to a small 


amount. Some surface staining or 
damp patches acceptable 


Tightness Class Requirements for Leakage 


Leakage to be minimal. Appearance 
not to be impaired by staining 

ili) 3 No leakage permitted. Special 
measures such as Prestressing or 
liner required. 


4.4.3.3 Limiting crack width should be chosen 
depending on the classification of the particular 
element under consideration and the required function 
of the whole structure. The following guidelines may 
be adopted, in absence of more specific requirements: 


a) Tightness Class 1 — Limiting crack width for 
cracks expected to pass through the full thickness 
of the section ( that is, no compression block) be 
limited to 0.2 mm. 


b 


x 


Tightness Class 2 — Limiting crack width shall 
be 0.2 mm and cracks expected to pass through 
the full thickness of the section are avoided unless 
appropriate measures such as liners or water bars 
have been incorporated. Alternatively, limiting 
crack width shall be 0.1 mm. 


Tightness Class 3 — Limiting crack width shall be 
0.1 mm. Cracks should not pass through the full 
thickness of the section and a compression zone 


c 


— 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


of at least 50 mm should be available. Generally, 
special measures like application of liners or 
prestress will be required to ensure this class of 
water-tightness. 


4.4.3.4 The limiting crack width values as given 
in 4.4.3.3 may be exceeded by 0.05 mm, if H/t ratio is 
20 or less. However, the limiting crack width shall not 
exceed 0.2 mm, in any case. 


4.4.3.5 The crack width at construction joint may be 
assumed to be 0.05 mm more than the crack width 
estimated for monolithic construction. 


4.4.3.6 The crack width enhances due to shear in 
absence of shear reinforcement in slabs and the same 
shall be checked against additional equivalent moment 
due to shear, M_ given by SF x D/3, where D is overall 
depth of slab at the section considered. 


4.5 Stresses Due to Moisture or Temperature 
Changes 


4.5.1 No separate calculation is required for stresses 
due to moisture or temperature change in the concrete 
provided that: 


a) The reinforcement provided is not less than that 
specified in 8. 


b) With regard to the provision of movement joints, 
the design comply with either of the following: 


1) Option 1 in Table 2 of IS 3370 (Part 1). 


2) Option 2 or option 3 in Table 2 of 
IS 3370 (Part 1) and a suitable sliding layer 
beneath the tank given therein. 


4.5.2 Where reservoirs are protected with an internal 
impermeable lining, consideration should be given 
to the possibility of concrete eventually, drying 
out. Unless it is established on the basis of tests or 
experience that the lining has adequate crack bridging 
properties, allowance for the increased effect of drying 
shrinkage should be made in the design. 


5 FLOORS 


5.1 Provisions of Movement Joints 


Movement joints shall be provided in accordance with 
IS 3370 (Part 1). 


5.2 Floors of Tanks Resting on Ground 


The floors of tanks resting on ground shall be in 
accordance with IS 3370 (Part 1). When the bottom of 
the tank is below the water table, the loading on the slab 
from hydrostatic pressure should be considered in the 
design. If the upward pressure exceeds the dead load of 
the tank floor, there may be a danger of heaving unless 
the floor is designed and constructed as a structural slab 
with loading directed upward rather than downward. 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


5.3 Floors of Tanks Resting on Supports 


If the tank is supported on walls or other similar 
supports, the floor slab shall be designed for bending 
moments due to water load and self-weight. The worst 
conditions of liquid load may be other than those given 
in 22.4.1 of IS 456, since, liquid level extends over 
all spans in normal construction. However, in case of 
multi-cell tanks, these will have to be determined by 
the designer for each particular case. 


5.3.1 When the floor is rigidly connected to the walls 
(as is generally the case), the bending moments at the 
junction between the walls and floor shall be taken into 
account in the design of floor together with any direct 
forces transferred to the floor from the walls or from the 
floor to the wall due to the suspension of the floor from 
the wall (see 8.3). 


6 WALLS 


6.1 Provision of Joints 


6.1.1 Sliding Joints at the Base of the Wall 


Where it is desired to allow the walls to expand 
or contract separately from the floor, or to prevent 
moments at the base of the wall owing to fixity to the 
floor, sliding joints may be provided. 


6.1.1.1 Constructions affecting the spacing of vertical 
movement joints are discussed in IS 3370 (Part 1). 
While the majority of these joints may be of the partial 
or complete contraction type, sufficient expansion 
joints should be provided to satisfy the requirements of 
IS 3370 (Part 1). 


6.1.1.2 Structure may be provided as a continuous 
one without movement or partial movement joints. 
If movement joints are provided, it is recommended 
that partial or induced contraction joint should not be 
placed more than 10 m spacing from a movement joint. 
Full contraction joint shall not be placed at more than 
30 m spacing, and may have partial joints in between. 


6.2 Pressure on Walls 


6.2.1 In liquid retaining structures with fixed or floating 
covers, the gas pressure developed above liquid surface 
shall be added to the liquid pressure. 


6.2.2 When the wall of liquid retaining structure is built 
in ground or has earth embanked against it, the effect of 
earth pressure shall be taken into account as discussed 
in IS 3370 (Part 1). 


6.3 Walls of Tanks Rectangular or Polygonal in Plan 


While designing the walls of rectangular or polygonal 
concrete tanks, the following points should be taken 
care of: 


a) In plane walls, the liquid pressure is resisted by 
both vertical and horizontal bending moments. An 
estimate of the bending moments in the vertical 
and horizontal planes should be made. The 
horizontal tension caused by the direct pull due to 
water pressure on end walls should be added to 
that resulting from horizontal bending moment. 


b 


x 


Vertical junctions and all other junctions of wall 
and any other member shall be analysed and 
designed for force actions due to continuity, even 
if the wall panel is designed primarily spanning 
in direction parallel to the line of junction (that 
is, wall vertically spanning). At the junction, 
reinforcement shall be designed for continuity 
effect. 


In the case of rectangular or polygonal tanks, the 
side walls act as two way panel, whereby the wall is 
continued or restrained in the horizontal direction, fixed 
or hinged at the bottom and hinged or free at the top. 
The walls thus act as thin plates subject to triangular 
loading and with boundary conditions varying between 
full restraint and free edge. The analysis of moment 
and forces may be made on the basis of any recognized 
method, such as finite element method. The moment 
coefficients, for some common boundary conditions of 
wall panels are given in IS 3370 (Part 4) for general 
guidance. 


6.4 Walls of Cylindrical Tanks 


While designing walls of cylindrical tanks, the 
following should be considered: 


a) Wall thickness should be designed, such as to keep 
concrete from cracking and the steel ring carry all 
the tension. 


b 


— 


Walls of cylindrical tanks are either cast 
monolithically with the base or are set in grooves 
and keyways (movement joints). In either case, 
deformation of the wall under the influence of 
liquid pressure is restricted at the base. 


Unless the extent of fixity at the base is 
established by analysis with due consideration 
to the dimensions of the base slab, the type of 
joint between the wall and slab and the type of 
soil supporting the base slab, the wall should 
be assumed to be fully fixed at the base for the 
purpose of estimating moment at base of wall. For 
moments at mid span of wall, condition of partial 
fixity at base should be considered. In the absence 
of detailed analysis involving stiffness of floor 
slab and foundation, for partial fixity, average of 
the two conditions (namely, fixed and hinged) 
may be taken. 


c 


— 


Coefficient for ring (hoop) tension and vertical moments 
for different conditions of the walls for some common 
cases are given in IS 3370 (Part 4). 


7 ROOFS 


7.1 Provision of Movement Joints 


To avoid the possibility of sympathetic cracking, it is 
important to ensure that movement joints in the roof 
correspond with those in walls, if roof and walls are 
monolithic. If, however, provision is made by means of 
a sliding joint for movement between the roof and the 
wall, correspondence of joints is not necessary. 


7.2 Loading 


Roofs should be designed for the following load 
conditions: 


a) Gravity loads, such as the weight of roof slab, 
earth cover, live loads and mechanical equipment, 
if any. Live load should be arranged so as to give 
the most critical bending moment. 


b) Upward pressure, if the tank is subjected to 
internal pressure or if roof 1s subjected to upward 


pressure due to sloshing of liquid. 


c) Safety in case of the unequal intensity of loading, 
which may occur during construction and the 


placing of the earth cover. 


d) Temporary condition of some spans loaded and 
other spans unloaded, even though in the final state 


the load may be small and/or evenly distributed. 


7.3 Liquid-Tightness 


In case of tanks intended for retaining water for 
drinking/domestic purposes or treated water, the roof 
should be made liquid-tight. This may be achieved 
by designing the roof as water retaining member and 
providing slopes to ensure adequate drainage. 


7.4 Protection Against Corrosion 


Protective measures shall be taken at the underside of 
the roof to prevent it from corrosion due to condensation 
and chlorine attack. It shall also be designed as a 
liquid retaining member, complying with stipulations 
regarding minimum cover and crack width. 


PEE 


NOTES 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


8 DETAILING 


8.1 Minimum Reinforcement 


8.1.1 The minimum reinforcement in walls, floors and 
roofs in each of two directions at right angles, within 
each surface zone shall not be less than percentage 
specified in Table 5. The percentage applies to surface 
zones, as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. 


Table 5 Minimum Percentage of Reinforcement 
( Clause 8.1.1 ) 


SI Grade of Elevated Tank Ground 
No. Reinforcement with Length supported Tank 
(see Note 1) with Length 
(see Note 1) 
<14m 28m <l4m 222m 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i)  Fe250 0.44 0.66 0.40 0.60 
Percent Percent Percent Percent 
H) Fe4l5or 0.28 0.42 0.24 0.36 
Fe 500 Percent Percent Percent Percent 
NOTES 


1 Length is the horizontal length of continuous reinforced 
concrete members in between full movement joints (if provided) 
or end of structure along the direction of main reinforcement. For 
significantly long lengths (> 30 m) higher percent of steel may be 
required. 

2 For lengths between 14 m and 28 m for elevated tanks, and 
between 14 m and 22 m for ground supported tanks, minimum 
percentage of reinforcement required shall be linearly interpolated. 


8.1.2 In walls having thickness less than 160 mm or slabs 
having thickness less than 180 mm, the entire minimum 
reinforcement may be placed in one face. 


For ground slabs having thickness less than 300 mm 
(see Fig. 2), the calculated reinforcement should be 
placed wholly in top surface with cover not exceeding 
50 mm. For ground slabs having thickness more than 
300 mm, the reinforcement required shall be calculated 
separately for top and surface zone as per Annex À and 
shall be placed accordingly with cover not exceeding 
50 mm. 


1 For D < 500 mm, assume each reinforcement face controls D/2 depth of concrete. 


2 For D > 500 mm, assume each reinforcement face controls 250 mm depth of concrete, ignoring any central core beyond this surface depth. 


FiG. 1 SURFACE ZONES: WALLS AND SUSPENDED SLABS 


7 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


— 


D UNDER 
300mm 


t | 


D/2 
NO BOTTOM 
REINFORCEMENT 


FiG. 2 SURFACE ZONES: GROUND SLABS 


8.2 Size of Bars, Distance between Bars, Laps and 
Bends 


8.2.1 Size of bars, distance between bars, laps and bends 
in bars, and fixing of bars shall be in accordance with 
IS 456. Spacing of bars should be small as possible, 
without causing congestion of steel and difficulty in 
placing and vibrating concrete. 


8.2.2 Laps in the horizontal bars of wall or longitudinal 
bars of beam which can have single concrete pour 
of 300 mm or more below the bar, shall be provided 
1.4 times the calculated lap length. In members 
subjected to axial tension or hoop, the bars in direct 
tension shall be provided with lap double that of 
calculated lap length. 


8.2.3 Bar spacing shall not exceed 300 mm or the 
thickness of the section, whichever is less. 


8.3 Junction of Members 


Where any two members such as wall and slab, are 
connected monolithically at a right angled junction and 
subjected to moments, shears and axial force which 
tend to open it (that is, the inner faces of the plates 
are in tension at the corner), proper detailing of the 
reinforcement shall be ensured to cater for the diagonal 
tension forces. Detailing should be as shown in 
Fig. 3 or alternately, the junction may be designed by 
an appropriate strut and tie model. 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


TENSION AT INNER CORNER ONLY 


MAIN BAR IN TENSION SHOWN 


FILLET BAR IN 
FILLET DESIRABLE 


0.4 Ast Ast 


d = EFF. DEPTH 


Fic. 3 DETAILING AT THE RIGHT ANGLED JUNCTION 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 4.4.3 and 8.1.2 ) 


CRACK WIDTH DUE TO TEMPERATURE AND MOISTURE IN IMMATURE CONCRETE 


A-1 CALCULATION OF MINIMUM 
REINFORCEMENT CRACK SPACING 
AND CRACK WIDTHS IN RELATION TO 


MOISTURE EFFECTS IN THIN SECTIONS 


A-1.1 The design procedures given in A-1.2 to A-1.3 
and A-2 are appropriate for long continuous wall or 
floor slabs of thin cross-section. A-3 considers thick 
sections. 


A-1.2 Minimum Reinforcement 


The minimum reinforcement, required to distribute the 
cracking in a surface zone for each direction, shall be 
given by the following formula: 


fa 


, = 0.75 
Poit Í 


...(1) 


critical steel ratio, the minimum ratio of area 
of steel reinforcement to that of the surface 
zone (bD. or bD ,, as applicable, see Table 6 
and Fig. 2); 
direct tensile strength of the immature 
concrete, which may be taken as given in 
Table 7, in absence of experimental results; 

= the characteristic strength of the reinforcement. 
Table 6 Top and Bottom Depths of Surface Zone 


( Clause A-1.2 ) 


SI Depth of Ground Top Depth, D, Bottom Depth, 
No. Slab, D D, 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) less than 300 mm D/2 NIL 

ii) 300 to 500 mm D/2 100 mm 

ii) more than 500 mm 250 mm 100 mm 


Table 7 Direct Tensile Strength of Immature 
Concrete 


( Clause A-1.2 ) 


Concrete M25 M30 M35 M40 M45 M50 M55 
Grade 
f, Nimm? 1.15 1.30 1.45 1.60 1.70 1.80 1.90 


A-1.3 Cracks can be controlled by choosing the spacing 
of movement joint and the amount of reinforcement. 
The three main options are summarized in Table 2 of 
IS 3370 (Part 1). 


10 


A-1.4 Crack Spacing 


When sufficient reinforcement is provided to distribute 
cracking, the maximum spacing of crack S\,, shall be 
given by the formula: 


where 


Jf," ratio of the tensile strength of the concrete (f) 
to average bond strength (ff) between concrete 
and steel, 

@= diameter of each reinforcement bar, and 


p= steel ratio, as defined 
(see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 ) 


For immature concrete, the value of f/f, may be taken as 
unity for plain round bars and 2/3 for deformed bars. The 
above formula may be expressed for design purposes as: 
2 ' 
n, $ ss lating, BODE ...(3) 
h T M Max 


under A-1.2 


where 
n = number of bars in width of section, 
b= width of section, 
D'— D or D,, as applicable (see Table 5), and 
Siu, Obtained from Wia 


The width of a fully developed crack due to drying 
shrinkage and the ‘heat of hydration’ contraction in 
lightly-reinforced restrained walls and slabs may be 
obtained from: 


I des 3 Duas E Éi .(4) 
where 
e= [£, +e, — (100 x 10 5] 
W aax 7 estimated maximum crack width, 
S," estimated likely maximum crack spacing, 
€ = estimated shrinkage strain, and temperature 


due to heat of hydration. 


£,-— estimated total thermal contraction after 
peak, and temperature due to heat of 


hydration. 
A-2 CALCULATION OF MINIMUM 
REINFORCEMENT CRACK SPACING 
AND CRACK WIDTHS IN RELATION 
TO TEMPERATURE EFFECTS IN THIN 


SECTIONS 


A-2.1 For immature concrete, the effective coefficient 
of thermal contraction may be taken as one half of the 


value for mature concrete (due to the high creep strain 
in immature concrete). 


A-2.2 For walls exposed to normal climatic conditions, 
the shrinkage strain less the associated creep strain is 
generally less than the ultimate concrete tensile strain 
of about 100 x 1075 unless high shrinkage aggregates 
are used. Hence, the value of W... for cooling to 
ambient from the peak hydration temperature may be 
assumed to be: 


..(5) 


where 


a= coefficient of thermal expansion of mature 
concrete, and 


T = fall in temperature between the hydration peak 
and ambient. 


The value of T, depends on the temperature of 
concreting, cement content, thickness of the 
member and material for shutters. As guideline, it 
is recommended to use 7, = 30 °C for concreting in 
summer and 20 °C for concreting during winter, when 
steel shutters are used. For other conditions, the value 


of T, may be appropriately increased. 


A-2.3 In addition to the temperature fall T , there can 
be a further fall in temperature, T, due to seasonal 
variations. The consequent thermal contractions occur 
in the mature concrete for which the factors controlling 
cracking behaviour are substantially modified. The 
ratio of the tensile strength of concrete to bond strength, 
ff, is appreciably lower for mature concrete. In 
addition, the restraint along the base of the member 


11 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


tends to be much more uniform and less susceptible to 
stress raisers, since a considerable shear resistance can 
be developed along the entire length ofthe construction 
joint. 
Although precise data is not available for these 
effects, a reasonable estimate may be assumed that 
the combined effect of these factors is to reduce the 
estimated contraction by half. Hence the value of Wax 
when taking an additional seasonal temperature fall 
into account is given by: 

W. ...(6) 


a 
Max = Ó, “ re) 


Max 


When movement joints are provided at a 
centre-to-centre spacing of not more than 15 m, the 
subsequent temperature fall, 7, , need not be considered. 


A-3 THICK SECTIONS 


For ‘thick’ sections, major causes of cracking are the 
differences which develop between the surface zones 
and the core of the section. The thickness of concrete 
which can be considered to be within the ‘surface zone’ 
is not exact. However, site observations have indicated 
that the zone thickness for D > 500 mm in Fig. 1 and 
Fig. 2 are appropriate for thick sections, and the 
procedure for calculating thermal crack control 
reinforcement in thick sections is same as that for thin 
sections. 


The maximum temperature rise due to heat of hydration 
to be considered should be the average value for the 
entire width of section. The temperature rise to be 
considered for the core should be at least 10 ?C higher 
than the value which would be assumed for the entire 
section. 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4.4.3 ) 
CRACK WIDTHS IN MATURE CONCRETE 


B-1 ASSESSMENT OF CRACK WIDTHS 
FLEXURE 


IN 


Provided that the strain in the tension reinforcement 
is limited to 0.6 f/E, and the stress in the concrete is 
limited to 0.4 ff, , the design surface crack width should 
not exceed the appropriate value given in 4.4.3.2 and 
may be calculated as follows: 


3a. Em .. (7) 
Y Xa C) 
1+ cr Min 
D-x 
where 

w= design surface crack width, 

a „= distance from the point considered to the 
surface of the nearest longitudinal bar, 

g. = average strain at the level where the cracking 
is being considered. To be calculated in 
accordance with B-2, 

C," minimum cover to the tension steel, 

D — overall depth of the members, and 

x= depth of neutral axis. 


B-2 AVERAGE STRAIN IN FLEXURE 


The average strain at the level where cracking is being 
considered, is assessed by calculating the apparent 
strain using characteristic loads and normal elastic 
theory. Where flexure is predominant but some tension 
exists at the section, the depth ofthe neutral axis should 
be adjusted. The calculated apparent strain, g is then 
adjusted to take into account the stiffening effect of the 
concrete between cracks e,. The value of the stiffening 
effect may be assessed from B-3, and: 

TELS 


€ 
m 


where 
£,-— average strain at the level where cracking is 
being considered, 
g = strain at the level considered, and 


£,— strain due to stiffening effect of concrete 
between cracks. 


B-3 STIFFENING EFFECT OF CONCRETE IN 
FLEXURE 


The stiffening effect of the concrete may be assessed 
by deducting from the apparent strain, a value obtained 
from the following expressions for deformed bars. 


12 


For a limiting design surface crack width of 0.2 mm: 
_ b(D- 3) (a'-x) 
3E, A, (d — x) 


£ 


.. (8) 


For a limiting design surface crack width of 0.1 mm: 


ne 1.5b (D — x) (a'- x) 


2 


3E, A, (d — x) .. (9) 
where 
g = strain at the level considered, 
£,— strain due to the stiffening effect of concrete 
between cracks, 
b = width of section at the centroid of the tension 
steel, 
D= overall depth of the member, 
x = depth of the neutral axis, 
E = modulus of elasticity of reinforcement, 
A = area of tension reinforcement, 
d= effective depth, and 
a'= distance from the compression face to the point 


at which the crack width is being calculated. 


The stiffening effect factors apply only for the crack 
widths stated and should not be interpolated or 
extrapolated. ¢, calculated from equation (8) or (9) shall 
be multiplied by 1.0 for uncoated deformed bars; 0.8 
for fusion bonded epoxy coated deformed bars; 0.625 
for uncoated plain bars, and 0.5 for coated plain bars. 


B-4 ASSESSMENT OF CRACK WIDTHS 
DIRECT TENSION 


IN 


Provided that the strain in the reinforcement 1s limited 
to 0.5 f/E., the design crack width should not exceed 
the appropriate value given in 4.4.3.2 and may be 
calculated from the following expression: 


w=3a € 


cr m 


where e, is assessed in accordance with B-5. 


... (10) 


B-5 AVERAGE STRAIN IN DIRECT TENSION 


The average strain 1s assessed by calculating the 
apparent strain using characteristic loads and normal 
elastic theory. The calculated apparent strain is then 
adjusted to take into account the stiffening effect of the 
concrete between cracks. The value of the stiffening 
effect may be assessed from B-6. 


B-6 STIFFENING EFFECT OF CONCRETE IN 
DIRECT TENSION 


The stiffening effect of the concrete may be assessed 
by deducting from the apparent strain a value obtained 
from the following expressions: 


For a limiting design surface crack width of 0.2 mm: 


E 2b. D 
° 3E.A. atii) 
For a limiting design surface crack width of 0.1 mm: 
SLU 
Bid ... (12) 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


where 
£,— strain due to stiffening effect, 
b= width of the section at the centroid of the 
tension steel, 
D — overall depth of the member, 
E = modulus of elasticity of reinforcement, and 
A — area of tension reinforcement. 


The stiffening effect factors apply only for the crack 
widths stated and should not be interpolated or 
extrapolated. g, calculated from equation (11) or (12) 
shall be multiplied by 1.0 for uncoated deformed bars; 
0.8 for fusion bonded epoxy coated deformed bars; 
0.625 for uncoated plain bars, and 0.5 for coated plain 
bars. 


13 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam P.O., 


Thiruvalla 689 583) 

ACC Ltd, Mumbai 

Ambuja Cements Limited, Ahmedabad 

Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 

Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 

Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 

Cement Manufacturers' Association, Noida 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Conmat Technolgies Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 

Construction Chemical Manufacturers' Association, 
Mumbai 

CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Science and Technology, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, Mumbai 


14 


Representative(s) 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN (Chairman) 


SHRI RAJESH J. MoI 
Dr MANISH V. KARANDIKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI UMESH P. SONI 

SHRI SUKURU RAMARAO (Alternate) 
SHRI L. R. BISHNOI 

SHRI SOURAV ACHARYA (Alternate) 
SHRI SUSHANTA KUMAR BASU 

Suri D. R. SEKOR (Alternate) 


Suri C. N. JHA 


Dn V. RAMACHANDRA 
Ms SHASHWATI GHOSH 


SHRI D. K. GARG 

SHRI NAVEEN KUMAR BANSAL (Alternate) 
DiRECTOR 

SHRI U. S. VIDYARTHI (Alternate) 
Director (CMDD) (N&W) 

Deputy Director (CMDD) (NW&YS) (Alternate) 


Dn A. K. CHATTERJEE 
Dn SUBRATO CHOWDHURY (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER 

SHRI NILOTPOL Kar (Alternate) 
SHRI S. K. SINGH 

SHRI SUBHASH GURRAM (Alternate) 
Dr RAKESH KUMAR 

Dn V. V. L. KANTA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr K. RAMANJANEYULU 
Dr P. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN SINGH 
SHRI VAY SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. KOHLI 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRIRAM B. KULKARNI 
SHRI RAHUL BIRADAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI MUKESH VALECHA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 

Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 

Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 

Branch, Army HQ, New Delhi 

Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 

National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 

Ballabgarh 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


Nuvoco Vistas Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, 
Chennai 


The India Cements Limited, Chennai 
The Indian Hume Pipe Company Limited, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 
The Ramco Cements Limited, Chennai 

Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 

Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 


Education, New Delhi 


In personal capacity [B-803, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi 
Garden City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


15 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI GANESH JUNEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK NAIK 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


Dr SHASHANK BISHNOI 
Dn Dipti RANJAN SAHOO (Alternate) 


Dr Devpas MENON 
Dr MANU SANTHANAM (Alternate) 


Dn V. K. GUPTA 
Dn BHUPINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. NIRMAL 
SHRI R. V. PATIL (Alternate) 


Mas GEN S. K. SRIVASTAV 

SHRI MAN SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI Y. BALAKRISHNA 

SHRI SANJEEV Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI V. V. ARORA 

Dn S. K. CHATURVEDI (Alternate) 
Suni D. V. S. PRASAD 

Dr SoMIT NeEoai (Alternate) 
SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 

SHRI RAGHUPATI Roy (Alternate) 
SHRI PRANAV DESAI 

SHRI RAVINDRA KHAMPARIA (Alternate) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 

EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI P. R. BHAT 

SHRI S. J. SHAH (Alternate) 
Dn H. C. VISVESVARAYA 

SHRI S. H. JAIN (Alternate) 
SHRI BALAJI K. MooRTHY 

SHRI ANIL KuMAR PILLAI (Alternate) 
SHRI SURYA VALLURI 

Dn M. R. KALGAL (Alternate) 
Suri M. A. U. KHAN 

SHRI B. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. JAIN 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Suri L. K. JAIN 


Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Suri R. C. WASON 


Nagar, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD ( CIVIL ENGINEERING ) 


[ REPRESENTING DiRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ ( CIVIL ENGINEERING ), BIS 


and 
SHRI MiLIND GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘C?’ ( CIVIL ENGINEERING ), BIS 


Concrete Subcommittee, CED 2:2 


Organization 


In personal capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam P.O., 


Thiruvalla 689 583) 
ACC Limited, Mumbai 


Ambuja Cement Limited, Ahmedabad 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 


New Delhi 


Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, 
Bhopal 


Bureau Veritas India Ltd, Mumbai 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Pvt Ltd, 
Ghaizabad 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, 
New Delhi 

CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 

Department of Science and Technology Ministry of 
Science and Technology, New Delhi 


16 


Representative(s) 
SHRI JOSE KuRIAN (Convener) 


SHRI PRAHLAD MUJUMDAR 
SHRI ANIL KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI UMESH P. SONI 
SHRI SUKURU RAMARAO (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH MOKAL 


SHRI AVINASH D. SHIRODE 

Suri K. K. MEGHASHYAM (Alternate) 
SHRI L. R. BISHNOI 

SHRI SOURAV ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ GUPTA 


SHRI S. K. KHARE 

SHRI BHAGWATI PRASAD GUPTA (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
Suri D. K. GARG 

SHRI RAJESH KHARE (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 

SHRI RAJ KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI AMAN DEEP 

SHRI MANIK CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 
Dn RAJESH DEOLIA 

Suri H. C. ARORA (Alternate) 


SHRI J. B. SENGUPTA 

SHRI SATISH PANDEY (Alternate) 
Dn B. H. BHARATHKUMAR 

Dn P. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. KOHLI 


Organization 
Elkem South Asia Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 
Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Society of Structural Engineers, Mumbai 


Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


National Institute of Technology Warangal, Warangal 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Pidilite Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers' Association, 
Mumbai 


Research, Design & Standards Organisation (Ministry 
of Railways), Lucknow 


RDC Concrete (India) Pvt Ltd, Thane 

Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, 
Mumbai 

Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


17 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


Suni BRAJESH MALVIYA 
SHRI SURENDRA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDEESH RAJENDRAN 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI KHATARBATCHA JIMMETAIN (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. TAYADE 

SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 
Dr B. BHATTACHARJEE 

Dr SHASHANK BISHNOI (Alternate) 
Dr SUDHIR MISHRA 
DR MANU SANTHANAM 

Dn RADHAKRISHNA G. PILLAI (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI UMESH JOSHI 

SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (RESEARCH) 

RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 
Dr B. SIVARAMA SARMA 

SHRI S. MANOHAR (Alternate) 


MAJ GEN S. K. SRIVASTAV 
SHRI MAN SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. PATHAK 

SHRI A. K. PANDEY (Alternate) 
Suri H. S. YADAV 

SHRI ARUN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 
SHRI V. V. ARORA 

Suri P. N. OJHA (Alternate) 
Dn C. B. KAMESWARA RAO 

Dn D. RAMA SESHU (Alternate) 
SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 

Suri N. M. Rao (Alternate) 
Dr SUGUNA NAIK 
SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 

SHRI SRIRANG SONDUR (Alternate) 
Jr DIRECTOR STDRS (B&S)/CB-I 

Jr DIRECTOR STDRS (B&S)/CB-II (Alternate) 
SHRI ANIL BANCHHOR 

SHRI SIMRANJIT SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI GIRISH BONDE 

SHRI D. N. VISHWANATH (Alternate) 
SHRI MAHESH TANDON 

Suri Vinay GUPTA (Alternate) 
SHRI S. N. DIWAKAR 

SHRI MANOS KUMAR DE (Alternate) 


Dr V. RAMACHANDRA 
Dn A. K. SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 3370 (Part 2) : 2021 


Organization 


Water Resource Department, Govt of Madhya Pradesh, 


Mumbai 


In personal capacity (452 Sector 14, Sonipat, Haryana) 
In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha 


Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity [B-803, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi 
Garden City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, 


Hari Nagar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (M1 F1 VGN Minerva Apartments, 
Guruswamy Road, Nolambur, Chennai) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S. K. KHARE 
Suri B. P. GUPTA (Alternate) 


Suni R. K. JAIN 
Suri L. K. JAIN 


SHRI A. K. JAIN 
Suni R. C. WASON 


Dr C. RAJKUMAR 


Panel for Review/Revision of IS 3370, CED 2:2/P1 


Organization 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, 


Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Pvt Ltd, 


Ghaziabad 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Gammon Engineers & Contractors Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Government College of Engineering, Pune 
Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, 
Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), New Delhi 

National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 


Ballabgarh 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


In personal capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam P.O., 


Thiruvalla 689 583) 


In personal capacity (A2B/37A, Ekta Apartments, 


Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 110 063) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Mother Dairy Road, Patparganj, Delhi 110 092) 


In personal capacity (K-L/2, Kavi Nagar, Ghaziabad 


201 002) 


In personal capacity (House No. 2103 Sector 7D, 


Faridabad 121 006) 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, 


Hari Nagar, New Delhi) 


Representative(s) 
Suri L. K. JAIN (Convener) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP GARG 
SHRI MANIK CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


Dn B. H. BHARATHKUMAR 
Dn P. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. W. DESHPANDE 
SHRI MUKUND C. BUTALA (Alternate) 


Dr NAMDEO A. HEDAOO 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI MUKESH VALECHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR DIPTI RANJAN SAHOO 
DR SHASHANK BISHNO! (Alternate) 


Dn ASHOK K. JAIN 


SHRI J. B. SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH K. SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
Suri T. V. G. REDDY (Alternate) 


SHRI S. M. PALEKAR 
SHRI S. KRISHNA (Alternate) 
SHRI JOSE KURIAN 
SHRI ARVIND KUMAR 
DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 
Dn A. K. MITTAL 


SHRI HARISH KUMAR JULKA 


SHRI R. C. WASON 


(Continued from second cover) 


e) The sub-clause on loads has been enlarged to include detailed guidance on the various types of loadings; 
and liquid load has been defined separately. 


f) Partial safety factors for loads and various load combinations, applicable to liquid retaining structures, 
have been provided, duly revised. 


g) Provision of classifying liquid retaining structures on the basis of the degree of protection against leakage 
in three tightness classes has been introduced. 

h) The clause on 'Detailing' has been enlarged to include detailed guidance regarding the minimum 
percentage of reinforcement and lap length. Additionally, detailing at the right angled junction of the 
members has been included. 

j) Title of the standard has, been modified to address the actual coverage. 

In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


BS 8007 : 1987 Code of practice for design of concrete structures for retaining aqueous liquids, British 
Standards Institute 


EN 1992-3 : 2006 Design of concrete structures — Part 3: Liquid retaining and containment structures, 
Committee European Normalization (CEN) 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 02 (13639). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


