**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11774 (1986) : Method for determination of dichlorvos 
residues in food commodities [FAD 1: Pesticides and 
Pesticides Residue Analysis] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11774- 1986 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
DETERMINATION OF DICHLORVOS 
RESIDUES IN FOOD COMMODLTJES 



UDG 664 i 5 13 : 632*951 026 DIG 




^Capytigia 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MAMAK BHAVANp fl BAHAIlUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHT tlCOOd 

Gr Z Ftl^iuaiy I9fi7 



IS : 11774 . 1986 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
DETERMINATION OF DICHLORVOS 
RESIDUES IN FOOD COMMODITIES 

Pesticides Residue Analysis Sectional Committee, AFDC 56 

Chairman 

Dr H. L. Bami 

Bangalow No. A, Malkaganj, Delhi 

Members Representing 

SiiBi T. K. Adhya Central Rice Research Institute, Guttack 

Shri E. a. AiiMEiDA Hindustan Ciba-Geigy Ltd, Bombay 

Shui F. QuADROs ( Alternate ) 
Rhrt K. D. Amre National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Da J. C. Verma ( Alternate ) 
Da M. D. AwaSTHI Indian Institute of Horticultural Research ( ICAR), 

Bangntore 
Dean Mohantal Sukhadia University, Udaipur 

Dr R. p. Srivastava ( Alternate) 
Dr K. C. GuiiA Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta; and Central 

Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi 
SnRiP.K. DmNiiii A. (Alternate ) 
DrR. C. Gvpta Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and Sto- 

rage ( Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development ), Faridabad 

Dr( ShRIMATI ) G. MUKHERJEE 

( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. GuFTE Bayer India Ltd, Thane 

D R P. V. Raikar ( Alternate ) 
Da S. K. HaNda Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR), 

New Delhi 
DrV. N. IYER Coromandel Indag ( P ) Ltd, Madras 

Dk R. SuNdaHARAJAN ( Alternate ) 
DrR. L. Kalra Department of Entomology, Punjab Agricultural 

Univeroity., Ludhiana 
Dr R. p. Chawl a ( Alternate ) 
DrKalyan SiNOH C. S. A. University of Agriculture and Technology, 

Kanpur 
D R J. C. Ma JUMDAR Pesticides Association of India, New Delhi 

DrV. SriNIVASAn^ ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. S. MiTHYANTHA Rallis Agrochemical Research Station, Bangalore 

Da K. SiVaSANKARAN ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



©Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is Protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIN of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS : 11774 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Db a. L, Mookerjee 
DrS. Y. Pandky 
Shki R. Rajgopal 

Shrt G. C. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Da M. S. Sastby 

Dii T. K. Verma ( Alternate ) 
Da T. D. Seth 



Representing 

Cyanamid India Ltd., B.ombav 

Union Carbide India Ltd, New Delhi 

National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Delhi 

Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR), 
Izatnagar 



DrR. K. Sethi 

Dr R. SUNDARARA.IAN 

Dn K. Visheswahiah 



Industrial Toxicology Research Centre (CSIR\ 

Lucknnw 
Indofil Chemicals Ltd, Thane 

Fredrick Institute of Plant Protection and Toxico- 
logy, Padappai 
Central Food 'Technological Research Institute 
( CSIR ), Mysore 
Dr J. R. Rang Asw AMY ( AUernate ) 
Shbi T. Purnanandam. Director GenQTSil, ISI( Ex-offtcio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri Lajivdeh Sinoh 

Joint Director ( Agri & Food ),ISI 



IS : 11774 . 1986 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
DETERMINATION OF DICHLORVOS 
RESIDUES IN FOOD COMMODITIES 

0. FO REWO RD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 18 September 1986, after the draft finalized by the Pesticides Residue 
Analysis Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Dichlorvos is used in agriculture for the control of insect pests. 
Assessment of residues is, therefore, an important step in safeguarding 
human health. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, due consideration has been 
given to the limits of dichlorvos laid under the provisions of Prevention 
of Food Adulteration Rules, 1965 and the test methods are sensitive to the 
prescribed levels of residues. 

0.4 This standard will enable the health authorities and others engaged 
in the field to follow a uniform test procedure for the estimation of 
dichlorvos residues in various food commodities. 

0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960** 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the gas chromatographic method ( GLC ) 
for the determination of dichlorvos residues in food commodities. 

2. QUALITY OF REAGENTS 

'2.1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled water ( see 
IS : 1070-1 977 1 ) shall be employed in tests. 

NoTK — 'Pore chemicals shall mean chemicals that do not contain .impurities which 
affect the results of analysis. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 
fSpecitication for water for general laboratory use ( second revision), 

3 



15:11774 - 1986 

3. SAM PLING 

3.1 The representative samples for the purposes of estimating dichlorvos 
residues in foods shall be drawn in accordance with IS : 11380 ( Part 1 )- 
1985*. 

4.PREPARATI0N OF THE LABORATORY SAMPLE, CLEAN 
UP AND EXTRACTION 

4.1 Apparatus 

4.1.1 Waring Blender or Equivalent 

4.1.2 Kuderna Danish Evaporative Concentrator 

4.1.3 Water-Bath 

4.1.4 Chromatographic Column — 25 cm long and 2 cm i.d, 

4.2 R eagents 

4.2.1 Methylene Chloride — AR grade, glass redistilled. 

4.2.2 n-Hexane — AR grade, glass redistilled. 

4.2.3 Ethyl Acetate — adsorption grade, glass redistilled. 

4.2.4 Sodium Sulphate — anhydrous. 

4.3 Extraction 

4.3.1 Fruits and Vegetables — Shred the entire laboratory sample. 
Macerate a subsample of 25 g with 100 ml of methylene chloride using 
the waring blender. Filter the suspension under slight vacuum through 
a 6-cm buchner funnel layered with suitable filter paper. Rinse, jar 
and filter cake twice with 50 ml portions of methylene chloride. Trans- 
fer the methylene chloride extract to a separatory funnel, and drain off 
the organic layer into 500-ml erienmeyer flask. Dry with 4-5 g of 
anhydrous sodium sulphate, and filter through a folded paper into a 
500-ml round-bottom flask. Concentrate the methylene chloride solution 
to about 20 ml and proceed as described under 4.4. 

4.3.2 Extraction Of Oily Crops — Place 25 g of milled grain into a 
soxhelt thimble and extract with 300 ml of methylene-chloride in a soxhiet 
apparatus for 4 hours, using a 500-ml round bottom flask. Concentrate 
the extract to approximately 20 ml by using the rotating evaporator 
( 35-40*G ) and add 50 ml of hexane. Concentrate again, and add a 
further portion of 50 ml hexane. Concentrate second time to a volume 
of 10-15 ml and transfer the hexane extract to a 50-ml volumetric 
flask. Wash the evaporation flask twice with small portions of hexane, 
add the wakings to the extract and make up to volume with hexane. 

^Methods of sampling for determination of pesticides residues ; Part 1 Agricultural 
and food commodities^ 



15:11774-1986 

4.4 Clean- Up — Extract the hexane solution ( 50 ml ) four times with 
100 ml of distilled water in a 250-ml separatory funnel. Combine the 
aqueous extracts and re-extract dichlorvos from the water with two 100- ml 
portions of ethyl acetate using 1-Jitre separatory funnel. Collect the 
organic solutions in an erlenmeyer flask, dry with 4-5 g anhydrous sodium 
sulphate, and filter through a folded paper into a round-bottom flask. 
Wash the erlenmeyer flask and the sodium sulphate with 50 ml of 
hexane, which portion is added to the ethyl acetate extract. Con- 
centrate on the rotating evaporator ( 35-40*'C ) to a volume of about 
5 ml, and transfer the concentrate to a lO-ml glass- stoppered graduated 
test tube. Rinse evaporation flask with 3-4 ml of hoxane, add the 
washing to the concentrate, and make up to 10 ml. 

5. GAS CHROMATOGRAPHIC METHOD 

5.1 The extracted dichlorvos is measured gas chromotographically using 
a NPD detector or a flame photometric detector ( phosphorus specific ), 
The content of dichlorvos is determined by comparing the response 
with reference standard of dichlorvos. 

5.1.1 Gas Chromatograph — A gas chromatograph equipped with a 
NPD detector or a flame photometric detector operated under the 
following suggested parameters. These parameters may be varied 
according to the available facilities provided standardization is done: 

Column Glass, 2 ml long and 2 mm i.d. packed 

with 10 percent F 2 10 on Gas Chrom 
Q ( 80-100 mesh ) 

Column oven temperatute 130°C 

Injection port temperature 200°C 

Detector temperature 200°C 

Carrier gas and flow rate Nitrogen 40 7 

Hydrogen 15-20 V ml per minute 
Air 150 J 

Retention time 5 mts 

Chart speed 5 mm/mt 

Attenuation 100 x 1 

5.2 Procedure — Inject suitable aliquot ( 1 /*! ) into the column using 
a microlitre syringe. Identify the peak by its retention time and measure 
the peak area. For reference standard prepare hexane solutions con- 
taining one to ten ppm of dichlorvos. 



15:11774-1986 
5.3 Calculation 

Dichlorvos residue, ^ -^iV^yiV^xCxf 
Mg/g(ppm) = ^3 X V^ KM 

where 

A^ «= peak height/ area of the sample; 

Vz = volume, in ftl, of standard dichlorvos injected; 

Vz ™ total volume, in ml, of sample solution; 

C = concentration, in ftg/g, of standard dichlorvos solution; 

- , , 100 

/ = recovery factor= , 

^ percent mean recovery 

A% = peak height/ area of the dichlorvos standard; 

Vi= volume of sample in ^l injected; and 

M = mass, in g, of sample taken for analysis. 



