UDC

621'922'025

: 614'8

I'S : 1991(

Part 9 ) - 1987

hdian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE, CARE AND PROTECTION OF ABRASIVE GRINDING
PART 9 GENERAL ( OPERATING RULES

WHEELS

Second Revision )
the general operating rules with regard to abrasive

1. Scope

grinding 2. Rules

- This wheels.

standard

( Part

9 ) covers

Z.l User's Responsibility - Competent and trained persons and inspection of abrasive wheels and grinding machines. The abrasive abrasive wheels. wheel operator shall be fully instructed

shall

be assigned use, care

to mounting, and p'rotection

care, of

in the

More efficient grinding and a reduction of wheel brehkages will result when with mechanical aptitude and a good knowledge of the contents of this standard inspection and operation of abrasive wheels and grinding machines.

the user insists that only personnel be assigned to the mounting care,

2.2 Wheel Breakage - Wheel breakage shall be investigated the cause. In the event of a wheel breakage which causes and the machine builder should be notified immediately. A cracked or damaged wheel shall not be used.

by the user to determine and correct personal injury, the wheel manufacturer

Should an abrasive wheel be broken in service an investigation must be made immediately that any conditions at variance with the requirements contained in the standard are corrected.

by the user to be

sure

The user should immediately isolate the machine and work area and notify the wheel-maker and machine-builder. Corrections of adverse conditions should only be made following a complete investigation and recommendation by all the parties concerned. This will help determine the cause of the breakage so that a recurrence of the trouble can be prevented.

a wheel is broken, a careful inspection shall be 2.2.1 Inspection after breakage - Whenever made to make sure that the hood has not been damaged, nor the flanges bent, sprung out-of-tune 3r out-of-balance. The spindle and nuts shall also be carefully inspected.
Should a grinding wheel be broken in service, the cause of breakage should established. Such procedure will correct the condition and prevent a recurrence. be investigated at the time of a wheel breakage are: a) Grinding 1) Proper b) Machine wheel: wheel selection; equipment: and be immediately investigated and The more important factors to

2) Wheel inspection. 1) Spindle

speed:
equipment, of guards. procedure: used, and tightened. abuse: sources, and by operator. of breakage will prevent future trouble. flange design and size and Range condition ( if worn and sprung 1; and

2) Mounting
3) Adequacy c) Wheel

mounting

1) Free fit on spindle, 2) Clean washers 3) Flanges d) Evidence 1) Dropped 2) Damage 3) Abusive carefully

of accidental from external pressure

wheel or equipment, or other practice at the time

A thorough

investigation

Adopted

23 November

1987 I

`*

"`3

i

0 May 1989, BIS
I

Or 3

BUREAU OF MANAK BHAVAN,

INElAN
9 NEW ,BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR

MARG

IS : 1991(
2.3 Replacing

Part 9 ) - 1987
Safety Guards -

place and should be checked place and properly tightened

At the completion of wheel mounting, the safety guard shall for condition and adjustment. All safety guard fasteners shall ( see Part 4 of this standard full information and exceptions ).

be in be in

2.4 WheelSpeed - It shall be determined at the time of mounting a wheel that spindle speed does not exceed the maximum operating speed marked on the wheel or wheel package. When a partly used wheel is remounted, spindle speed in revolutions per minute may exceed the maximum revolutions per minute marked on the wheel provided the maximum peripheral speed ( metres per second ) established for the wheel when new, is not exceeded.
On some variable speed machines the spindle speed is governed by an interlock with the guard or some other Care must be exercised to determine that device that allows the rpm to be increased as wheel diameter decreases. such devices are in good working order to prevent the possibility of over-speeding and wheel breakage. Machine builders overspeed conditions. 2.5 usually offer maintenance literature which Variable pitch pulleys require continual can be useful in preventing wheel failure maintenance to remain in proper working caused order. by

Starting the Wheel - All abrasive wheels shall be run at operating speed with safety guard in place or in a protected enclosure for at least one minute before applying work, during which time no one shall stand in front of or in line with the wheel.

This

provision

shall

apply each time whenever

one of the following

conditions

occurs:

a) A new wheel has been mounted, b) A used wheel has been remounted.
An abrasive wheel may be damaged in shipment or storage or the Wheels which have been damaged excessive stresses during mounting. fracture within the first minute of rotation at operating speed. wheel may be subjected to improper and or are under excessive stress are likely to

While this procedure is most important at the time when an abrasive wheel is mounted or remounted, damage may also occur to a wheel during a shut down of the machine on which it is mounted. The user should evaluate the circumstances and the length of machine shut down to determine additional times that the operating rule should be followed.

2.5.1 It is most important that off when actually not in use.

swing

frame

and portable

grinding

machines

shall

be switched

can result in marred 2.6 Balance - Out of balance wheels which set up vibrations machine damage and also cause stresses which could contribute to wheel failure. cannot be corrected for imbalance by the user shall not be used.

work surfaces, Wheels which

On precision grinding machines equipped with balance adjustment devices, wheel/spindle assemblies should be corrected for imbalance by utilizing such devices. When a grinding machine has not build-in precision balance adjustment device, balance must be accomplished by other means. Usually this means dressing or truing the wheel as shown in Fig. 1 or with other devices such as diamond dressers.

FIG. 1

METHOD

OF DRESSING

OF WHEEL

2.7 Truing the wheel.

and Dressing

-

Truing

shall

Truing a wheel corrects the runout be done by a competent person. action

condition

on the grinding surface.

surface

of

Dressing A wheel

a wheel which

alters the cutting

or shape of the grinding

cannot

be trued should

not be used.

A method of dressing wheel used in off-hand operation is shown in Fig. 1. Note that the dresser should be supported on a work rest and that the work rest should be adjusted away from tb wheel so that the heel of the dresser may hook over the work rest and be guided by it as the dresser is moved evenly across the wheel face. `Bumping' a wheel with a heavy casting or other object is dangerous and wi II not dress a wheel properly.

a

IS: 1991(

Part

9 ) - 1987

the diamond type, shall be equipped with 2.7.1 Dresser guards - Wheel dressers, excepting guards over the tops of the cutters to protect the operator from flying pieces of broken cutters or wheel particles. 2.8 Wet Grinding - Wheels used in wet grinding shall the coolant. The soaked portion may throw the wheel wheel not be allowed to stand partly dangerously out of balance. shall first be shut immersed in

When shutting down a wet grinding operation, the coolant allowed to run free until all the coolant has been removed.

off and the
important. wheel and

For satisfactory operation, adherence to recommended practices of coolant manufacture Fig. 2 shows distortion in the work piece due to the heat being located in the area of contact work. Proper application of coolant will help minimize those conditions. ,-WORK PIECE

is very between

GRINDING WHEEL

FIG. 2

DISTORTION

IN WORK

PIECE

DUE TO HEAT

IN AREA

OF CONTACT

2.9 Side Grinding -Side grinding should only be performed with wheels designed for this purpose. Grinding on flat sides of the wheels designed for phripheral grinding may be dangerous may cause broken wheels. This does not preclude their use for applications such as shoulder and form grinding where it is recognized that a limited amount of side grinding is performed. Extreme caution should be exercised not to use excessive side pressure.
Peripheral grinding wheels should not be used for side grinding because of insufficient support to withstand the pressure exerted. Wheels designed for side grinding such as abrasive discs are mounted with one flat side against a suitable steel machine plate to safely withstand side pressure. Form grinding is not considered to be side grinding.

2.10 Lubrication - The machine heating or other conditions which

spindle bearings shall be properly might damage the abrasive wheel.
cause the mounting spindle

lubricated
because may

to prevent

over-

Improperly lubricated spindle bearings will thus exerting a stress in the arbor hole ure8. Other adveise being broken. conditions related to

to expand

of heat generated, result in

improper

lubrication

can cause

vibrations

which

a wheel which be

An offhand grinder shall be equipped with a work rest or-other 2.11 Work Restsshall prevent the work piece from jamming between the abrasive wheel and the wheel The work rest or other device shall not contact properly maintained as shown in Fig. 3. When work rests are used, the following the abrasive shall wheel at any time

device guard. and

shall

conditions

be m`aintained

at all times:

a) The work rest shall be adjusted such that the gap between the work rest and the grinding face of the abrasive wheel shall not exceed 3 mm, b) The work rest height shall be on the horizontal centre line of the machine spindle. c) The work rest shall not be adjusted while rest is designed to allow such adjustment. d) The work rest shall be securely clamped the abrasive wheel is rotating unless the work

after each adjustment.

When work rest cannot be used in accordance with (a) and (b) above, because of job requireIn ments, the work rest can be adjusted, modified or eliminated to accommodate the operation. that circumstance, the user shall provide a means for prohibiting the use of the grinder for other than the job for which the work rest was modified.
Jamming of the; workpiece is such machinesshould be identified

a cause of wheel breakage and operator
b-warning signs, locked

Where work rests are not usable, injury. out when not in use or closely supervised as to use.

IS : 1991 ( Part 9 ) - 1987

FIG. 3

FLOOR

STAND

GRINDER

SHOWING

ADJUSTMENT

OF WORK

REST TO WHEEL

2.12 Maintenance 2.12.1 Grinding machine area free as possible from obstructions. The space about the machine shall be kept light, dry and as

grinding equipment 2.12.2 Machine maintenance - An employer shall maintain which will not create a hazard for an employee. An employer shall instruct report defective equipment to an employee's supervisor.

in a condition an employee to

Prooer machine maintenance orocedures are one of the most important aspects of safetv in the use of abrasive wheels.' Particular attention should be placed on those components or `parts which can affect the speed of a wheel, such as governors on air grinders, variable.pitch Pulleys, gear boxes, and rheostats or other type of electrical controls. _

2.12.3 Check for wear - All spindles, be periodically inspected and maintained

spigots or other machine parts on which to size ( Part 3 of this standard ).

wheels

fit, shall

2.13 Large Hole Inorganic Vitrified Bonded Wheels - Large hole inorganic bonded wheels (those with hole in excess of one-fourth of the wheel diameter ) should not be used on snagging operations.
Since the cross-sectional strength of an abrasive wheel decreases is not safe to use large hole inorganic wheels for snagging operations. Large hole inorganic bonded wheels cannot be manufactured with as its retaining diameter media approaches such as steel its hole size, it

rings.

2.14 Wheel Discard Size - The usable portion of an abrasive wheel shall be considered to be that A wheel shall not be worn down to a size portion which .extends beyond the mounting flanges. which would alloti the `mounting flange assembly to contact the workpiece holding fixture. j
Wheels which have been removed-from operation or machine, provided that proper one operation may be remounted as a smaller diameter wheel mounting, speed and guarding regulations are observed. on another

2.15 Eye Protection - Suitable for all grinding operations.

eye protection .

devices

shall

be provided

and used by the operator

Most eye injuries could be prevented by the provision and use of suitable goggles or effective screens or better It is essential that appropriate eye protectron for the particular work should be provided and used in still, both. all dry grinding and cutting-off operations, whether by fixed or portable machins, and for all materials on which such machins are employed. Screens of toughened glass are particularly useful on machines used for short periods by different operators who may be reluctant to wear goggles. Easy adjustment of inclination sources from its surface. of the screen window is ncessary to counter image reflection of external light

To protect the lower surface of transparent glass screens from pitting by the stream of hot particles leaving the wheels; it should be covered with a thin sheet'ofsuitably clear'plastics material which will not pit as readily as Dust should be excluded by binding together the edges of the glass glass and can be replaced quickly and cheaply. and plastics with adhesive tape.

r4

IS : 1991 ( Part 9 ) - 1987
EXPLANATORY NOTE

The safe operation of abrasive wheels requires the understanding and cooperation of many diverse groups and of all indlviduals concerned with their use or operation. This has been the basic viewpoint in establishing these safety requirements for the guidance of manufacturers, users and others involved in handling these products. A thorough knowledge of nature and characteristics of abrasive wheels, the grinding machines on which they are used and the safety and protection devices which can and shall be used to limit, if not eliminate, injury or damage in case of accidental wheel breakage, is necessary for proper understanding of these safety requirements. These safety requirements may be used as a guide and not as an alternative to constant educational programmes at all levels which are the best insurance against those unforeseen conditions or circumstances which result in an industrial accident. The mandatory requirements are printed in normal ( 10 points ) type and the explanatory information in smaller ( 8 point ) type. This is intended to facilitate a condensed document of The explanatory information mandatory requirements together with supporting tables and a figure. gives the basic reasons for the rules to encourage their implementation in practice. However, it may not be termed as part of the standard. The explanatory material has been included to encourage compliance and it is given only where it amplifies or clarifies a requirement. Operating rules are not included as to be important safety requirements standard. This standard was first on ANSI B 7.1-1970. issued in these safety requirements unless they are of such a nature equal in importance to other requirements included in this in 1962 and its first revision was taken up in 1973, based and drafting

In order to review the individual section at any time and also reasons alike, this standard has been split-up in the following ten parts: Part Part Part Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 Scope and definitions 2 Handling and storage 3 General machine requirements 4 5 6 7 Safety guards Flanges Inspection and mounting Standard speeds rules

for technical

8 Special speeds 9 General operating wheels

Part 10 Mounted

While splitting, this part ( Part 9 ) of the standard has also been revised been made more explicit. More data has also been included. While revising this standard, assistance

and the details

have

has also been taken from the following

publications: wheels', issued wheels',

`European safety by the Federation

requirement for the use, care and protection of abrasive of European Producers of Abrasive Products ( FEPA ).

ANSI B 7.1-1978 `Safety requirement for the use, care and protection issued by the American National Standards Institute, USA.

of abrasive

5
Printed at New lndla PrlntinO Press, Khuria, India

