( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 6004- 1980

Indian Standard
CRITERIA FOR HYDRAULIC DESIGN OF SEDIMENT EJECTOR FOR IRRIGATION AND POWER CHANNELS

( First Revision )
Canals
Chairman
SHRI S. B. KHARE

and Canal

Linings

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

BDC 57

Chukha Hyde1 Project,

Bhutan

Mem hers Irrigation and Research Institute, Khagaul ( Patna ) ADMINISTRATOR Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay SERI N. C. BHATNAQ~R Central Ground Water Board, Chandigarh SURI CHICKARMANE Union Carbide India Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. K. KARAMCHANDANI ( Alternate ) CHIEF ENGINEER Irrigation and Power Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad DR J. PURUSKOTHAM ( Alternate) Irrigation Works, Government of Punjab, CUIEF ENQINEER ( C ) Chandigarh DIRECTOR CENTRAL DESIGNS ( Alternare ) CHIEF ENOZNEER ( IRRIQATION ) Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras SR DY CZIIEF ENGINEER ( IRRITATION ) ( Alternate ) ADDITIONAL DI~IZCTOR ENGINEER ( IRRIRATION ) Public Works Department, Government of ( SOUTH ) Karnataka, Bangalore CHI~FENGINEER (TUNQABHADRA PROJECT ) ( Altrrnate ) SHRI 0. P. DATTA Beas Designs Organization, Nangal Township DR R. J. GARDE Water Resources Development Training Centre, University of Roorkre, Roorkee ( U. P. ) Dn A. S. C~AWLA ( Alternate) DIRECTOR Irrigation Department, Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur
CHIEF

( Continued on page 2 )

@ Copyright 1980
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright sunder the said Act.

IS:6004-1980
( Continwdfrom #age 1 ) Representing New Delhi

Mem hers DIRECTOR ( B & CD-I )

Central Water Commission, DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( B & CD-I ) ( Alternate j

DIRECTOR ( B & CD-II ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( B & CD-II SHRI K. M. MAIXESHWARI

Central Water Commission, New Delhi ) ( Alternate ) Planning Commission, Government of India, Delhi

New

&RI N. K. DIESEIT ( Alternate ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI Y. K. MEHTA SHRI E. T. ANTIA ( Alternate) Irrigation Department, Government SHRI GAUHI KANTA MISRA Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI R. K. AQUARWAL ( Alternate) Fibreglass Pilkington Ltd, Bombay SHRI G. H. RODRICKS SHRI E. SUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate )
SHRI P. C. SAXENA SERI V. P. BIXATT (Alternate) SECRETARY Central Water and Power Research of Central Board

of

Uttar

Station, Power,

Pune New

Delhi

Irrigation

and

Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee SHRI JAQDISH MOHAN ( Alternate ) Irrigation and Power Department, Government of SHRI K. T. SUBUDHI Orissa, Bhubaneshwar Irrigation and Power Department, Government SUPERINTENDINO ENUINEER (PROof Haryana, Chandigarh JECT&DESIoN CIBCLE) ENGINEER SUPEaINTENDlNC ( S. Y. L. DESIGN CIRCLE ) ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&i0 Member ) SHRI D. AJITRA SIMHA,

SHRI M. K. SINQHAL

Director

( Civ Engg ) Secfetary
SHRI V. KALYANASUNDARAM Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

2

X8:6004- 1980

Indian Standard
CRITERIA FOR HYDRAULIC DESIGN OF SEDIMENT EJECTOR FOR IRRIGATION AND POWER CHANNELS

(First Revision)
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 17 March 1980, after the draft finalized by the Canals and Canal Linings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council, 0.2 Sediment ejector, also known as sediment extractor or silt ejector, is a contrivance to remove excessive sediment load after it has entered a canal. The extraction of sediment is effected by causing sediment concentration in the bottom layers and separating them in such a way that there is least disturbance in the sediment distribution of the approaching flow. This standard is intended to help in design of sediment ejectors. Sediment ejectors are usually provided in head reaches of canals which carry heavy silt, especially canals taking off from diversion weirs, anicut or barrages across rivers. 0.3 This standard was first issued in 1971. The present revision was taken up with a view to bring in further clarifications and modifications in the light of experience gained while applying the provisions of the earlier version of the code to practical situations. 0.4 The present revision includes the modified clauses on the data required for the design of sediment ejector, location, approach channel, main strucA new clause on hydraulic model studies has ture and outfall channel. also been included. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard deals with the criteria ejector for irrigation and power channels. 3 for hydraulic design of sediment

IS I 6004 - 1980 2. DATA REQUIRED data relating to the canal are needed for design of

2.1 The following sediment ejector:

a) Site plan; b) Cross section and other design data of the canal upstream downstream of the proposed location; c) Canal discharge; d) Sediment data:

and

1) Silt load both suspended and bed load daily, fortnightly or monthly, as available. For suspended silt, data should be available at different depths along atleast three equidistant verticals across the width, at the proposed site of the ejector. The bed load should be observed up to 0.2 d, where d is the depth of water ( subject to a maximum of 0.5 m ); and 2) Permissible size of silt can safely be allowed downstream of the silt ejector. In case of power channels generally sediment size larger than O-2 mm is intended to be ejected; and e) Data for existing reach of the outfall channel: 1) Contour plan; 2) Cross sections; 3) Stage discharge the outfall; and 4) Discharging 3. LOC+TION 3.1 While deciding the location of the silt ejector, availability of suitable outfall channel has to be kept in view. The approach channel upstream of the ejector preferably be straight as otherwise it is likely to change the sediment concentration across the channel and disturb the uniform In certain unavoidable distribution of the flow in front of the ejector. cases where silt ejector has to be provided in the curved reach of the channel, it should be done after conducting model studies. The ejector should not be sited too near the head regulator as the residual turbulence may cause the sediment load to remain in suspension and prevent its ejection to the desired extent. At the same time it should not be far away from the head reach otherwise the sediment may settle down earlier and reduce the channel capacity upstream. 3.2 The working head available, that is, the difference in water level in the canal upstream of the ejector and the outfall channel at the exit of curve and the hydrograph of the stream at

capacity.

4

lS : 6004- 1980 the ejector tunnel, shall be sufficient to extract the desired sediment. A working head of about 1 m is generally considered satisfactory for the purpose. 4. COMPONENTS 4.1 Generally, a silt ejector has the following components:
of:

a) Approach channel; b) Main structure which consists 1) diaphragm, 2) tunnels, and 3) control structure; c) Outfall channel. 5. APPROACH CHANNEL and

5.1 In order to increase the concentration of sediment in the bottom layers, the cross sections of the approach channel should be increased by depressing suitably the bed and/or increasing the width, to reduce the At the start of approach channel velocity of flow to the desired limit. suitable transition/splay of the order of 1 in 5 should be provided SO as to obtain streamline flow. The setting velocity of the silt particles can be calculated by - Stoke's law which is given as under: Settling velocity, V, = where V, F= Settling velocity in cm/s, Pfl = Density of the particle in g/ems, P = Density of the fluid in g/ems, g = Acceleration due to gravity in cm/ss, p = Absolute viscosity of the medium in poise, and d = Diameter of the particle in cm. The layout of the approach channel may be decided with the above guidelines. The reduced velocity should be maintained for a sufficient length to achieve the desired sediment concentration in the bottom layers. 6. MAIN STRUCTURE diaphragm shall be so designed that 6.1 Diaphragm ( see Fig. 1 ) -The it causes least disturbance in the sediment concentration attained in the 5 +( pg;p)gd2

IS : 6004 - 1980 bottom layers of flow upstream of the ejector tunnels. In fixing the diaphragm level due consideration should be given to the following factors: a) Desired sediment size to be trapped b) Bed level and size of tunnels, and c) Thickness of diaphragm, Bed level of canals downstream d) and extracted,

of the silt ejector.

ENLARGED

DETAIL

AT A

PLAN

AT DIAPtiRAGM

LEVEL

SECTION

XX

NOTE 1 -Energy
channel not shown. Radii level

dissipation of vanes

arrangement such that

d/s of channel requirement

and

in

the 6.2

escape to 6.2.3

NOTE2 are fulfilled. *HFL/water

to be

of clauses

in exit channel.

FIG. 1

TYPICAL DESIGNFOR SEDIMENT EJECTOR

6

ISr6004-1980
The location of diaphragm can be determined by drawing the integrated discharge depth curve by using Vanoni's logarithmic velocity distribution,

v=
where

vs

+gyss
-(

1 + 2'3 log,or/Yll )

v = Velocity of flow at a height y from channel bottom,

V = Mean velocity of flow,
k = Von Karman constant ( assumed usually as 0'4 ), s = Slope of the channel, Y = Height from channel bottom, Yo = Total depth of flow, and g = Acceleration due to gravity. (However these parameters should be confirmed by model test experiments ),

suitable

6.1.1 It is desirable to place the diaphragm at the downstream bed level of the canal. However, if the diaphragm has to be placed higher from other considerations, the condition of all particularly for low supplies should be checked and, if necessary, proper energy dissipation arrangements provided. 6.1.2 The diaphragm should be properly tied to the supports as otherwise the diaphragm is likely to be dislodged. 6.1.3 The diaphragm shall be extended beyond the pier noses and the underneath of the diaphragm shall be given a streamlined bell mouth (elliptical ) shape conforming to the following equation: _++1 4 a2 where a = the thickness of the diaphragm (see Fig. 1).
X2

6.2 Tannels-The ejector should normally span the entire width of the canal and shall be divided into a number of compartments of tunnels by vanes gradually converging so as to accelerate the escaping flow for These main delivering it to the outfall channel on one side of the canal. compartments shall be subdivided into smaller compartments or sub-tunnels by vanes of radii varying from 3 to 4 times the width of sub-tunnels to 7

IS : 6004 - 1980 avoid cross flow in the transition section. The upstream noses of vanes shall have cut water shapes. Downstream end of vanes shall be fish tailed. 6.2.1 The tunnel dimensions at the entry and exit shall be so fixed as to ensure velocities that would carry the size of sediment to be removed. The section of the sub-tunnel at the entry shall be so chosen that the velocity of flow at the intake is slightly higher than the velocity of bottom The section of sub-tunnels up filaments of water upstream of the ejector. to their exit, where these end into the main tunnels, shall be reduced gradually in such a way that there is an overall increase of 10 to 15 percent in velocity of emerging flow. 6.2.2 At the exit of sub-tunnels the section of the,main tunnel shall be designed such that the flow velocities of the combined discharge are not The section at less than the velocities emerging out from the sub-tunnels. the exit of the main tunnels shall be so designed as to attain a velocity of 2.5 to 6 m/s depending on the grade of sediment to be ejected, but in all cases, the exit velocity shall be less than the critical velocity. 6.2.3 2.2 m to ad.justed designed The depth of the main tunnels should be kept about 1.8 m to facilitate inspection and repair work. Their width shall be so as to have equal losses in each tunnel. The tunnels shall be to run full bore to secure maximum efficiency.

NOTE - As the length of tunnels will be different, head loss in various tunnels would be different and, therefore, the shorter tunnels will tend to take a higher This will discharge than the longer ones, head available for both being the same. result in higher velocity of entry in shorter tunnels ( nearer to escape channel ) than To counteract this possibility, in others and would lead to disturbance at entry. either the shorter tunnels shall he made to serve a larger width of the canal as compared to longer tunnels or tunnel cross sections shall be altered each serving an equal width.

6.3 Control Structure -The discharge from the sediment ejector is controlled by set of emergency and regulating gates. The quantum of discharge to be run through sediment ejector and frequency of its operation would vary in different parts of the year depending on the sediment load carried in the canal and this is achieved by operating regulating gate as required. It would be desirable to operate the gates fully open or fully closed. 7. OUTFALL CHANNEL

7.1 The outflow from the ejector is led to a natural drainage through an outfall channel. The outfall channel should be designed to have a selfcleaning velocity so that the ejected material is transported witout deposi8

IS : 6004 - 1980 tion. Adequate drop between the full supply level of the outfall channel at its tail end and the normal high flood level of the natural stream is desirable for efficient functioning of the channel. Of the several formulae available, the following equation can be adopted for working out approximate flushing velocity: P hT where d, by Neil

VC2=

Z-5

-0.80

V c - Competent
material,

mean velocity for first displacement

of bed

P = Mass density of the fluid,
d, = Effective diameter of bed grains, y0 = Depth of flow, and AT= Specific weight of the bed material in the fluid. The velocity adopted should be well in excess of that worked out The adequacy of the section of the escape channel, especially above. when the available bed slope is not steep, should be tested for its carrying capacity. A triangular distribution of sediment concentration can be assumed at the mouth of the ejector to work out the quantity of sediment entering the ejector. The section of the escape channel should be so designed as to have adequate capacity to transport the total quantity of sediment entering it. 8. ESCAPE DISCHARGE 8.1 The escape discharge will be governed by the following considerations: a) Discharge required to remove the desired sediment size and load, and b) Minimum discharge required for flushing individual tunnels. Generally an escape discharge equal to 10 to 20 percent of the full supply discharge of the canal downstream of the ejector will be adequate for this purpose. 9. LOSSES IN TUNNELS 9.1 These shall comprise friction losses and those due to bends and transitions in contractions or expansions and shall be evaluated as given in 9.1.1 to 9.1.4. 9

IS : 6004 I 1980 9.1.1 Friction formula: Losses -These shall be computed by the Manning's

4 = where hi V L n

v2 L n2, K4/3

Head loss in m, Average velocity in m/s, Length of tunnel in m, Rugosity coefficient of the tunnel and R = Hydraulic mean radius in m.

= = =

surface

(see 9.1J.l ),

9.1.1.1 Values of rugosity coefficient ( n) for various be taken in accordance with IS : 4745-1968". 9.1.2 Loss Due equation: to Bend It shall I.72 3g be calculated 8 180 by

surfaces the

shall

following

h,,=F-where hb = Head

loss due to bend

in m, +,

F = 0.124 + 3.104 S = Width R = Radius of tunnel in m,

of the bend

along

centre

line of tunnel

in m,

g = Acceleration due to gravity in m/G, and 0 = Angle of deviation in degrees. 9.1.3 Contraction Losses It shall be obtained by the following formula:

where h, = Head loss due to V, = Average velocity VI = Average velocity due g = Acceleration
*Code of practice for design

contraction in m, at the exit of transition in m/s, at the entrance of transition in m/s, and to gravity in m/s*.
of lined canals.

of cross section

10

1st6004.1980
9.1.4 Expansion Losses equation: These shall be computed by the following

h
where

he = Head loss due to expansion in m, k = Coefficient which may be taken as 0.2 for gradual transitions,

V a = Average velocity in smaller section in m/s, VI = Average velocity in expanded section in m/s, and
g = Acceleration 10. EFFICIENCY due to gravity in m/s2. OF EJECTOR

10.1 The efficiency ( E) of the ejector shall be calculated for the bed load primarily. It will also be iridicated for suspended load. The samples of the sediment will be collected sufficiently away from the transitions of the silt ejector. E= where I u = Silt intensity in canal upstream of the ejector, and Id = Silt intensity in canal downstream of the ejector. `u;Id u
X 100 percent

11.FLUSHING
11.1 During the period when sediment ejector is not required to function, it is desirable to operate the regulation gates occasionally for short periods to flush the tunnels consistent with the economy in water Otherwise, the tunnels requirements for irrigation and power generation. are likely to get choked and may require manual clearance which may be possible only during closure of the canal. 11.2 At times during the normal operation of the sediment ejector, the approach channel and/or tunnels or both may require flushing. This may be done by running the tunnels in rotation to achieve higher velocities. 12. TYPICAL DESIGN

12.1 A typical sketch of sediment ejector is shown in Fig. 1. 11

IS : 6004 - 1980 13. HYDRAULIC MODEL STUDIES

13.1 There are many unknown factors in the design of silt ejector, such as the capacity of the silting basin in the approach channel, layout of the sub-tunnels and main tunnels, flushing velocity for the particular characteristics of the sediment to be gected, and flow pattern of the bottom layers of the discharge, etc. As such it is essential that the layout based on the theoretical design be checked by model studies to ascertain the efficiency of the silt ejector.

12

