**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12134 (1987): Classification for dredgers [TED 18: 
Inland, Harbour Crafts and Fishing Vessels] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 627-748 : 621 879 IS ; 12134 - 1987 



Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2003 ; 

CLASSIFICATION OF DREDGERS 



1. Scope — Specifies a classification of all types of dredgers designed for extracting or moving 
soil when altering the dimensions of basins or when creating new ones. In this standard, only 
displacement craft are considered. 

2. Classification of Dredgers Basins on General Properties 

2.1 Basing on Usage 

a) Dredgers for deepening, 

b) Mining dredgers*, 

c) Dredgers for reclamation*, and 

d) Dredgers for special works*. 

2.2 Basing on the operational area ( with account for the design, construction and classing by a 
classification society ): 

a) Sea-going — operating in the areas of roads, ports, approach canals, coastal zones; and 

b) Dredgers for inland navigation ways — operating on the area of rivers, lakes, water basins 
and canals. 

2.3 Basing on the type of the soil extracted; 

a) Operating on hard soils, 

b) Operating on medium soils, 

c) Operating on soft soils, and 

d) Of multi-purpose type ( providing for operation in a range of several groups of soil or by 
changing the set of technological equipment, treatment of soils of other categories of 
difficulty ). 

2.4 Basing on the type of power plant: 

a) Steam,. 

b) Diesel, 

c) Diesel-electric, 

d) Diesel-hydraulic, 

e) Electric, 

f) Gas-turbine, 

g) Nuclear, 

h) Supplied from shore power plants, and 
j) Combined. 

2.5 Basing on the method of movement from one working section to another: 

a) Self-propelled, 

b) Trailing, and 

c) With restricted self-propelling ability. 

2.6 Basing on the transportability: 

a) Dismountable, and 

b) Non-dismountabfe. 

2.7 Basing on the habitability: 

a) With accommodation, and 

b) Without accommodation. 



Adopted 8 June 1987 



© December 1987, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 12134- 1987 

2.8 Basing on the method of soil treatment and extraction: 

a) Suction, 

b) Scoop, 

c) Rock-crushing, 

d) Bed wash-out, 

e) Rock-drilling*, 

f) Sub-marine bulldozers*, and 

g) Reloaders and sorting dredgers or attachments*. 

3. Classification of Dredgers Based on Specific Properties 

3.1 Suction dredgers are additionally divided. 

3.1.1 Basing on the type of dredging member: 

a) With a centrifugal pump, 

b) With a jet pump, 

c) With an air-lift ( gas-lift ), and 

d) Combined. 

3.1.2 Basing on the location of the dredging facility: 

a) With the dredging facility located at one side, 

b) With the dredging facility located at both sides, 

c) With the dredging facility located in a notch, and 

d) With a combined location, 

3.1.3 Basing on the soil transportation method: 

a) With a floating pipeline, 

b) With a suspended pipeline, 

c) With a soil-discharging nozzle, 

d) Hopper, 

e) Barge-loading, and 

f) Combined. 

3.1.4 Basing on the soil loosening method: 

a) Without an agitator, 

b) With a mechanical agitator, 

— With multipurpose agitator nozzles, 

— With rock agitator nozzles. 

c) With a hydraulic agitator, and 

d) Combined. 

3.1.5 Basing on the means of operative travel. 

a) Moved with propelling devices, 

b) Pile and anchor, 

c) Anchor, 

d) Pile, and 

e) Combined. 

3.1.6 Basing on the methods of operative travel: 

a) Butterfly, 

b) Longitudinal, 

c) Combined, and 

d) Pit*. 



IS : 12134-1987 

3.2 Suction hopper dredgers are additionally divided. 

3.2.1 Basing on the method of discharge: 

a) With bottom dischargs openings, 

b) With an opening hull, 

c) With a suspended pipeline, and 

d) With a soil extraction with mechanical or hydraulic facilities of a dredger or reloader. 

3.2.2 Basing on the methods of dredging: 

a) With a trailing soil receiver, 

b) With an attacking soil receiver, and 

c) Combined. 

3.3 Scoop dredgers are additionally divided into: 

a) Basing on the type of dredging facility: 

1) Dipper, 

2) Multi-bucket, and 

3) Grap. 

b) Basing on the means of operative travel into: 

1 ) Anchor, 

2) Pile, and 

3) Pile and anchor. 

3.3.1 Dipper dredgers are additionally divided into: 
a) Basing on the direction of the bucket movement: 

1) With a director shovel, and 

2) With a reverse shovel. 

3.3.2 Bucket dredgers are additionally divided into: 
a) Basing on the soil transportation method into: 

1) Barge-loading, 

2) Conveyor, 

3) Chute, and 

4) Combined. 

3.3.3 Grab dredgers are additionally divided: 

a) Basing on the number of grabs: 

1) Single grab, and 

2) Multi-grab. 

b) Basing on the soil transportation method: 

1) Non-hopper, and 

2) Hopper. 

3.3.4 Rock-crushing dredgers are additionally divided basing on the performance of the 
operating member into those: 

a) With a free movement of the bit, and 

b) With a forced movement of the bit. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Dredging is a constant feature in most of the ports and waterways. A large number of types 
of dredgers are employed for the purpose in the country. An attempt has been made in this 
standard to lay down the classification of dredgers. 

The dredging equipment marked with an asterisk { * ) are not further dealt upon as they do 
not directly pertain to deepening as such. 

3 

Printed at Printograph, New Uelhi, Inaia 



