( Reaffirmed 1998 )

IS :120411987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE DETERMINATION OF MERCURY BY ATOMIC ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETER
Chemical Standards
Chairman DR B. N. MATTOO Members DR S. K. MEGHAL ( Alternate Dr B. N. Mattoo ) SHRI P. K. AGARWAL SHKI K. D. AMRE
SHRI J. A. ASHTAPUTRE

Sectional Committee,
MahaF;E;;yState

CDC 1
Science Laboratory,

Representing Forensic

to IDMA Laboratories, National Organic Bombay ) Chandigarh Chemical Industries Ltd,

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI P. K. RAO ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Health Services, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR GENERAL Delhi ( PFA ) ASSISTANT SECRETARY( PFA ) ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI K. M. BANERIEE SHRI N. C. CHATI.ERJEE( Alternate ) Centr;L,Eevenues Control Laboratory, CHIEF CHEMIST

SHRI S. B. NANAL ( Alternate

New

New

DEPUTY CHIEF CHEMIST ( Alternate ) Department of Industries & Commerce, JOINT DIRECTOR ( CHEMICALS ) Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( MCL ) ( Alternafe ) Regional Testing Centre, New Delhi DR S. K. KAPOOR Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi DR J. K. NIGAM SHRI N. S. BIRDIE ( Alternate ) Sarabhai M. Chemicals, Vadodara DR P. K. PANDYA Reglonal Research DR M. PARDHASARADIII Laboratory ( CSIR ), Hydcrabad DR J. MA~HUSUDAN RAO ( Alternate ) Century Rayon, Kalyan SHRI OM PRASAD Natio;;fh%ysical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New DR 0. C:. PRASHAR h DR A. K. SARKAR ( Alternate ) ( Continued @ Copyright 1987 on page 2)

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This pnblicntion is protected under the fndicrn Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and repr~>duction in whole or in pact by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall he deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:12041-1987
( Continued from page Mcmhers DR G. RAMANA RAO 1) Representing New

Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Delhi SHRI ROOP LAL SHAH ( Alternate ) 1 DR M. P. SAHAKARI It&b Private Limited, Bombay SHRI S. S. HONAVAR ( Alternate) i DR L. V. SASTRY Bhabha Aromic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI V. N. SEHGAL Centr;lelhForensic Science Laboratory,

New

SHRI V. S. BISARIA (Alternate ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta DR N. R. SEN GUPTA SHRI B. B. BOSE ( Alternate > Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Nagpur SHRI G. S. SHUKLA SHRI T. V. MATHEW ( Alternate ) Central Salt & Marine Chemical Research PRO! M. M. TAQUI KHAN Institute, Bhavnagar DR_G. D. BHA.~ ( Alternate ) Di:ec:or General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI SAT~SHCHANDER, Director ( Chem )
Secretary SHRI M. BAKSHI GUPTA Deputy Director ( Chem ), BIS

2

IS :120411987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE DETERMINATION OF MERCURY BY ATOMIC ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETER
0. 0.1This Indian FOREWORD

Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 February 1987, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council.

0.2 The atomic absorption spectrophotometric method is based on the fact that atoms present in ground state will absorb incident light of the same wavelength they emit when excited. When radiation from the given excited element is passed through the flame containing atoms of that element in the ground state, the intensity of the transmitted radiation will decrease in proportion to the amount of the ground state atoms present in the flame. A hollow cathode lamp made of the element to be The metal atoms to be measured are determined provides the radiation. introduced into the beam of radiation by aspirating the sample solution into the flame. A monochrometer isolates the characteristic radiation from the hollow cathode lamp and photo-sensitive device measures the Various elements including mercury can be transmitted radiation. precisely analyzed by the technique. analysis making use of hydride 0.3 However, flameless absorption technique or a graphite furnace or cold vapour technique are alternatively available. Mercury is frequently determined by cold vapour technique as a free rapid method, which has also been described in the specification. 0.4 Various products, like water and industriel effluents, food products, acids, etc, in which mercury concentration is very low are determined by cold vapour technique. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960".

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard mercury by atomic
*Rules for rounding

prescribes absorption
off numerical

the method for the spectrophotometry.
values ( revised ).

determination

of

3

IS : 12041- 1987 2. QUALITY OF THE REAGENTS 2.1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and deionized water shall be used in tests.
NOTE - `Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals which affect the results of analysis.

that do not contain

impurities

3. OUTLINE

OF THE METHOD

3.1 The sample is brought into solution by suitable treatment with acids or acid combination and diluted suitably with water. Suitable dilutions are made for aspirating into air acetylene flame. The standard solution is prepared in the same way for calibration. The characteristic mercury line is 253'7 mm. 3.2 The cold vapour technique is used for the determination of traces of the mercury. Mercury ions are reduced to the elemental state by suitable reducing agent ( see Note >. The reduced solution is stirred vigorously so that an equilibrium is achieved between the mercury in solution and air phase. The vapour is then purged into absorption cell which is located in the light path of the spectrometer in place of normal burner. The resultant absorption peak is then recorded.
NOTE -

The composition chloride

of reducing solution -

agent shall be: 5 percent ( m/v ) (
m/v )

a) Stannous b) Hydrazine

( m/v )

hydrate

40 percent 5 percent

c) Sodium borohydride

4. INTERFERENCE 4.1 Mercury ( I ) and Mercury ( II) show different sensitivities air acetylene flame. ( I ) is more sensitive due to absorption Mercury --t Hg 2+ t Hg. I$+ percent efficiency. Mercury element is readily in the reaction

atomized with 100

4.2 Problem caused by the different sensitivities may be overcome by addition of 1 ml of freshly prepared 20 percent stannous chloride to each solution immediately before analysis. This method is not recommended, unless absolutely necessary, as the elemental mercury formed is readily lost by evaporation. Addition of ascorbic acid has similar effect, while addition of complexing agent ( such as EDTA > assists the disproportion reaction by removing divalent mercury. 4

IS : 12041 - 1987 4.3 In cold vapour technique other metallic ions which are reduced to With both flame the elemental state by stannous chloride can interfere. and vapour technique it is advisable to check for non-atomic absorption by repeating the analysis with hydrogen lamp.

5. APPARATUS 5.1 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer - Provided with background correction and having following parameters. 5.1.1 Lamp Current - Depending upon the lamp and the instrument used. 5.1.2 Support - Air. 5.1.3 Fuel - Acetylene. 5.1.4 Flame Stoichiometry - Oxidizing air-acetylene flame. 5.1.5 Wave Length - 253'7 nm. 5.1.6 Band Pass - 0'2 nm. 5.2 Working Range 5.2.1 Air-Acetylene Flame - 100-400 pg/ml. 5.2.2 Cold Vapour Generation Technique - 0'12-1'0 pg/ml.
5.3 Absorption 5.4 Reaction 5.5 Magnetic 6. REAGENTS - 99'99 percent. Hydrochloric Acid - See IS : 265-1967". r6.3 Concentrated Nitric Acid - See IS : 264-19767. 6.4 Stannous Chloride - Pure. 6.1 Pure Mercury 6.2 Concentrated 7. SAMPLE Vessel Vessel Stirrer

PREPARATION

7.1 A few procedures are given for certain material in which mercury has to be determined for guidance. 7.2 Water and Effluents - Mercury may be present in water as free ( ionic ) mercury or as organically bound _ _ mercury. The . . latter form is not reduced by stannous chloride during cold vapour technique and more vigorous reduction must be used if total mercury is to be measured.
*Specification tSpecification for hydrochloric acid ( second revision ), for nitric acid ( second revision ).

5

IS : 12041-

1987

For total mercury estimation, 100 ml sample is digested with 10 ml sulphuric-acid and 5 ml of 2 percent potassium permanganate at minimum temperature for 24 hours. More potassium permanganate may be added in case of sewage or effluent. Alternatively, 5 ml concentrated sulphuric acid, 2'5 ml nitric acid and 1 ml of 5 percent potassium permanganate solution are added to 100 ml of sample. After 15 minutes, 2 ml of 5 percent potassium persulphate solution it added. Excess permanganate is destroyed by just prior to the determination. After the digestion, apply the cold vapour technique. 7.3 Concentration Technique - When effluent is very low, the concentration estimation. mercury content in water or of sample is required prior to of mercury compounds,

7.3.1 Evaporation - Due to high volatility use of evaporation should be. avoided.

7.3.2 Solvent Extraction - Mercury may be extracted in methyl isobutyl ketone using 1 percent ammonium pyrolidine dithiocarbamate in water at pH 3. 7.4 Mercury in Caustic Soda - Select the sample size according to the anticipated mercury concentration and neutralize with ( 1 : 1 ) hydrochloric acid using phenolphthalein indicator. Add 1 ml of ( 1 : 4 ) sulphuric acid and 1 ml of potassium permanganate. Add 30 ml of water and boil, allow to cool. Destroy the excess potassium permanganate with hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution till colourless. Make up to 100 ml. Take aliquot to the reaction vessel and proceed. 7.5 Mercury in Coal and Coke - Powder the sample to pass through 250 IS sieve and weigh 1 g in pre-ignited crucible. Transfer 10 ml (1: 9) nitric acid to the combustion bomb, attach the fuse wire to the bomb electrode. Assemble the bomb and charge it with oxygen to 20 atmospheric pressure. Place the bomb in the water bath and ignite the sample. Let it remain for 10 minutes in cold water. Release the pressure and thoroughly rinse the bomb electrodes with 1 percent nitric acid and make to 100 ml. Add potassium permanganate dropwise until permanent Proceed further, as for water and colour persists for 60 seconds. effluent. 7.6 Mercury in Paints - The liquid sample or dried film is transferred into PTEE lined vessel and digested with sulphuric/nitric acid. The digested sample is diluted to known volume with water and mercury is determined by cold vapour technique. 7.7 Mineral Acid and other Inarganic Chemicals - Suitable amount of the sample is diluted to 100 ml and neutralized by adding sodium hydroxide while keeping the beaker in ice. Solution is further diluted to known volume and subsequently suitable aliquot is taken for analysis.
6

IS: 7.8 Inorganic Mercury in Biological Material -

12041-1987
in 7.2.

Same as stated

8. PROCEDURE 8.1 Air-Acetylene Flame Method - Optimize the response of instrument by adjustment of burner height and flame. Aspirate water to get zero absorbance when stable response is observed, aspirate at least 4 standards and note down absorbance. Aspirate sample to get absorbance of the sample. Prepare calibration curve by plotting the net absorbance value of the standard against conLocate the point of the sample absorcentration in pg/ml of mercury. bance and calculate the concentration of mercury in the sample. Background correction may be made in all the readings with hydrogen continuum lamp. The net reading should be taken for calculation. 8.2 Vapour Generation Technique - Place the absorption cell of the apparatus on the spectrophotometer burner mount. Connect the reaction vessel to the cell with appropriate tubing. Place 50 ml aliquot of the sample in the reaction vessel ( if mercury content is higher, take less sample and add water to level 50 ml in reaction vessel ). Add 1 ml of 20 percent stannous chloride solution and immediately stopper the vessel. Turn off the stirrer, turn Stir the solution vigorously for ninety seconds. on the air valve ( air flow 4 litre/min) and purge the vapour into the absorption cell. A sharp analytical peak will be recorded immediately. This could better be carried out on peak-hold mode. Take at least 3 standard readings and samples. Correct non-atomic absorption, mercury in sample. Take a reagent blank 9. CALCULATION Mercury, where C = concentration Y = volume of mercury in pg/ml and in final solution, in ml of final solution, percentage cx by mass = 108 vx 100 M take replicate reading of the if necessary, and calculate the reading.

M = mass in g of sample

in final solution.

INTERNATIONAL Base Units
Quantity

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS )

Unit

Symbol

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Units
Quantity

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m kg
S

A K cd mol

Unit

Symbol

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
Quantity

radian steradian

rad sr

Unit

Symbol N

Definition

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force

newton joule watt webe r tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

1N 1J 1W

= 1 kg,m/sa = 1 N.m 1 J/s

J W Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 Wb = 1 v.s IT = 1 Wb/m2

1 Hz = 1 c/s(s-l) 1s IV 1 Pa = 1 A/V = 1 W/A = 1 N/1$

Pressure, stress

