NAT HIAF IS 17284 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


SAM AU aan AA At aT 
aes NA Hh Sh HEA H 


fore Ana sia 


Requirements for Good Aquaculture 
Practices — India GAgP for 
Freshwater Prawn Culture 


ICS 67.120.30 


© BIS 2019 


anda NAK YO 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR NGA, 9 TAKANG TH AMT, ay Ret - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2019 Price Group 5 


Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, FAD 12 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fish, Fisheries 
and Aquaculture Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Considerable milestones have been reached in productivity of aquaculture products in the country. Concerns 
about food safety and quality, sustainability, environmental protection, worker safety and welfare have also 
gained importance. Thus, it is desirable to set up control and compliance systems for various kinds of aquaculture 
produce. In this context, it is necessary to pay attention to the quality of production practices requiring minute 
attention at different aspects of production, storage, handling and distribution. 


In India, aquaculture practices are highly localized occupations and display a lot of variability in cultural practices 
and varietal preferences across regions. Further, with the opening up of the world market, there is a flow of trade 
in the aquaculture products. It is, therefore, necessary to define and assign certain common minimum standards 
to facilitate trade in these products and to win the confidence of the consumers within the country and outside. 


Such standards envisaging focused approach for implementing good aquaculture practices, traceability, etc. 
through appropriate infrastructure, record keeping and monitoring would reap following broad benefits: 


a) Development of basic infrastructure at the field level, 
b) Build up culture for good aquaculture practices by the farmers, 
c) Uniform approach across farms regardless of their sizes, 


d) Increased awareness among the producers as well as the consumers about the need for consumption of 
good quality and safe food, 


e) Traceability through complete integration of food chain, 

f) Improvement in the environment, 

g) Worker safety and welfare. 

h) Reputation in the international market as a producer of good quality and safe produce, and 

j) Overcoming the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBTs). 
This Standard is part of a series of Indian Standards on Good Aquaculture Practices under development. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


In formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been provided by Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research - Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture, Bhubaneswar (ICAR-CIFA). Contribution of Dr. Bindu 
R. Pillai, Principal Scientist and Head, (ICAR-CIFA) is also duly acknowledged. 


IS 17284 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


REQUIREMENTS FOR GOOD AQUACULTURE 
PRACTICES — INDIA GAqP FOR FRESH WATER 
PRAWN CULTURE 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard covers the control points and 
compliance criteria necessary to be followed by the 
producers (individual producers and/or members of 
a producer group) of freshwater prawn (also called 
SCAMPI by farming community). This standard 
applies to the good aquaculture practices (GAqP) to 
be followed at all stages of the production of prawns 
in freshwater pond including practices followed for 
stocking, pond management, harvesting and post- 
harvest handlings prior to transportation to market. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
terminologies shall apply: 


2.1 Good Aquaculture Practices — Practices 
that address environmental, economic and social 
sustainability for on-farm processes, and result in safe 
and quality food and non-food aquaculture products. 


22 Applicant Producer/Producer Group — 
Individual/organization that has applied for certification 
to India GAqP certification body. 


2.3 Hazard — A biological, chemical, physical agent 
in/or condition of which have the potential to cause an 
adverse health effect. 


2.4 Individual Producer — A person/organization 
legally responsible for on farm production, who retains 
ownership of all the produce covered in the India GAqP 
licence. 


2.5 Inspection — An examination of all aquaculture 
practices in order to verify compliance to requirements 
specified in this standard. 


2.6 Record — Document showing objective evidence 
of the tasks performed and results achieved. 


2.7 Self-inspection — Internal inspection of the 
registered product carried out by the grower on his/her 
farm using control points and compliance criteria. 


2.8 Traceability — The ability to trace the history, use 
or location of a product (that is, the origin of materials 
and parts, processes applied to the product, or its 


distribution and placement after delivery) by means of 
a record. 


2.9 Worker — Any person on the farm who has been 
contracted to carry out a task. This includes farm 
owners and managers. 


2.10 Producer Group — A recognized group of 
producers applying for certification with an internal 
procedure and internal control of all the members 
registered to the India GAqP requirements, and 
complying the requirements as specified in this 
standard. 


2.11Field — Separate unit of land within a farm. 


2.12 Farm — A farm is an agricultural production unit 
or group of agricultural production units; covered by 
same operational procedures, farm management. 


213 Environment — Surroundings in which an 
activity takes place including air, water, land, natural 
resources, flora, fauna, humans, and their interrelation. 


2.14 Customer — A customer is anyone who purchases 
products or services from a supplier. 


2.15 Certification — All actions leading to the issuance 
of an India GAqpP licence. 


2.16 Waste — Any materials unused and rejected as 
worthless or unwanted 


217 Standard Operating Procedure — A written 
document which details an operation, analysis, or 
action whose mechanisms are prescribed thoroughly 
and which is commonly accepted as the method for 
performing certain routine or repetitive tasks. 


2.18 Major Requirement — The mandatory 
requirement that shall be fully complied with. In 
case of non-compliance, it will seriously affect the 
quality of freshwater aquatic animal as well as safety 
for consumers. It means that the requirement shall be 
complied with relevant laws and regulations as well. 


2.19 Minor Requirement — The requirement that shall 
be mostly complied with. In case of non-compliance, it 
will affect the health of freshwater aquatic animal or 
product quality. 


IS 17284 : 2019 


2.20 Veterinary Drug — Any substance applied or 
administered to any food-producing animal, whether 
used for therapeutic, prophylactic, or diagnostic 
purposes or for modification of physiological functions 
or behaviour. 


3 CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE 
CRITERIA 


3.1 Control points and compliance criteria required 
to be followed by the applicant producer (individual 
producer and/or member of a producer group) as well 
as by the certification body for independent verification 
of the aquaculture practices that have gone into the 
production of the produce are given in Table 1. In 
addition, the applicant producer (individual producer 
and/or member of a producer group) shall demonstrate 
compliance with all applicable statutory and regulatory 
requirements. 


3.2 These criteria are marked as ‘Major’ or ‘Minor’ or 
‘Reco’. The criteria marked as ‘Major’ have a definite 
effect on the safety and quality of the produce and shall, 
therefore, be complied with, or shall give adequate 
assurance about the safety and quality of the produce. 
The criteria marked as ‘Minor’, though have a bearing 
on quality, are those which, if implemented, would 
provide an advantage to the assessment for India GAqP 


certification. The criteria marked as ‘Reco’, are those, 
which though may not have direct bearing on safety 
and quality of produce but may have other benefits to 
the producer and are recommended for implementation 
and are advisory in nature. 


3.3 For the purpose of verification, a grading pattern 
given below shall be followed for grant of India GAqP 
licence: 


Compliance Compliance 
Category of of Major of Minor 
Licence Requirements Requirements 


(in Percent) (in Percent) 


India GAqP — A 100 90 
India GAqP — B 100 80 
India GAqP — C 100 75 


4 BIS INDIA GAQP CERTIFICATION 


BIS India GAgpP certification shall be as prescribed 
under the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 2016 and Rules and Regulations framed thereunder. 
The details of the conditions, under which the licence 
may be granted to producers (individual producer and/ 
or member of a producer group) may be obtained from 


the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


No. 


IS 17284 : 2019 


Table 1 Control Points and Compliance Criteria 


Item 


Level 


( Clause 3.1 ) 


India GAqP requirements 


Compliance Criteria 


1.1 


1:2 


13 


1.4 


1.5 


21 


22 


2.3 


LOCATION AND LAYOUT OF FISH FARM, SITE RECORD AND TRACEABILITY 


Identification and Major 

Traceability 

Farm Location Minor 

Farm Layout Major 
Minor 

Vicinity of Production Major 

Area to Potential Risk 

Source 

Access to the farm Minor 


IndiaGAgpP registered produce shall be 
traceable back to and trackable from the 
registered farm where it has been grown. 


Survey No./Part-Survey No., village, 
tehsil district, state where the farm is 
located along with total area under 
cultivation and the area under IndiaGAqP 
certification shall be specified. 


Fields/plots and structures shall be 
identified on the layout map of the farm. 


Availability of good water supply, inlet 
and outlet system 


Location of the farm with special 
reference to vicinity to chemical or other 
industries, saline regime, agriculture 
fields, rivers, other water sources, hill 
rocks, and reclaimed land shall be 
specified and measures shall be in place 
to check contamination. 


Convenient access to the farm from 
both outside and inside for easy farm 
operation and transportation of the 
inputs and produce 


SOIL AND WATER MANAGEMENT 


Soil has a major impact on aquaculture production, and the improvement of soil is essential for increasing production. Good soil 
husbandry ensures long-term fertility of soil, and helps in achieving higher production and profitability. 


Soil Mapping Minor 
Soil Health Major 
Water Source Minor 


The land should be classified based on 
topography, texture and structure of soil, 
gradient, Surroundings, etc. Soil maps 
should be prepared for the farm. 


Soil health shall be determined based on 
physical and chemical composition as 
well as soil profile observation. 


Water source can be surface water or 
underground water. Water source need to 
be identified and should be free from any 
pollutants (pesticides/ heavy metals). 


Verify whether each registered grower, society, 
farm and produce has a Code No. and a package 
of practice to be followed. 


NOTE — The first traceability starts with 
the registration/identification number 
given to the farm. Next traceability is 
plot and batch identification. 


Availability of records complying to the land 
record requirement of India GAqP 


Verify that the position of the ponds and other 
infrastructures are in place as per the layout of 
the farm. 


Visual inspection of the design of water inlet 
and outlet system and the water supply and 
drainage system among the ponds to prevent 
cross contamination. 


a) Availability of records regarding the 
micro-climate of the area which affects 
the productivity, safety and quality of the 
aquaculture product 


b) Availability ofRecord regarding measures 
taken to minimize contamination 


Visual inspection 


a) Availability of soil map. 


b) Verify that the type of soil is identified 
for each site based on a soil profile or soil 
analysis or local (regional) cartographic 
soil type map 


c) Verify that the analysis is carried out for 
the soil from actual depth of interest for 
farming the targeted species. 


Availability of records on soil and water quality 
analysis to assure that the soil is ideally suited 
for the species, based on soil reaction (Electrical 
conductivity,, pH), soil nutrient status, etc. 


a) Availability of records to verify that 
the water from source is free from any 
pollutants (pesticides, heavy metals). 


b) Visual inspection to verify that the water 
supply and drainage are two separate 
system in the farm to avoid cross 
contamination. 


IS 17284 : 2019 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


SI Item Level India GAqP requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 

2.4 Water Quality Major Water quality shall be determined based Availability of water quality analysis records 

on standard chemical analysis to verify that the water quality is suitable and 
is being monitored to provide ideal growing 
environment for prawns. 

2.5 Waste water drainage Major Effluent disposal should comply with Availability of records to verify that the effluent 
relevant laws and regulations water is treated through treatment plant before 

release to the environment and to verify the 
quality of treated water before disposal. 

3 GROWER RECORD 

3.1 Type of Farming Reco Records relevant for the type of Availability of records to verify the type 
farming that is cooperative, contract, of aquaculture activities mentioned like 
lease farming, individual farmer, group cooperative, contract, lease farming, individual 
farming activity, public/ Governmental farmer, group farming activity, public/ 
agencies should be maintained. Governmental agencies etc. 

3:2 Farm management Reco Grower's accomplishment in farming, Availability of records to verify that farmer 

capability technical background in aquaculture, the or the farm manager is well versed in 
skills acquired and knowledge support aquaculture through formal education, skill 
available shall be documented. development training or experience and to 
verify, if the farmer is getting technical know- 
how from Government or any other competent 
organization or individuals. 

3:3 Maintenance of Major Records on species cultivated, stocking Availability of records to verify that information 

Records density, type of culture systems (mono regarding the species cultured in the particular 
culture of prawn or polyculture with system for the current and previous growing 
carps) shall be maintained seasons and for a minimum period of six 

months for new applicants and to verify 
that records are maintained for the cropping 
pattern of particular farms and crop history of 
particular plots. 

3.4 Retention Period of Minor All records requested during the Availability of records to verify that the 

Records inspection shall be accessible and shall producers keep up to date records for a 
be kept for a minimum period of two minimum of two years from the date of 
years. previous inspection. 

3.5 Internal Evaluation Major The farmer/society/co-operative body Availability of records to verify that self- 
shall undertake internal self- inspection evaluation based on applicable criteria is 
on scheduling of crop production conducted annually or seasonally during crop 
practices and shall exercise necessary duration. 
supervision in their adoption. 

3.6 Corrective Actions Major Effective corrective actions shall Availability of records to verify and validate 
be taken as a result of internal self- documentation of all corrective actions. 
inspections. 

4 CULTURE SPECIES AND SYSTEM 

4.1 Culture System Minor The culture system and species (mono Availability of records to verify that the culture 
culture or polyculture) need to be system is specified and that the practitioner has 
specified. basic knowledge and acquired skill to operate 

in the culture system. 

4.2 Species Selection Major In polyculture system, along with the Availability of records to verify that species 


prawn compatible fish species need to be 
selected based on local market demand 
as well as the soil and water quality of the 
site and the climatic condition prevailing 
in the area. Carnivores, bottom feeders 
and detritivores should be avoided in 
prawn polyculture system. 


selected is suitable for the site and has good 
demand in the market and are compatible with 
prawns. 


Item 


Level 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


India GAqP requirements 


IS 17284 : 2019 


Compliance Criteria 


5:2 


53 


6.2 


6.3 


Culture Practice 


Cropping Pattern 


SEED 
Traceability of Seed 


Quality of Seed 


Seed Transport 


NURSERY 


Site selection 


Pond Preparation 


Stocking Attributes 


Minor 


Minor 


Major 


Major 


Reco. 


Major 


Major 


Major 


Culture practice to be followed need to 
be recorded. 


Cropping pattern recommended by 
State Agriculture Universities (SAUs)/ 
National Research  Institutes/other 
Government organizations/ Government 
approved organizations shall be used 


Seed (Post larvae) need to be procured 
from a reputed/certified hatchery. 


The seeds should be active, fast moving, 
cling to the sides of the container when 
a circular water current is created in the 
container. Body should be translucent 
and glossy with no whitish patches/ 
black/brown spots with no fouling on 
body or appendages. Free from known 
major diseases of the cultivated species. 


The seed shall be transported in hygienic 
conditions and with minimum stress to 
the species. Standard protocol for seed 
transportation should be followed. 


Proper site selection is essential to 
obtain best results from freshwater 
prawn culture operations. The selected 
site should have supply of good 
quality, pollution free freshwater or 
brackish water (> 7 pH). Warm climate 
(Temperature > 24°C) is optimum for 
prawn culture as it is a tropical species. 


The standard recommended pond 
preparation practices shall be followed. 
An ideal nursery pond for prawn should 
be preferable less than 0.10 ha size and 
having water depth of about 1.0 m. 
The pond should be prepared before 
two weeks of stocking. The source of 
technology shall be documented. 


Stocking should be done either early 
morning or late evening with proper 
acclimatization of the seed. Stocking 
size should not be less than Postlarva-20 
(PL-20) for prawn and spawn or fry 
for fishes depending on the species 
in polyculture system. Depending on 
the species stocking density need to 
comply to recommendation of the source 
technology. However, the stocking 
density in the nursery pond should not 
exceed more than 100 nos. PL/m2. 


Availability of records 
practice. 


regarding culture 


Availability of records to verify that the cropping 
pattern recommended by State Agriculture 
Universities SAUs)/National Research 
Institutes/other Government  organizations/ 
Government approved organizations are being 
used. 


Availability of records to verify that the seed 
used is procured from a reputed/ certified 
hatchery and record is maintained on the 
procurement date and batch of seed production. 


Availability of records to verify claim on 
seed, regarding freedom from known diseases 
endemic to the area. 


Availability of records to verify that the species 
has been transported in hygienic conditions and 
with minimum stress to the animals. 


Availability of records to verify that the site 
selection is proper. 


Availability of records to verify that standard / 
recommended pond preparation practices, has 
been followed during preparation of the pond 
based on source technology. 


Availability of records to verify that appropriate 
seed only are stocked and stocking density is as 
per recommendation of the source technology 
to achieve the desired final size in pre-define 
culture duration. 


IS 17284 : 2019 


SI 
No. 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


Item Level India GAqP requirements 


Compliance Criteria 


6.4 


6.5 


6.6 


6.7 


6.8 


7.11 


Pond Environment Major The standard pond management 

Management practices for maintaining optimum 
water quality (phased manuring, water 
addition or exchange and aeration) need 
to be followed fortnightly. Pond may 
be covered with a bird protection net, if 
required to protect the stock from bird 
predation. Dissolved oxygen content of 
pond water must be checked early in the 
morning daily. 


Feeding Major Feeding to be done as per species behavior 
and actual requirement. Feeding to be 
done with formulated nursery sinking 
feed for prawn and floating feed for 
carps having recommended nutritional 
profile suitable for the cultured species. 
Only recommended quantity of feed 
should be given to the prawn/fishes in 
order to avoid feed wastage. Feed should 
be broadcasted in the pond twice daily 
preferably in the morning and in the late 
evenings. 


Health Management Major Routine health checkup of the stocked 
species need to be conducted once in 
three weeks by cast net sampling. If any 
prawns/fishes are found to be affected 
by any diseases or external parasitic 
infestation then immediate corrective 
actions should be taken. 


Harvesting Major The harvesting should be well planned 
to reduce the stress. The juveniles should 
be harvested between 45-60 days of 
culture by dewatering the pond. The seed 
should be either packed or immediately 
be transferred to grow out ponds after 
recording the growth and survival. 


Seed packing and Minor Seed should be packed in proper 

transportation container/ bag filled with clear water and 
oxygen or large water filled container 
with aeration facility and packing 
density should comply to seed size and 
distance/time of transportation 


GROW-OUT CULTURE PRACTICES 
Pre-Stocking Pond Preparation 


Site selection Major Proper site selection is essential to 
obtain best results from freshwater 
prawn culture operations. The selected 
site should have supply of good quality, 
pollution free freshwater or brackish 
water (> 7 pH) for at least 6 months. 
Soil should have good water retention 
capacity preferably clay loam, sandy 
loam. Warm climate for nearly 6-8 
months (Temperature > 24°C) is 
essential for prawn grow out culture. 


Availability of records to verify that the standard 
pond management protocol for maintaining 
water quality and pond environment are 
followed. 


Availability of records to verify that daily ration 
is provided as per recommendation of source 
technology to avoid wastage of feed and curtail 
pollution of the pond environment. 


Availability of records to verify that routine 
health checkup has been conducted and 
immediate corrective actions has been taken 
whenever any abnormality noticed. 


Availability of records to verify that harvesting 
was well planned and carried out in an 
organized manner. 


Availability of records to verify that seed 
packaging and transportation are being made as 
per prescribed protocol. 


Verify the site selection is proper or not. 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


IS 17284 : 2019 


SI Item Level India GAqP requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 

7.1.2 Pond Preparation Major Pond preparation to be done following Availability of records to verify that pond 
suitable protocol of weed clearance, preparation is carried out with prescribed use 
liming, application of organic manure. of lime, manures and chemical fertilizers as per 
The ideal pond for grow out culture of the source technology. 
prawn is 0.1 to 1.0 ha with 1.0 m water 
depth for monoculture and 2.0 m depth 
for polyculture . The pond should be 
dewatered and bottom soil should be 
dried and ploughed. Standard protocol 
of pond preparation should be followed 
in liming and fertilizing the pond. 

12 Stocking 

7.2.1 Stocking Attributes Major After 15 days ofpond preparation, stocking Availability of records to verify that fingerling 


73 Post-Stocking Pond Management 


7.3.11. Pond Environment 
Monitoring and 
Management 

7.3.2 Feed management 

7.3.3 Health Management 


Major 


Major 


should be done. Stocking size should not 
be less than 2g for prawn and fingerling 
(>10g) of fishes in polyculture system. 
The stocking density in monoculture 
should 3/m? and for polyculture it should 
be less than 1-2 for prawn and 6-8/m? 
for fishes. Seed to be acclimatized to the 
new pond environment prior to release. 
Stocking density and species ration need 
to comply to recommendation of the 
source technology 


Standard pond management practices 
for maintaining optimum water quality 
should be followed with phased 
manuring, water addition, aeration or 
water exchange as per the requirement. 
The water quality needs to be checked 
fortnightly. Loss of prawn stock is 
usually associated with low dissolved 
oxygen in the pond. Therefore it is 
essential to maintain dissolved oxygen 
at optimum levels (>3 ppm) at all times. 
Dissolved oxygen should be monitored 
during early morning. Hideouts in 
the form of earthen pipes/ PVC pipes 
(~4 inch diameter), tree branches etc 
should be kept in the ponds to provide 
shelter to the prawns during moulting for 
better survival. 


Feeding should be preferably done 
with formulated pelleted sinking feed 
for prawn and floating feed for carps 
in polyculture system twice daily. 
Revise feed quantity every month as 
per requirement. Precautions should be 
taken to avoid feed wastage. 


Prawns/fishes should be periodically 
sampled for regular health check. In case 
of abnormal symptom or any disease 
outbreak, farmer should immediately 
inform the line department and corrective 
measures should be taken up after 
preliminary diagnosis and records should 
be maintained. Use only prescribed 
veterinary drugs and chemicals. 


or juveniles are only stocked to achieve the 
desired final size in pre-define culture duration; 
to verify that proper seed acclimatization done 
prior to release to ensure higher survivability; 
verify that stocking density complies to the 
targeted production; verify that suitable species 
ratio maintained for effective utilization of 
pond productivity and living space 


Availability of records to verify that only 
recommended lime, fertilizers and organic 
manures are used for interim application and 
in prescribed dosage to maintain the natural 
productivity (plankton production and that 
water quality is maintained that is suitable for 
prawn culture as per source of technology and 
corrective action is taken to maintain the water 
quality within tolerance range of the cultured 
species. 


Availability of records to verify the nutritional 
claim of the feed and to verify that daily feed 
ration is tailored to meet the actual requirement 
of feed to minimize wastage of feed and 
pollution 


Availability of records to verify that effective 
preventive and prophylactic measures are 
taken in case of any disease incidence and that 
banned chemicals are not used to cure or curtail 
the disease incidence. 


IS 17284 : 2019 


SI Item Level 
No. 
7.3.4 Harvesting 
8. FARM HYGIENE 
8.1 Discharge water from Major 
pond 
8.2 Storage facility for Minor 
feed, feed ingredients, 
lime, fertilizers etc 
and farm implements 
8.3 Toilet facility Major 
9 POST-HARVEST MANAGEMENT 
9.1 Live transport Reco 
9.2 Cold Chain Transport 
9.2.1 Sorting & Grading Reco 
9.2.2 Packing Reco 
9.2.3 Transport Reco 
10 RECORD KEEPING 
10.1 Maintenance ofrecord Minor 


Table 1 ( Concluded ) 


India GAqP requirements 


Because of the heterogeneous growth 
pattern of prawn, individual weight is 
highly variable for individuals of the 
same age. Periodic harvesting is always 
preferred. After four months larger 
prawns (>50g) should be removed by 
using a seine/cast net of suitable mesh 
size. Selective harvesting should continue 
once every 3-4 weeks for another 
3-4 months and finally the pond should 
be harvested by complete draining. In 
polyculture fishes should be harvested 
by netting before dewatering the pond. 
Harvesting should be well planned. 


The farm should treat discharge water in 
effluent treatment system (ETS) before 
release to environment. 


Farm should have well ventilated storage 
facility for feed to maintain the feed 
quality during storage. 


Farm should have suitable provision to 
keep other inputs in good condition. All 
the farm implements, equipment used for 
farm operation are properly maintained, 
clean and orderly placed, in hygienic 
manner in store 


Hygienically designed toilet should be 
located at safe distance from the pond to 
prevent possible sewage contamination. 


Transport harvested fish and prawn 
separately in live condition to main 
freshness of the product 


The prawns and fishes should be sorted 
to different grades immediately after 
harvesting. 


The sorted groups should be weighed 
and ice packed immediately to maintain 
product quality and labeled properly. 


The packaged cartons should be 
transported to market or processing plant 


All the major activities of the farm, 
records of employee, culture operation, 
input use, disease incidence, fish growth, 
harvest and sale records should be 
maintained 


Compliance Criteria 


Availability of records to verify that harvesting 
was well planned and carried out in an 
organized manner. 


Availability of records to verify that the farm 
has a well-designed ETS to treat the discharge 
water before its release. 


Visual inspection to verify that the store is clean, 
well ventilated and protected from moisture and 
has provision to store feed bags in stacks. 


Visual inspection 


Availability of records to verify that live fishes 
or prawns are transported in suitable container 
and to verify that banned chemicals are not 
used during transportation. 


Availability of records to verify that harvested 
fishes are graded before sale to fetch size 
specific sale price. 


Availability of records to verify that the 
harvested fishes are properly packed to ensure 
better quality and that packing is done with 
approved packaging materials. 


Availability of records to verify that appropriate 
fish: ice ratio is maintained in pack based on 
transport distance and duration to maintain 
product quality during short and long-term 
transportation in cold chain. 


Availability of the said records. 


IS 17284 : 2019 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Pillai, B.R., Lalrinsanga, P.L., Jesna, P.K., 


Panda, D. and Mishra, B. 2018. Breeding and 
Culture of giant freshwater prawn (scampi) 
Macrobrachium rosenbergii. In: Ravichandran, 
K (Ed.). Package of practices for breeding and 
culture of commercially important freshwater 
fish species. NFDB, Hyderabad, 55-77. 


. Pillai, B.R. 2011. Freshwater prawn breeding 
and culture. In: Verma, S.A., Kumar, A.T., 
Rahman, O., Pradhan, S. (Eds.), Handbook 
of Fisheries and Aquaculture, ICAR, New 
Delhi, (Second Revised Edition). Directorate 


of Knowledge Management in Agriculture 
(DKMA), Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research, New Delhi, p.413-438, pp 1116. 


. Bindu R. Pillai, P.L. Lalrinsanga, Jesna, P.K., B. 


Mishra. 2016. Polyculture of freshwater prawn 
Macrobrachium rosenbergii (scampi) with 
Indian major carps. ICAR-CIFA Extension 
Series 31, ICAR-CIFA, Bhubaneswar, pp. 1-6. 


. Bindu R. Pillai, P.L. Lalrinsanga, Jesna, P.K., 


2016. Freshwater prawn culture, ICAR-CIFA 
Extension series 22 (English). 


IS 17284 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, FAD 12 


Organization 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, 
Barrackpore 


Central Institute of Brackish Water Aquaculture, 
Chennai 


Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), 
Cochin 


Central Institute of Fresh Water Aquaculture, 
Bhubaneswar 


Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Kochi 


Coastal Aquaculture Authority, Chennai 


Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 
Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


Fisheries Division, DAHD&F, Min. of Agriculture, 
Gol, New Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


National Fisheries Development Board, Hyderabad 


National Institute of Fisheries Post Harvest Technology 


and Training (NIFPHATT), Cochin 
Sea Food Exporters Association of India, Alleppy 


Society of Aquaculture Professionals, Chennai 


The Marine Products Export Development Authority 


(MPEDA), Kochi 


Kerala University of Fisheries and Ocean Studies, 
Kochi 


All India Shrimp Hatchery Association 


Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 


Representative(s) 
Dr JoyKRUSHNA JENA, (Chairperson) 


Dr Bisay KUMAR BEHERA 
SHRI DHARMENDRA KUMAR MEENA (Alternate) 


Dr K. AMBASANKAR 
Dr SUBHENDU KUMAR OTTA (Alternate) 


Dr GoPAL KRISHNA 
DR B. B. Nayak (Alternate) 


Dr K. AsHoK KUMAR 
Dr MADHUSUDANA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr KEDAR NATH MOHANTA 
Dr P. C. Das (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. ABDUL NAZAR 


ProF R. JAYARAMAN 
Suri S. MANI (Alternate) 


Dr N. GOPALAN 
Suri R. M. MANDALIK 


SHRI PAUL PANDIAN 
Suri I. A. SIDDIQUI (Alternate) 


Ms VINITA VERMA 
Dr Rajesh KUMAR (Alternate) 


ExECUTIVE DIRECTOR (TECHNICAL) 


SHRI V ARGHESE JOHN 
MR Kamat RAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI NORBERT KARIKKASSERY 
PRESIDENT 


Joint DIRECTOR 
Deputy DIRECTOR (QC) (Alternate) 


Dr T. V. SANKAR 


SHRI D. RAMRAJ 
Suri K. MADHUSUDAN REDDY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. RAJESH, 
HEAD (Food AND AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT) 


Member Secretary 


Ms Navita YADAV 


SCIENTIST ‘C’ (Food AND AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 12 (14333). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


