RAT HAF І5 12835 (Рагі 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Ron, gran з УТА dai GAT 
Ronga afit Geers — Aà аат 


STRT 1 AA чап AT 
( TET TRIAT ) 


Design and Installation of 
Fixed Foam Fire Extinguishing 
Systems — Code of Practice 


Part 1 Low Expansion Foam 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.220.20 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH APT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 13 


Firefighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Firefighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 
Fixed fire extinguishing installations are employed for protecting public buildings and industrial premises where 
it is desired to keep fire losses to the minimum by automatic discharge of fire extinguishing media immediately 
upon an outbreak of fire particularly when the premises are unoccupied, such as during the night, weekends and 
holidays, and in particular parts ofthe premises where it is not possible to fight the fire manually. Such installations 
are also employed for fire protection in premises which are at times unattended. There are various types of fixed 
fire extinguishing installations, like carbon dioxide, sprinklers, dry powder, foam and halon. This standard covers 
the requirements of fixed foam fire extinguishing system. This standard was intended to be brought in two parts: 


Part 1 covering low expansion foam installations; and 
Part 2 covering medium and high expansion foam installations. 


Fixed foam fire extinguishing installations are suitable as extinguishing system for the fire risk like flammable 
liquid processes and their storage areas, industrial chemical complexes, vehicle loading bays, etc. Such types 
of systems can also be used in aircraft hangars not exceeding 7.5 m in height or 1 600 m? in area. This standard 
gives guidance to those who are responsible for the selection, design, installation and maintaining such systems. 
Adherence of this standard will ensure that these systems are effective in controlling and extinguishing the types 
of fires for which they are designed. 


The standard (Part 1) was first published in 1989 as a Code of practice for design and installation of fixed foam 
fire extinguishing system. Part 2 1s under formulation. 


In this revision, the following major changes have been made: 


a) New type of foam known as bio-foam is included as a fluoro surfactant [in view of the gradual 
phasing out of perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) due to their 
non-biodegradability and carcinogenic potential]. 


b) Requirements for the installation of protection systems using low expansion foams have been detailed. 


c) Detailed working mechanism and the method of application of foam fire extinguishing system have 
been included. 


d) Limitations on use of low expansion foams have been updated. 


e) New types of foam concentrates, such as film forming fluoroprotein foaming agents and alcohol type 
foaming agents have been included. 


f) Design considerations and specifications for foam system have been updated. 

g) Suitability of different types of foam to fight specific fires has been included in Annex E. 
h) Terminology has been brought up-to-date. 

j) All the cross-referred standards have been updated. 


This revision of standard covers all relevant information regarding various types of foam, their application, design 
information and installation methods. Assistance has been derived from various documents such as: 


ISO 7076-1 : 2012 Fire protection — Foam fire extinguishing systems — Part 1: Foam 
proportioning equipment 

ISO 7076-2 : 2012 Fire protection — Foam fire extinguishing systems — Part 2: Low expansion 
foam equipment 

МЕРА 11 : 2016 Standard for low, medium, and high-expansion foam 

NFPA 16 : 2019 Standard for the installation of foam-water sprinkler and foam-water spray 
systems 

BS EN 13565-2:2018 Fixed firefighting systems — Foam systems — Design, construction and 
maintenance 

BS 5306-1 : 2006 Code of practice for fire extinguishing installations and equipment on 
premises — Part 1 Hose reels and foam inlets 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN AND INSTALLATION OF FIXED FOAM FIRE 
EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 1 LOW EXPANSION FOAM 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) lays down the requirements for 
design, installation, selection, inspection, operation and 
maintenance for both fixed and semi-fixed type of low 
expansion foam systems. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms given in 
IS 7673 and IS 8757, and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Application Rate — The rate at which foam 
solution is applied to a fire. Usually expressed in litres 
of foam-water solution per square metre of fire surface 
area per minute (l/min/m?). For low expansion type of 
foam, the same is measured at the foam discharging 
branch pipe. 


3.2 Adhesive Qualities — The ability to bind together 
substances of unlike compositions. 
NOTE — When a foam blanket clings to a vertical surface, it 


is said to have adhesive qualities. For example, this is required 
to prevent vapour release from a tank shell. 


3.3 Air-foam/Mechanical Foam — Foam produced 
by a physical agitation of a mixture of water, air and a 
foaming agent. 


3.4 Accelerated Ageing — Storage of foam 
concentrates for short periods at high temperatures to 
indicate their long term storage properties at ambient 
temperatures. 


3.5 Base Injection — The introduction of foam from 
beneath the surface of certain flammable hydrocarbons 
to effect extinguishment. 


3.6 Boil-over — Violent ejection of flammable liquid 
from its container caused by the vapourization of 
water beneath the body of liquid. It may occur after a 
lengthy burning period of products, such as crude oil 
when the heat wave has passed down through the liquid 
and reaches the water bottom in a storage tank. It will 
not occur to any significant extent with water soluble 
liquids or light products, such as gasoline. 


3.7 Bund Area — The tankage area bound on all sides 
by dyke walls. 


3.8 Burn-back Resistance — The ability of a foam 
blanket to resist direct flame impingement as would 
be evident in a partially extinguished petroleum fire or 
re-ignition following an extinguishment. 


3.9 Cohesive Qualities — The ability to bind together 
the substances of like composition. A good foam 
blanket is held together by its cohesive qualities. 


3.10 Concentration — The percent of foam concentrate 
contained in a foam solution. The type of foam 
concentrate being used determines the percent of the 
concentration required. A one percent foam concentrate 
is mixed in the ratio of 99 parts water to | part foam 
concentrate to make foam solution. A three percent 
concentrate is mixed with 97 parts of water to 3 parts 
of foam concentrate. A six percent concentrate is mixed 
with 94 parts of water to 6 parts of foam concentrate. 


3.11 Control — A reduction of fire intensity of 
approximately 90 percent. 


3.12 Combustible Liquids — Combustible liquids 
shall mean any liquid having a flash point at or above 
32 °C (90 °F). They may be further sub-divided as 
follows: 


a) Class II liquids shall include those having flash 
points at or above 32 °C (90 °F) and below 65 °C 
(150 °F), 

b) Class ША liquids shall include those having 
flash points at or above 65 °C (150 °F) and below 
100 °C (212 °F), and 

c) Class IIIB liquids shall include those having flash 
points at or above 100 °C (212 °F). 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


3.13 Class of Fires — There are four classes of fire 
namely, Class А fires in materials, such as wood, 
paper, clothes, etc; Class B fires Involving a flammable 
liquids; Class C fires involving gases; Class D fires 
involving metals; and Class K or F fire involving fat 
fires or kitchen fires. 


3.14 Critical Application Rate — The lowest rate at 
which foam solution may be applied to a fire in order to 
achieve extinction. 


3.15 Discharge Device — A fixed, semi fixed or 
portable device that directs the flow of foam to the 
fire or flammable liquid surface. Also it is a device 
designed to discharge water or foam-water solution in 
a predetermined, fixed, or adjustable pattern. Examples 
include, but are not limited to, sprinklers, spray nozzles, 
hose nozzles, pourers, monitors, etc. 


3.16 Discharge Coefficient — The coefficient K is 
given by the equation: 


К = QP? where О is the flow (in m?/h), and 
P is the pressure (in bar). 


3.17 Dissolved Solids — Solid matters left after 
evaporating all water from a foam compound. 


3.18 Drainage Time — Time taken for a percent of the 
concentrate content of a foam sample of a stated depth 
to drain to the bottom. For low and medium expansion 
foams, it is measured as 25 percent and high expansion 
foams it is 50 percent. 


3.19 Drainage Rate — Rate at which water drains 
from a finished foam. 


3.20 Deflector — A device attached to most type II 
fixed foam chamber discharge outlets which directs 
then flow of foam down and over the large area of the 
inside of the tank wall. 


3.21 Downstream — Direction to which the water is 
flowing. 


3.22 Expansion Ratio — Ratio of the volume of the 
foam solution to the volume of the foam produced after 
aeration. 


3.23 Eductor — A device that uses the venturi 
principle to introduce a proportionate quantity of foam 
concentrate into a water stream. The pressure at the 
throat is below atmospheric pressure and will draw in 
liquid from atmospheric storage tank. 


3.24 Flammable Liquids — Flammable liquids mean 
any liquid having a flash point below 32 °C (90 °F) 
and having a vapour pressure not exceeding 276 kPa 
at 32 °C (90 °F). Flammable liquids may be further 
sub-divided into: 


a) Class IA liquids shall include those having flash 


points below 23 ?C (73 ?F) and having a boiling 
point below 32 ?C (90 ?F), 


b) Class IB liquids shall include those having flash 
points below 23 ?C (73 ?F) and having boiling 
point above 32 °C (90 °F), and 

c) Class IC liquids shall include those having flash 
points at or above 23 °C (73 °F) and below 32 °C 
(90 ?F). 


3.25 Flashback — Reignition of flammable liquid 
caused by exposure of vapours to a source of ignition, 
such as hot metal surface or a spark. 


3.26 Foam Concentrate — Foam concentrate is a 
concentrated liquid foaming agent as received from the 
manufacturer. The following are the varieties of foam 
concentrates available (see a/so IS 4989): 


a) Protein foam, 
b) Fluoroprotein foam, 


c) Synthetic foam, such as aqueous film forming 
foam, medium and high expansion foams and 
other synthetic concentrate foams, 


d) Film forming fluoroprotein foam, 
e) Alcohol resistant foam, and 
f) Biofoam. 


3.27 Foam — А firefighting agent made by 
mechanically mixing air with a solution consisting of 
fresh/hard/soft/sea/potable water to which a foaming 
agent (liquid concentrate) has been added. Firefighting 
foam is a stable aggregation of small bubbles of lower 
density than oil or water, and shows tenacious qualities 
for covering horizontal surfaces. 


3.28 Foam Quality — A measure of foams physical 
characteristics, expressed as: 


a) 25 percent drain time; and 


b) expansion ratio. 


3.29 Foam Solution — A mixture of proportioned 
of pre-mixed foam liquid concentrate dissolved in 
fresh/hard/soft/sea water. 


3.30 Foam Proportioning — Proportioning is the 
continuous introduction of foam concentrate at the 
recommended ratio into the water stream to form foam 
solution. 


3.31 Foam Water Sprinkler System — A special 
system that is pipe-connected to a source of foam 
concentrate and to a water supply. The system is 
equipped with appropriate discharge devices for 
extinguishing agent discharge and for distribution 
over the area to be protected. The piping system is 
connected to the water supply through a control valve 
that usually is actuated by operation of automatic 
detection equipment that is, installed in the same areas 
as the sprinklers. When this valve opens, water flows 
into the piping system, foam concentrate is injected into 
the water, and the resulting foam solution discharging 


through the discharge devices generates and distributes 
foam. Upon exhaustion of the foam concentrate supply, 
water discharge follows and continues until shut off 
manually. Systems can be used for discharge of water 
first, followed by discharge of foam for a specified 
period, and then followed by water until manually shut 
off. Existing deluge sprinkler systems that have been 
converted to the use of aqueous film-forming foam 
or film-forming fluoroprotein foam are classified as 
foam-water sprinkler systems. Other types of systems 
are as follows: 


a) Foam-Water Deluge System — А foam-water 
sprinkler system employing open discharge 
devices, which are attached to a piping system 
that is connected to a water supply through a valve 
that is opened by the operation of a detection 
system, which is installed in the same areas as the 
discharge devices. When this valve opens, water 
flows into the piping system and foam discharges 
from all discharge devices attached thereto. 

b) Foam-Water Dry Pipe System — A sprinkler 
system employing automatic sprinklers or nozzles 
that are attached to a piping system that contains 
air or nitrogen under pressure, the release of which 
(as from the opening of a sprinkler) permits the 
water pressure to open a valve known as a dry 
pipe valve. The foam solution then flows into the 
piping system and out the opened sprinklers. 


c) Foam-Water Preaction System — A sprinkler 
system employing automatic sprinklers or nozzles 
attached to a piping system containing air that 
might or might not be under pressure, with a 
supplemental detection system installed in the 
same area as the sprinklers. Actuation of the 
detection system opens a valve that permits foam 
solution to flow into the sprinkler piping system 
and to be discharged from any sprinklers that have 
activated. 


d) Foam-Water Spray System — A special system 
that is pipe-connected to a source of foam 
concentrate and to a water supply. The system 
is equipped with foam-water spray nozzles for 
extinguishing agent discharge (foam followed 
by water or in reverse order) and for distribution 
over the area to be protected. System operation 
arrangements parallel those for foam-water 
sprinkler systems as described in the definition of 
foam-water sprinkler system. 


3.32 Foam Water Density — The unit rate of foam 
water solution application to an area expressed in 
litre/metre?. 


3.33 Full Scale Equipment — Field installed 
components, such as proportioners and foam makers, 
that are intended to extinguish fires. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


3.34 Foam Maker — A device designed to introduce 
air into a pressurized foam solution stream. 


3.35 Foam Stability — The relative ability of a foam 
to withstand spontaneous collapse or breakdown from 
an external causes, such as heat or chemical reaction. 


3.36 Friction Loss — The loss of pressure in a flowing 
stream resulting from resistance to flow imposed by 
the inside of the pipe or hose and by changes in flow 
directions, such as elbows and tees. 


3.37 Head Loss — Pressure necessary to force water 
up a pipe or hose to a given vertical height above the 
source of water pressure. 


3.38 High Expansion — Foam of expansion ratio 
200 to 2 000. 


3.39 Hydrocarbon Fuels — Fuels containing primarily 
hydrogen and carbon atoms; for example, petrol, oil, 
etc. 


3.40 Heat Resistance — The ability of a foam to 
withstand its exposure to heat. 


3.41 Hydrophilic — Water liking; mixing readily with 
water. 


3.42 Hydrophobic — Water hating; having the 
property of not mixing with water. 


3.43 Induction Rate — The percent of foam compound 
mixed or induced into the water supply to achieve a 
solution. 


3.44 Liquid Concentrate — A concentrated protein or 
synthetic liquid foaming agent that is intended to be 
diluted with fresh water at a concentration (volume of 
concentrate/volume of water) of 1 percent or higher. 


3.45 Low Expansion — Foam of expansion ratio 
between 2 and 20. 


3.46 Medium Expansion — Foam of expansion ratio 
between 20 and 200. 


3.47 Minimum Operating Temperature — The 
lowest temperature at which a foam concentrate will 
proportion with venturi devices. 


3.48 Non-aspirated Foam — Foam of expansion 
typically between 0 and 2. Only film forming 
compounds are suitable. 


3.49 Nozzle — A device intended to discharge foam 
in a straight stream or other specific pattern. In field 
application, a nozzle may be handheld or fixed in 
position. 


3.50 Oleophobic — Oil hating; having the ability to 
shed gasoline, oil and similar products. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


3.51 Pick Up — The induction of a foam concentrate 
into a water stream by a venturi equipment. 


3.52 pH Value — Measurement of acidity to alkalinity 
on a scale of 1 to 14. Neutral and deionized water has 
a pH value of 7. 


3.53 Polar Solvent — These are generally water 
miscible solvents which require special foam 
compounds, for example, alcohols, esters, ethers, 
aldehydes, and ketones. In firefighting parlance, any 
flammable liquid which destroys regular foam is 
generally referred to as a polar solvent. Generally such 
liquids possess a permanent dielectric charge. 


3.54 Polymeric Membrane — A thin, durable cohesive 
skin formed on a polar solvent fuel surface, protecting 
the foam cells by destruction by the fuel, a coagulation 
which occurs when a polar solvent foam comes in 
contact with a hydrophilic fuel such as isopropanol, 
ethanol or other solvents. 


3.55 Pressure Drop — The net loss in flowing water 
pressure between any two points in a hydraulic system. 
It is the sum of friction loss of pipes and all fittings, 
head loss, or other losses due to the insertion of an 
orifice plate, venturi, or other restriction into a section 
of pipe or hose. 


3.56 Protein — Complex nitrogen containing organic 
compounds derived from natural vegetable or animal 
sources. Hydrolysis products of protein provide 
exceptionally stable, cohesive, adhesive and heat 
resistant properties to foams. 


3.57 Pour Point — The lowest temperature at which 
a foam compound is fluid enough to pour, generally a 
few degrees above freezing point. 


3.58 Protein Type Concentrate — А hydrolized 
protein based low expansion foam liquid. 


3.59 Proportioning — Proportioning is the continuous 
introduction of foam concentrate at the recommended 
ratio into the water stream to form foam solution. 


3.60 Proportioners — The methods to provide suitable 
proportioning of foam liquid concentrate and water 
through known mechanisms, such as direct injection 
variable pump output proportioning, foam nozzle 
eductor, inline inductor, balanced pressure pump type 
proportioning, in-line balanced pressure proportioning, 
around the pump proportioning, etc. 


3.61 Regular Liquid Concentrate — A low expansion 
protein or synthetic foam liquid used in the production 
of foam and intended to extinguish fires involving 
common flammable hydrocarbon liquids, such as 
heptane, that are not miscible in water. 


3.62 Residual Pressure — The pressure existing in a 
line at a specified flow (as opposed to static pressure). 


3.63 Self Aspirating — A foam producing equipment 
into which air is introduced by the venturi effect of the 
foam solution stream. 


3.64 Self Inducting — A foam proportioning device 
into which the foam concentrate is introduced by the 
venturi effect of the water stream. 


3.65 Shear Stress — The measurement of the stiffness 
of the foam sample іп a viscometer measured, іп N/m’. 


3.66 Skin Fire — A flammable liquid fire, such as a 
spill on a solid surface where the liquid is not present in 
a depth not exceeding 300 mm. 


3.67 Solution Transit Time — The time taken for the 
solution to pass from the point where foam compound 
is introduced to the water supply to where aeration 
takes place. 


3.68 Spray Nozzle — A device intended to discharge 
foam in a fixed spray pattern and attached to piping. 


3.69 Spray Pattern — The pattern produced by a 
widely divergent flow of fully formed subdivided 
foam, the pattern varying with nozzle pressure and the 
adjustment of the spray creating device. 


3.70 Sprinkler — A device intended for installation in 
an upright or pendent position, designed to distribute 
foam or water downwards in an umbrella shaped 
pattern. 


3.71 Stability — A term used with foam concentrates 
to determine the permanence and security of a foam 
blanket. 


3.72 Static Pressure — A pressure existing in a line 
at no flow. This can be considered as higher than the 
residual pressure. 


3.73 Submergence — Plunging of foam beneath the 
surface of burning liquid, resulting in partial breakdown 
of the foam structure and coating of the foam with the 
burning liquid. 


3.74 Subsurface Foam Injection — Discharge of 
foam into certain flammable hydrocarbon storage tanks 
from outlets near the tank bottom. 


3.75 Surfactant — A chemical that lowers the surface 
tension ofa liquid. Also known as surface active agents. 


3.76 Specific Gravity — It is a measure of the density 
of the material in relationship to the density of water. 


3.77 Topside Application — A method of foam 
discharge wherein the foam is applied onto the top of 
the burning fuel surface. 


3.78 25-Percent Drain Time — The time required for 
25 percent of the liquid contained in the foam to drain. 


3.79 Transalem Closure or Vapour Seal — 
A specially designed rupturable seal used in foam 
chambers which prevents vapours within the tank from 
entering the foam solution lines. 


3.80 Types of Foam Concentrates 


3.80.1 Alcohol Type Liquid Concentrate — A 
concentrate used for fighting fires on water-soluble 
materials and other fuels destructive to regular, 
AFFF, or FFFP foams, as well as for fires involving 
hydrocarbons. 


3.80.2 Aqueous Film-forming Foam (AFFF) Туре 
Liquid Concentrate — А concentrate based on 
fluorinated surfactants plus foam stabilizers and usually 
diluted with water to a 1 percent, 3 percent, or 6 percent 
solution. 


3.80.3  Fluoroprotein Foam Concentrate — А 
concentrate very similar to protein-foam concentrate 
but with a synthetic fluorinated surfactant additive. In 
other words, a foam compound based on hydrolized 
protein with surface active fluorocarbon surfactants 
added and loosely bonded to provide oleophobicity. 


3.80.4 Film Forming Foam — А concentrate that when 
mixed at its nominal use concentration will form an 
aqueous film on hydrocarbon fuels. The hydrocarbon 
fuel typically used as a minimum benchmark for film 
formation is cyclohexane. 


3.80.5 Film-forming Fluoroprotein Foam Concentrate 
(FFFP) — А concentrate that uses fluorinated 
surfactants to produce a fluid aqueous film for 
suppressing hydrocarbon fuel vapors. 


3.80.6 Protein Foam Concentrate — Concentrate 
consisting primarily of products from a protein 
hydrolysate, plus stabilizing additives and inhibitors 
to protect against freezing, to prevent corrosion 
of equipment and containers, to resist bacterial 
decomposition, to control viscosity, and to otherwise 
ensure readiness for use under emergency conditions. 


3.80.7 | Medium апа | High-expansion Foam 
Concentrate — А concentrate, usually derived from 
hydrocarbon surfactants, used in specially designed 
equipment to produce foams having foam-to-solution 
volume ratios of 20 : 1 to approximately 1 000 : 1. 


3.80.8 Synthetic Foam Concentrate — Concentrate 
based on foaming agents other than hydrolyzed proteins 
and including aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF) 
concentrates, medium and high-expansion foam 
concentrates, and other synthetic foam concentrates. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


3.80.9 Other Synthetic Foam Concentrates — A 
concentrate based on hydrocarbon surface active 
agents and listed as a wetting agent, foaming agent, or 
both. 


3.81 Types of Foam Systems 


3.81.1 Fixed System — A complete installation in 
which foam is piped from a central foam station, 
discharging through fixed delivery outlets to the hazard 
to be protected with permanently installed pumps 
where required. 


3.81.2 Mobile System — Any type of foam-producing 
unit that is mounted on wheels and that is self-propelled 
or towed by a vehicle and can be connected to a water 
supply or can utilize a premixed foam solution. 


3.81.3 Portable System — Foam-producing equipment, 
materials, hose, and so forth, that are transportable 
manually. 


3.81.4 Semifixed System — A system in which the 
hazard is equipped with fixed discharge outlets 
connected to piping that terminates at a safe distance. 


3.82 Types of Foam Discharge Outlets 
3.82.1 Type I Discharge Outlet 


A device that conducts and delivers foam onto the 
burning surface of the liquid without submerging the 
foam or agitating the foam. 


3.82.2 Type II Discharge Outlet 


A device that delivers foam onto the burning liquid and 
partially submerges the foam and produces restricted 
agitation of the surface. 


3.82.3 Type III Discharge Outlet 


A device that delivers foam in a manner that causes 
the foam directly onto the surface of the burning 
liquid and does so in a method that causes general 
agitation. 


3.83 Upstream — In the direction from which the 
water 15 flowing. 


3.84 Unstable (Reactive Liquid) — A liquid that will 
vigorously polymerize, decompose, condense, or will 
become self-reactive under certain conditions of shock, 
pressure, or temperature. 


3.85 Venturi — A constricted portion of a pipe or 
tube which increases water velocity, thus momentarily 
reducing its pressure. 


NOTE — It is in this reduced pressure area, foam concentrate 
is introduced. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Foam for fire protection is an aggregate of air 
filled bubbles formed from aqueous solutions of 
specially formulated concentrated liquid foaming 
agents and is lower in density than flammable liquids. 
Normally the gas used is air, but in certain applications 
it may be an inert gas. Since foam is lighter than 
the aqueous solutions from which it is formed, and 
lighter than flammable liquids, it floats on flammable 
and combustible liquids, producing an air excluding, 
cooling, continuous layer of vapour sealing, water 
bearing material that halts or prevents combustion. 
Foam is produced by mixing a foam concentrate 
with water at the appropriate concentration, and then 
aerating and agitating the solution to form the bubble 
structure. Some foams are thick and viscous and form 
tough, heat resistant blankets over burning liquid 
surfaces and vertical areas. Other foams are thinner and 
spread more rapidly. 


4.2 Foam is used principally to form a cohesive 
floating blanket on flammable and combustible liquids 
and prevents or extinguishes fire by excluding air 
and cooling the fuel. It also prevents re-ignition by 
suppressing formation of flammable vapours. It has 
the property of adhering to surfaces, which provides 
a degree of exposure protection from adjacent fires. 
Foam can be used as a fire prevention, control, or 
extinguishing agent for flammable liquid hazards. 
Foam for these hazards can be supplied by fixed piped 
systems or portable foam-generating systems. Foam 
can be applied through foam discharge outlets, which 
allow it to fall gently on the surface of the burning fuel. 
Foam can also be applied by portable hose streams 
using foam nozzles or large-capacity monitor nozzles 
or subsurface injection systems. 


4.3 Some foams are capable of producing a vapour 
sealing film of surface active water solution on a 
liquid surface. Some foams, such as medium and high 
expansion foams are meant be used as large volumes of 
wet gas cells for inundating surfaces and filling cavities. 
Normally, foams are defined by their expansion ratio, 
which is the ratio of final foam volume to original foam 
solution volume before adding air. They are generally 
divided into three ranges: 


а) Low expansion foam - expansion 20 : 1; 

b) Medium expansion foam — expansion 20 : 1 to 
200 : 1; and 

c) High expansion foam - expansion 200 : 1 to 
1 000 : 3. 


In this standard (Part 1), the requirements for the 
installation of protection systems using low expansion 
foams are covered. 


4.4 Foams are also defined according to their 
effectiveness on hydrocarbon fuels, water miscible 


fuels or both. Foam breaks down and vapourizes its 
water content under attack of heat and flame. It must, 
therefore, be applied to a burning liquid surface in 
sufficient. volume and rate to compensate for this 
loss, with an additional amount applied to guarantee a 
residual foam layer over the extinguished liquid. Foam 
15 unstable and may be broken down easily by a physical 
or mechanical force, such as a water hose jet stream. 
Certain chemical vapours or fluids may also destroy 
foam quickly. When certain other extinguishing agents 
are used in conjunction with foam, severe breakdown 
of the foam may occur. Turbulent air or violently 
uprising combustion gases may divert foam from the 
burning area. 


4.5 Generally speaking, the following criteria for the 
flammable and hazardous liquids shall be met for a 
foam protection to be fully effective: 


a) Combustible liquid shall not be water reactive. 


b) At the ambient conditions of temperature and 
pressure, the combustible liquid shall be below its 
boiling point. 

c) Liquid shall not be unduly destructive to the foam 
used, or in other words, the foam shall not be 
highly soluble in the liquid to be protected. 


d 


— 


Foam application cannot extinguish three 
dimensional (falling fuel) or pressure fires in most 
of the cases. For effectiveness of the foam system, 
the fire shall be a horizontal surface fire. 


e 


wm 


From the standpoint of forming a cohesive foam 
blanket and rapid flow around the obstructions, 
a free flowing fluid type foam is desirable. But 
water from this type of foam is lost rapidly and 
chance of flame burn back is a possibility. From 
the other standpoint of foam that retain its water 
for a long time, it does not flow readily over the 
burning space, thus reducing the rapidity of fire 
extinction. 


4.6 Thus the installation of foam system is really a 
compromise between these two opposite properties 
in order to obtain a premium optimum protection. 
Thus an optimum foam protection is defined as the 
foam, with physical properties defined by expansion 
and drainage time that will extinguish a fire faster, at 
a lower application rate or with less water consumed 
than any other foam. 


4.7 Low expansion foams are generally used for the 
extinction of fires in flammable liquids by the formation 
of a blanket over the surface of the liquid, thereby 
reducing the rate of release of flammable vapours to 
the combustion zone below that which is necessary to 
maintain burning. The fires may include pool of spill 
fires, or fires in tanks and similar containers. 


4.8 Low expansion foams may be applied directly to 
the surface of the burning liquid (surface application) 
or may be applied in the case of tank fires, below the 


surface so that they float to the surface under their own 
buoyancy (sub-surface application). Low expansion 
foams may also be applied by a semi sub-surface 
method. For petrol and light crude oils, (AFFF) should 
be used. 


4.9 Low expansion foams may be used for the 
suppression of vapour emission from spillage of 
flammable liquids. They can also be used to protect 
other risks from radiant heating, provided the foam 
layer is regularly replenished, and they can have a 
limited usefulness in the extinction of surface fires in 
solid combustibles. 


Spreading coefficient of the foam directly influences 
the ability of foam to spreads over the surface of a 
hydrocarbon fuel, cooling the burning fuel surface, 
reducing the hydrocarbon evaporation rate and 
depleting the supply of fuel vapour to the flames. 


4.10 There are certain limitations on the use of low 
expansion foams and the same are listed as under: 


a) They are not generally suitable for the extinction 
of running fuel fires, that is, fuel running from a 
leaking container or from damaged pipework or 
pipe joints. 

b 


x 


Sinceall firefighting foams are made from aqueous 
solutions, they may be ineffective or dangerous 
to use on flammable liquids with temperatures 
having content of varying boiling point, much in 
excess of 100 ?C, particularly where these fires 
are in liquids of considerable depth of in-tank 
fires. Drainage of the water from the foam may 
result in the formation of steam which can cause 
frothing or slop-over of the burning liquid unless 
due precautions are taken to avoid this. Foams, 
may, however, sometimes be used to cool the 
surface layers of a flammable liquid below the fire 
point, provided the temperature 1s not greatly in 
excess of 100 °C. 


Most aqueous foams are not suitable for use on 
water-miscible flammable liquids, which can cause 
rapid breakdown of the foam by extraction of the 
water from the bubble walls. For these flammable 
liquids, specially stabilized foam concentrates are 
used. 


c 


— 


d) Low expansion foams are not suitable for use on 
fires involving gases, or liquifiable gases with 
boiling points below 0 °C, or cryogenic liquids, 
however high expansion foam exhibits potential 
of managing fire involving cryogenic fluid like 
LNG, ethylene, etc. Also, low expansion foam 
is rendered ineffective in suppression of vapour 
generation from spillage of hazardous material 
(strong alkali or acid). 


е 


— 


Because foams are made from aqueous solutions 
they may be dangerous to use on materials which 
react violently with water, such as metallic sodium 
or potassium. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


f) Low expansion foam is a good conductor and 
should not be used on energized electrical 
equipment. 


g) Certain wetting agents and some extinguishing 
powders may be incompatible with foams, causing 
a rapid breakdown of the latter. Only agents which 
are substantially compatible with these foams 
should be used in conjunction with them. In such 
cases AFFF should only be used. 


h) Only certain types of foam concentrates are 
suitable for storage in the diluted or premixed 
condition. AFFF can be kept in premixed condition 
up to 1 year. Protein base foams are unsuitable for 
keeping in premixed condition. 


— 


Simultaneous use of water jets or sprays may 
adversely affect a foam blanket, and their use 
should not be envisaged in conjunction with these 
foams unless it has been shown that this will not 
occur. 


5 


The various types ої foam (see IS 4989) available for 
protection of risks are as briefed under: 


1) Protein foam, 
2) Fluoroprotein foam, 


3) Synthetic foam, such as aqueous film foaming 
foam, medium and high expansion foams and 
other synthetic concentrate foams, 


4) Film foaming fluoroprotein foam, 
5) Alcohol resistant foam, and 
6) Biofoam. 


4.11 The selection of foam, the method of application, 
foam application rate, type of foam pourers, installation 
of piping network, etc, depend on several factors on a 
case to case basis and it Is not true that some philosophy 
of protection can be adopted for all fire protection 
requirement. Certain guidelines have been provided in 
this regard in this standard. 


4.12 These provisions provide a reasonably sound 
protection philosophy for various types of risks with 
foam protection. 


NOTE — Nothing in this standard is intended to restrict new 
technologies or alternate arrangements, provided the level of 


safety prescribed herein is not lowered. 


5 TYPES OF FOAM CONCENTRATES 
5.1 General 


There are a number of foaming agents available and 
their application depends upon the type of hazard to be 
protected. While some are capable of extinguishing all 
types of flammable liquids, few of them are restricted 
for application only on specific types of liquids. 
Descriptions of some of the most commonly preferred 
foam agents are as under (see also Annex E). 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


5.1.1 Protein [Р] Foaming Agents 
a) Protein foams (see IS 4989) use aqueous liquid 
concentrates proportioned with water for their 
generation. 


b 


wm 


These concentrates contain high molecular weight 
natural proteinaceous polymers derived from 
a chemical digestion and hydrolysis of natural 
protein solids. The polymers give elasticity, 
mechanical strength and water retention capability 
to foams generated from them. The concentrates 
also contain dissolved polyvalent metallic 
salts which aid the protein polymers in their 
bubble-strengthening capability when the foam is 
exposed to heat and flame. 


c 


wa 


Protein type concentrates are available for 
proportioning to a final concentration of either 
3 percent or 6 percent volume, using either fresh 
water or sea water. 


d 


М7 


In general, these concentrates produce dense, 
viscous foams ofhigh stability, high heat resistance 
and also good resistance to burn-back. They are 
less resistant to breakdown by fuel saturation 
than are by other types of foams like AFFF and 
fluoroprotein foams. 


е) These are non-toxic and bio-degradable. The 
normal-use ambient temperature range for these 
concentrates are between — 5 °C and 50 °C. These 
type of concentrates are relatively less expensive 
compared to other type of foams. 


f) Protein. foams are not suitable for use in 
sub-surface systems in fuel storage tanks but may 
be, applied by a semi subsurface method. 


g) Protein foams are compatible with certain dry 
chemicals. 


5.1.2 Fluoroprotein [FP] Foaming Agents 


a) The concentrates used for generating fluoroprotein 
foams are similar in comparison to protein foam 
concentrates, but, in addition to protein polymers, 
they contain fluorinated surface active agents 
that provides a ‘fuel shedding’ property to the 
generated foam. 


b) This makes them particularly effective for 
firefighting conditions where the foam becomes 
coated with fuel, such as in the method of 
sub-surface injection of foam for tank firefighting, 
and nozzle or monitor foam applications where 
the foam may be often plunged into the fuel. 


c 


w 


Thistype of foam 15 thus very effective for in-depth 
crude petroleum or other types of hydrocarbon 
fuel fires due to its ‘fuel shedding’ property. They 
also possess superior securing and burn back 
resistance. 


d 


М7 


Fluoroprotein type concentrates are available for 
proportioning to a final concentration of either 
3 percent or 6 percent volume, using either fresh 
water or sea water. 


e) These are non-toxic and bio-degradable after 
dilution. The normal-use ambient temperature 
range for these concentrates are between — 5 °C 
and 50 °C. 


f) These foams are reported to have better 
compatibility with dry chemical powders when 
used as combined agent systems. 


5.1.3 Film Forming Fluoroprotein [FFFP] Foaming 
Agents 


a) Film forming fluoroprotein [FFFP] foaming 
agents are composed of protein together with 
film-forming fluorinated surface active agents, 
which make them capable of forming water 
solution films on the surface of most of the 
flammable hydrocarbons and conferring a ‘fuel 
shedding’ property to the generated foam. 


b 


— 


However, for extinguishment, an effective FFFP 
blanket should cover the entire fuel surface. 


c) The foams produced drain rapidly and may thus 
have less burn back resistance compared to protein 
based foams. 


d) FFFP type concentrates are available for 
proportioning to a final concentration of either 
3 percent or 6 percent volume, using either fresh 
water or sea water. 


e) These foams are reported to have no compatibility 
problems with certain dry chemical powders when 
used as combined agent systems. 


5.1.4 Aqueous Film Forming [AFFF] Foaming Agents 


a) Aqueous film forming [AFFF] foaming agents 
are composed of synthetically produced materials 
that form foams similar to protein based foams. 
In addition, these agents are capable of forming 
water solution films on the surface of flammable 
hydrocarbon liquids, thus bringing the term 
*aqueous' to its name. 


b 


wm 


The foams generated from AFFF solutions possess 
low viscosity, have fast spreading and levelling 
characteristics and just as other foams act as surface 
barriers to exclude air and prevent vapourization. 
These foams develop a continuous aqueous layer 
of solution under the foam, maintaining a floating 
film on hydrocarbon fuel surfaces to help not only 
suppress combustible vapours but also cool the 
fuel substrate. 


Film effectiveness may be reduced on hot surfaces 
and aromatic hydrocarbons. 


AFFF film fluidity and film strength on kerosene 
makes it suitable for fighting fires of aviation fuels. 
The extremely low surface tension of the solution 
draining from AFFF helps tackling fires under 
mixed class situations (Classes A and B), where 
deep penetration of water is needed in addition to 
the surface spreading action of the foam itself. 


С 


— 


d 


— 


e) The foams produced drain rapidly and may thus 
have less burn back resistance compared to protein 
based foams. 


f) These foams are reported to not seem to have 
compatibility issues with dry chemical powders 
when used as combined agent systems. 


g) The normal-use ambient temperature range for 
these foam concentrates is between —10 °C and 
50 C. 

h) Sophisticated equipment are not required in 
the deployment of AFFF. Water spray nozzles 
and sprinklers may be used because of the 
inherent rapid and easy foaming capability of 
AFFF solutions. 


J) AFFF type concentrates are available for 
proportioning to a final concentration of either 
] percent, 3 percent or 6 percent volume, using 
either fresh water or sea water. 


k) Degradabality, high shelf life, as well as 
carcinogenic nature is presently been found a 
problem in its use and contamination. However 
AFFF, FP, FFFP, AR are not biodegradable. 


5.1.5 Alcohol Type Foaming Agents [AR] 


Foams generated from ordinary agents are subject to 
rapid breakdown and loss of effectiveness when they 
are used on fires that involve fuels that are water soluble 
water miscible, or of a *polar solvent? type. Examples, 
of this type of fuel are alcohols, enamels, lacquers, 
thinners, etc. Even small amounts of these substances 
mixed with common hydrocarbon fuels, such as gasohol, 
may cause rapid breakdown of ordinary firefighting 
foams. Therefore, certain special foaming agents, called 
*alcohol type concentrates' have been developed. 


These alcohol resistant concentrates are proprietary 
compositions of several types some containing 
protein, fluoroprotein or an aqueous film forming 
foam concentrated base. The most common are 
usually described as polymeric alcohol resistant 
AFFF concentrates which produce foams suitable 
for application to spill or in-depth fires of either 
hydrocarbon or water miscible flammable liquids by 
any foam generating device. 


There are three general types. One is based on 
water-soluble natural polymers, such as protein 
or fluoroprotein concentrates, and also contains 
alcohol-insoluble materials that precipitate as an 
insoluble barrier in the bubble structure. Second type 1s 
based on synthetic concentrates and contains a gelling 
agent that surrounds the foam bubbles and forms a 
protective raft on the surface of water-soluble fuels; 
these foams can also have film-forming characteristics 
on hydrocarbon fuels. Third type is based on 
water-soluble natural polymers, such as fluoroprotein, 
and contains a gelling agent that protects the foam 
from water-soluble fuels. This foam can also have 
film-forming and fluoroprotein characteristics on 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


hydrocarbon fuels. Alcohol-resistant foam concentrates 
are generally used in concentrations of 1 percent to 
10 percent solutions, depending on the nature of the 
hazard to be protected and the type of concentrate. 


The normal-use ambient temperature range for these 
concentrates are between 2 °C and 50 °C. 


Annex B serves as a guide for determining the suitability 
of different types of foams for variety of firefighting 
applications. 


5.2 Requirements Pertaining to Foam Concentrates 


5.2.1 Foam Concentrate and Solution 


The pre-mixed foam solution used in the system shall 
have a concentration within the range of minus zero (0) 
percent, plus thirty (30) percent of induction rate (that 
is 1 or 3 or 6 percent) or one percent point, whichever 
Is less. For sub-surface application, AFFF, FFFP or FP 
type of foams shall only be used. The nominal 
concentration of use for mixtures of foam concentrates 
shall not be less than the higher or highest value 
selected for design (1 percent, 3 percent or 6 percent 
as applicable). 


5.2.2 Supply of Foam Concentrates 


The minimum quantity of foam concentrate which shall 
be held in immediate readiness for a particular risk or 
hazard is determined by the following equation: 


Minimum quantity of foam concentrate 
(in litre) = ABCD/100 


where 

A= area, in m’; 

B= application rate, in //min/m’; 

C — percent foam concentrate, in percent; and 

D = minimum discharge time, in min. 
Suitable allowance shall be made for the quantity of 
foam concentrate needed to fill the pipelines between 
the source and the injecting devices. Where it is desired 
to continue the water supply after the foam concentrate 
is exhausted in order to displace the solution or 


concentrate in the feed lines, no additional concentrate 
need be provided. 


The hazard requiring the greatest quantity of foam 
concentrate within the protected premises shall be thus 
identified (sum of the quantities indicated above) and 
equal quantity thus calculated shall be held in stock in 
readiness. 


NOTE — Suitable reserve of supply shall be stored in stores. 


5.2.3 Storage of Foam Concentrates 


Foam concentrate and pre-mixed solutions of foam shall 
be stored at an accessible location not exposed to the 
hazard it protects. The storage shall be housed within a 
non-combustible structure. Only suitable concentrates 
shall be stored as pre-mixed solutions as high storage 
temperatures may accelerate deterioration due to aging 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


of the solution. Means shall be available to ensure that 
the concentrate or pre-mixed solutions is kept within 
its design operating temperature range. Storage vessels 
shall be clearly marked with the class of concentrate 
and its concentration in the solution. Storage tanks shall 
have sufficient ullage space to accommodate thermal 
expansion of the concentrate or solution. 


Adequate measures shallbe adopted as permanufacturer 
recommendation to minimize the evaporation losses of 
foam during storage. The storage temperature and other 
storage condition shall comply with relevant standards 
and manufacturer's recommendations in all respect. 


Foam storage tank shall be equipped with the 
appropriate level gauge and low level warning alarm. 


5.2.4 Foam Concentrate Compatibility 


Different types of foam concentrates shall not be 
mixed for storage. Low-expansion foams generated 
separately from protein, fluoroprotein, FFFP, and AFFF 
concentrates shall be permitted to be applied to a fire in 
sequence or simultaneously. 
NOTE — The extinguishing effect of premixed solutions, in 
storage vessels or pipework, may be reduced considerably 
depending on the storage time and the quality of water used. 
Polymeric film forming foams should not be pre-mixed unless 
written confirmation of suitability has been provided by the 
foam manufacturer. 


5.2.5 Foam Concentrate Pumps 


Pumps for foam concentrate shall be either positive 
displacement pump like internal rotary gear pump or 
centrifugal type self-priming and driven by any suitable 
prime mover conforming to relevant Indian Standard. 
Foam concentrate pumps shall be treated as good as 
main fire pumps. Pumps shall have adequate capacity 
to meet the maximum system requirements. To ensure 
positive injection, the discharge pressure rating at 
design discharge capacity shall be sufficiently in excess 
of the maximum water pressure under any condition at 
the point of injection of the concentrate. Pumps shall 
be provided with adequate means of pressure and flow 
relief from the discharge to the suction side of the 
circuit to prevent excessive pressure and temperature. 
The material of construction for the moving parts of 
the pump shall be of non-corrosive type as specified 
in IS 13039. Special attention shall be paid to the 
type of seal or packing used. Seals or packing used 
shall be compatible with the foam concentrate. 
Installation of pumps should be as per manufacturer's 
recommendations and/or as per the Authority having 
jurisdiction (AHJ). However, various provisions of 
IS 13039 shall receive attention particularly for the 
electrification of pump motor and location of the foam 
concentrate pumps. Where hydrant pump water flow is 
utilized for the foam induction including online booster 
pumps ifany, the hydrant system shall be ofan approved 
type complying in all respects with various provisions 
of IS 13039. Pumps that are arranged to stand dry shall 


10 


have means provided for flushing with clean water after 
use and shall be provided with a drain valve. Where 
required, all electrical equipment and fittings related to 
foam pumps shall be of flame-proof type. The electrical 
supply to foam pumps or fire pumps feeding the foam 
system shall comply with all the requirements specified 
in the fire protection manual for the purpose. 


5.2.6 Foam Proportioning Devices 


Devices shall be of approved type and selected from 
any of the following methods: 


a) Self educting nozzle, 

b) In-line inductor, 

c) Pressure proportioners, 

d) Around the pump proportioner, 

e) Direct injection from variable output pump, and 
f) Balanced pressure pump type proportioners. 


5.2.7 Water Supply 


Water supplies for the foam installations shall be 
free from suspended, fibrous or other matters, which 
may accumulate in the system pipework, and it is 
recommended to use filtered water for the system. The 
water supply to foam systems shall be permitted to be 
hard or soft, fresh or salty, but shall be of a quality such 
that adverse effects on foam formation or foam stability 
do not occur. System shall be normally charged with 
fresh water. Storage quantity shall depend upon the 
supply to all the devices on the assumption that all 
devices work simultaneously. This will be in addition 
to water quantity requirements for all other water based 
systems in the premises. 


5.2.8 Drainage of Bunds 


Drains and interceptors in bunded areas shall be of 
adequate capacity to carry the anticipated drainage of 
water/foam used for firefighting. 


6 DESIGN 
SYSTEM 


REQUIREMENTS FOR FOAM 


6.1 General 


Fire protection, employing foam based system, can be 
achieved by different types of application depending 
upon the nature and type of the risks to be protected. 
The different types of application are listed as under: 

a) Fixed systems, 

b) Semi-fixed systems, 

c) Portable systems, and 

d) Mobile systems. 


6.1.1 Fixed Systems 


This type has permanent metallic pipework connected 
from the water supply via the fire water pump (if fitted) 
and foam liquid proportioning device to the foam 
producing equipment which protects the fire hazard. 


6.1.2 Semi-Fixed Systems 


Permanent metallic pipework is employed from an 
area adjacent to the risk, from which it is considered 
safe for personnel to conduct firefighting operations, to 
the foam producing equipment which protects the fire 
hazard. This pipework may include the proportioning 
device and has provisions for water supply hoses to be 
connected. The water supply is usually pumped and 
foam concentrates provided by mobile fire appliances. 


6.1.3 Portable Systems 


This includes foam producing units that can be carried 
by one or more men and connected via fire hose to 
a pressurized water or pre-mixed solution, so as to 
produce foam jets, or sprays that can be applied to the 
risks. 


6.1.4 Mobile Systems 


This includes foam producing units mounted on wheels, 
and which may be self-propelled, towed by a vehicle 
or pushed by hand. These units may be connected to 
a suitable water supply or may utilize pre-mixed foam 
solutions. They can produce foam jets or sprays that 
can be applied to the risk. 


6.2 Important Design Considerations 


The design of a foam system shall be made to suit 
hazards under consideration. The following points are 
to be considered before designing the system: 


a) Full details of the flammable liquid, its storage 
surroundings, handling and location; 


b) Most suitable foam concentrate at appropriate 
concentration; 


c) Most suitable solution application rate; 
d) Most suitable foam making and delivering 
equipment; 
e) System operating time; 
f) Quantity of foam concentrate required for 
extinction; 
g) Most suitable proportioning arrangement; 
h) Pipework size and friction losses; 
j) Water supply arrangement, quantity and pressure; 
k) Detection equipment; 
m) Reserve supply for the concentrate; 
n) Drainage and bund provisions; 


p) Usage of electrical equipment in flammable 
vapour area near the tankage area; and 


q) Manual operation or automatic operation is 
required. 


The decision as to which option (systems those are 
fixed or semi-fixed; portable/mobile equipment) to use 
will depend on site specific conditions considering the 
following: 


11 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


1) Number of hazards protected and system 
vulnerability; 

2) Manpower available; 

3) Speed of deployment; and 

4) Access/egress and requirement of the backup 


equipment. 


6.3 Fixed and Semi-Fixed Systems for Exterior 
Storage Tanks 


6.3.1 General 


6.3.1.1 Application 


The above systems are suitable for the protection of 
outdoor vertical atmospheric storage tanks containing 
flammable and combustible liquids used in conjunction 
with fixed foam discharge outlets. The design shall 
always be based on protecting the tank requiring the 
largest solution flow including supplementary hose 
streams where provided. As a rule, tanks containing 
Class III combustible liquids having flash points above 
65 °C shall not be protected by foam systems. 


6.3.1.2 Limitations 


It is likely that the foam may fail to seal the surface of 
the burning liquid as a result of prolonged free burning 
prior to foam discharge. Hence, it is always necessary 
to cool the exterior of the tanks, in addition, by a fixed 
automatic medium water spray system at a minimum 
density of 3 litre/min/m? of the shell surface area for 
bulk storage tanks storing flammable liquids flashing 
at 32 °C and below. Such systems are not suitable for 
discharge into horizontal tanks and also not suitable for 
pressurized vessel tanks. 


6.3.2 Design Specification for Tanks Containing Liquid 
Hydrocarbons 


6.3.2.1 Foam solution delivery rate 
The following specification shall apply: 


a) For tanks containing liquid hydrocarbons, the 
delivery rate of the foam solution shall be at least 
5 litre/min/m? of liquid surface area of the tank to 
be protected. 
b) The foam solution delivery rate for tanks 
containing liquid hydrocarbons, polar solvents or 
those hydrocarbons that are foam destructive in 
nature, for example, amines, anhydrides, etc, shall 
be at least 6.5 litre/min/m? of liquid surface area of 
the tank to be protected. 


6.3.2.2 Foam discharge outlets 
The following guidelines shall be adhered to: 


a) Discharge outlets shall be attached to the tank 
at regular intervals on the periphery (depending 
on the diameter of the tank) of the tank for the 
protection of flammable liquid contained in a 
vertical storage tank. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


b) Where two or more outlets are required, the 
outlets shall be equally spaced around the tank 
periphery and each outlet shall be sized to deliver 
foam at minimum application rate or higher but 
approximately same rate at all outlets. 

c) All such outlets shall be individually piped and 
separate valves shall be provided for isolation 
outside the dyke area. 
d) Fixed discharge outlets shall be and so located or 
connected at the top as to preclude the possibility 
of overflowing of the tank contents into the foam 
lines. 
e) Fixed foam discharge outlets shall be provided 
with vapour seal, frangible under low pressure, to 
prevent entrance of vapours into foam outlets and 
pipelines. 
NOTE — The vapour seal is designed to rupture within 
0.7 to 1.75 kg/cm? (10 to 25 psi) pressure at inlet flange of foam 
chamber, as required by relevant standard. The vapour seal will 
withstand maximum back pressure ої 0.07 kg/cm? (1.0 psi) or 
equal to 686 mm of water column for welded storage tank. If 
the requirement exceeds 0.07 kg/cm? (1.0 psi) as in case of 
nitrogen blanketing system, then this equipment may not be 
suitable. 

Fixed foam discharge outlets shall be provided 

with inspection means to allow maintenance and 

for inspection and replacement of vapour seals. 


Fixed discharge outlets shall be securely attached 
at the top of the shell so that displacement of 
the roof is not likely to subject them to serious 
damage. 


g) 


h) If fixed discharge outlets are provided with 
orifices plates, then її should be securely fixed 
to the equipment. Tanks should be provided with 


foam discharge outlets/vapour seal chambers as 


indicated below: 
upto20m 2 outlets 
> 20 m and up to 25 m 3 outlets 
> 25 m and up to 30 m 4 outlets 
> 30 m and up to 35 m 5 outlets 
7 35 m and up to 40 m 6 outlets 
7 40 m and up to 45 m 8 outlets 
7 45 m and up to 50 m 10 outlets 


J) Fixed discharge outlets shall be provided with 
foam discharge outlets as per the following table 
around the tank: 


12 


Tank Diameter Minimum Number of 
m Discharge Outlets 
Up to 24 1 
Above 24 and up to 36 2 
Above 36 and up to 42 3 
Above 42 and up to 48 4 
Above 48 and up to 54 5 
Above 54 and up to 60 6 


NOTES 

1 For tanks having diameter above 60 m, at least one extra 
discharge outlet shall be provided for every additional 
450 m° surface area of the liquid or part thereof. 

2 For tanks above 60 m diameter, sub-surface injection may 
be alternatively considered to reduce foam travel distance. 


6.3.2.3 Duration of discharge 


The duration of discharge of foam shall be as suggested 
below: 


Type of the Liquid Discharge Outlet 

Type - 2 

Flash point of 32 °C and below 55 min 

or liquids heated above their 

flash points 

Flash point above 32 °C 30 min 

Petroleum crude oil 55 min 

Tanks containing liquid 30 min 

hydrocarbons - Class “С° 

petroleum 

Tanks containing Class ‘A’ and 65 min 


Class ‘B’ petroleum or liquids 
heated above their flash points 


6.3.3 Design Specification for Tanks Containing 
Flammable and | Combustible Liquids Requiring 
Alcohol Resistant Foams 


Water-soluble and certain flammable and combustible 
liquids and polar solvents that are destructive to 
non-alcohol-resistant foams shall require the use of 
alcohol-resistant foams. 


6.3.3.1 Foam solution delivery rate 


The foam solution delivery rate shall be at least 
8.1 litre/min/m? for the flammable liquids having a 
boiling point of less than 32 °C for example, isopropyl 
alcohol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl methacrylate 


monomer, butyl alcohol, methyl isobutyl ketone, etc, 
and also for mixtures of water miscible liquids in 
general. 

NOTE — Application rate of AR-AFFF varies with different 


polar solvent therefore manufacturer shall be consulted for 
application rate for particular polar compound. 


6.3.3.2 Foam discharge outlets 


Tanks shall be provided with approved fixed foam 
discharge outlets as indicated in 6.3.2.2. 


6.3.3.3 Duration of discharge 


Minimum discharge time shall be for 55 min with 
Type II foam discharge outlet. 


6.4 Sub-surface Foam Injection Systems 


6.4.1 Design Criteria 


Subsurface foam injection systems shall be permitted 
for protection of liquid hydrocarbons in vertical 
fixed-roof atmospheric storage tanks. 


These requirements under this clause are applicable to 
systems used for the protection of fixed roof storage 
tanks containing low viscosity hydrocarbon liquids, in 
which foam is injected (through a product line ora special 
foam line) at the base of the tank and rises to the surface 
through the liquid in the tank. Subsurface injection of 
foam generally is not recommended for fuels that have a 
viscosity greater than 440 centistokes at their minimum 
anticipated storage temperature. These systems shall 
not be used for protection of Class IA hydrocarbon 
liquids or for the protection of alcohols, esters, ketones, 
aldehydes, anhydrides, or other products requiring the 
use of alcohol-resistant foams. Foam concentrates and 
equipment for subsurface injection shall be suitable for 
the application. Fluoroprotein foam, AFFF, AR-AFFF 
and FFFP for subsurface injection shall have expansion 
ratios between 2 : 1 and 4: 1. 


6.4.2 Foam Application Rates 


Systems shall be designed to deliver not less than the 
minimum foam solution application rate as specified 
below: 


Type of Liquids Density of Application 
l/min/m? 
Foam destructive liquids 6.5 
Liquids having boiling 8.1 
point below 32 ?C and 
unstable liquids 
All other liquids 5.0 


6.4.3 Foam Discharge Outlets 


The discharge outlet into the tank shall be permitted 
to be the open end of a foam delivery line or product 


13 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


line. Outlets shall be sized so that foam generator 
discharge pressure and foam velocity limitations 
are not exceeded. The foam velocity at the point of 
discharge into the tank contents shall not exceed 3 m/s 
for Class IB liquids or 6 m/s for other classes of liquids 
over a distance of not less than 20 times the diameters 
from the outlet. For other pipework the foam velocity 
shall not exceed 9 m/s. Where two or more outlets are 
required, they shall be located so that the foam travel 
on the surface cannot exceed 30 m. Where more than 
one foam injection point is required, these points shall 
be designed to deliver foam at approximately the same 
rate and be positioned to distribute foam evenly over 
the free surface of the fuel in the tank shell, terminating 
in a central manifold with separate outlets arranged 
radially. 


Foam outlets positioned at the tank shell or inside 
the tank via a manifold shall discharge foam above 
any water layer present in the tank. This shall be 
accomplished by having the outlets located at least 
300 mm above the highest water level to prevent 
destruction of the foam. The sizes and lengths of 
discharge pipe or lines used beyond the foam maker 
and the anticipated maximum depth of the fuel to be 
protected shall be such that the back pressure is within 
the range of pressures under which the device has been 
tested and approved. Allowance shall be made for the 
pressure losses due to friction at valves or bends. A 
typical subsurface injection method is given in Fig. 1. 


6.4.4 The number of foam injection points for 
subsurface application shall be as given below: 


Tank Diameter Flash Point Flash Point 
m (32?C and (above 32 °С)? 
below)? 
Up to 24 1 1 
Above 24 and 2 1 
up to 36 
Above 36 and 3 2 
up to 42 
Above 42 and 4 2 
up to 48 
Above 48 and 5 2 
up to 54 
Above 54 and 6 3 
up to 60 


D For tanks having diameters above 60 m and flash point 
below 32 ?C, one additional injection outlet shall be 
provided for each additional area of 45 m°. 

2 For tanks having diameters above 60 m and flash point 
above 32 ?C, one additional injection outlet shall be provided 
for each additional area of 700 m’. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


RUPTURE DISC 
(OPTIONAL) 

SWING 
CHECK VALVE 


VALVE TEST 
CONNECTION 


FOAM FLOW 


TANK SHELL 


GATE VALVE 


= 


2 


ZZ, 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL SUBSURFACE INJECTION 


6.4.5 Duration of Discharge 


The minimum discharge time for low expansion foam 
at specified application rates shall be as given below: 


Risk for Tanks Containing Discharge Time 


Liquid Hydrocarbons min 
Flash point 32 °C and 55 
below and for crude 
petroleum 
Flash point above 32 °C 30 


NOTE — Good judgment should be used in applying foams 
to tanks containing hot oils, burning bitumen (asphalts), or 
burning liquids that are heated above the boiling point of 
water. Although the comparatively low water content of 
foams can beneficially cool such liquids at a slow rate, it 
can also cause violent frothing and ‘slop-over’ of the tank’s 
contents. 


6.5 Semi Sub-surface Foam Injection Systems 


6.5.1 General 


These systems are not considered appropriate for 
floating roof tanks with or without a fixed roof because 
the floating roof prevents foam distribution. The 
flexible foam delivery hose is contained initially in a 
sealed housing and is connected to an external foam 
generator capable of working against the maximum 
product head. When operated, the hose is released from 
its housing, and the hose floats to the surface as a result 
of the buoyancy of the foam. Foam then discharges 
through the open end of the hose directly onto the 
liquid surface. Typical arrangement is shown in Fig. 2. 


14 


Consideration should be given to the following 
factors when selecting this type of system: 


a) Total foam output should reach the surface of the 
burning liquid. 

b) With large tanks, the semi-subsurface units can 
be arranged to produce an even distribution over 
the fuel surface. 

c) Any type of concentrate suitable for gentle 
surface application to the particular fuel can be 
used. 

d) Foam-generating equipment and operating 
personnel can be located at a distance from the 


fire. 


System can be used for the protection of foam 
destructive liquids, provided the flexible hose is 
not affected by them. 


Certain high-viscosity fuels might not be suitable 
for protection by this type of system. 


e) 


There is no circulation of the cold fuel and, 
therefore, no assistance in extinguishment. 
h) 


System can be difficult to check, and 


maintain. 


test, 
j) Highback-pressure foam generator has to produce 
foam at a pressure sufficient to overcome the 
head pressure of fuel as well as all friction losses 
in the foam pipework. Friction losses with foam 
differ from those with foam solution. 


CONE ROOF 


PRODUCT 


C? RUN 


FOAM SEALING 
MEMBRANE 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


HOSE 
CONTAINER 


Fic. 2 ARRANGEMENT OF FOAM INJECTION SYSTEM IN SEMI SURFACE 


6.5.2 Application Rates 


Systems shall be designed to deliver not less than the 
minimum foam solution application rate as specified 
below: 


Type of Liquids Density of Application 
I/min/m° 
Foam destructive liquids 6.5 
Liquids having boiling 8.1 
point below 32 °C and 
unstable liquids 
All other liquids 5.0 


6.5.3 Number of Foam 
Semi-subsurface Application 


Injection Points for 


Tank Diameter Number of Discharge 
(in m) Outlets! 
Up to 24 1 
Above 24 and up to 36 2 
Above 36 and up to 42 3 
Above 42 and up to 48 4 


15 


що FOAM 
INLET 
COMPENSATOR 
Tank Diameter Number of Discharge 
(in m) Outlets! 
Above 48 and up to 54 5 
Above 54 and up to 60 6 


'For tanks having diameters above 60 m, one additional 
injection outlet shall be provided for each additional area of 
450 nr. 

NOTES 

1 For liquids having low flash point and low boiling point 
that is below 32 ?C, the required number of foam injection 
points shall be increased by one. 

2 Where more than one foam injection point is required, these 
points shall be designed to deliver foam at approximately the 
same rate and be positioned to distribute foam evenly over 
the free surface of the fuel in the tank shell, away from tank 
level indicator devices and swing arm product pipes. 

3 Semi sub-surface units shall be secured by straps for 
support and sited within the base of the tank. 

4 Non-return valves shall be fitted at the foam entry points 
adjacent to the tank shell. 

5 This system must be laid in conjunction with an approved 
hydrant system. 


6.5.4 Foam Discharge Outlets 


Various requirements under 6.4.3 are applicable for 
semi-subsurface application also. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


6.5.5 Duration of Discharge 


The minimum discharge time for low expansion foam 
at specified application rates shall be as given below: 


Risk — Tanks Foam and Discharge 
Containing 
сина Туре of Foam Discharge 
Hydrocarbons Time Through 
Type II outlet 
min 
Flash point Protein, AFFF, 55 
32 °С апа below ЕР, FFFP, 
Alcohol resistant 
AFFF or FFFP 
Flash point АП types 30 
above 32 °C 
Foam destructive Alcohol resistant 55 
liquids 


6.6 Floating Roof Exterior Storage Tanks 
6.6.1 General 


Normally, fixed outlets are required for open top 
floating roof tanks. However, when floating roof tanks 
are covered (fixed cum floating roof tanks), such tanks 
shall be deemed as fixed roof tanks when floating covers 
are made of material other than steel for the purpose of 


STAINLESS STEEL 
SHUNT 


SUPPORT 
PLATE 


PRIMARY SEAL 
ENVELOPE 


RESILIENT FOAM 


FUEL LEVEL 


RIM 


TANK SHELL 


BUMPER 


protection. If the floating covers are made of steel, 
such tanks can be construed as open top floating 
roof type for the purpose of protection. Floating roof 
tanks have a good fire record and fixed protection is 
normally contemplated only for the annular rim seal 
area. Floating roof seals may be of the pantograph 
type or tube seal type. Foam shall be discharged 
into the seal area behind a foam dam secured to the 
floating roof, below the pantograph seal or behind a 
metal weather shield of tube seal designs (see Fig. 3). 
Adverse wind conditions and obstructions projecting 
through the fuel surface may reduce the effectiveness 
of the system and hence suitable allowance is 
necessary in the rate of foam application. Subsurface 
and semi-subsurface injection shall not be used for 
protection of open-top or covered floating roof tanks 
because of the possibility of improper distribution 
of foam at the fuel surface. The foam protection 
facilities for an open-top floating roof tank seal area 
shall be provided in accordance with 6.6.2. 


6.6.2 Fixed discharge outlets shall be provided for 
fire protection of seals in open top floating roof tanks 
for application of foam which shall be achieved in 
either of the two methods as given below: 


a) The first method discharges foam above the 
mechanical shoe seal, a metal weather shield, or 
a secondary seal. 


SECONDARY 
SEAL 


BOTTOM 
DECK 


Fic. 3 SEALS IN FLOATING Roor TANKS (DOUBLE SEAL SYSTEM) 


b) The second method discharges foam below a 


mechanical shoe seal directly onto the flammable 
liquid, behind a metal weather shield directly onto 
the tube seal envelope, or beneath a secondary seal 
onto the primary seal. 


6.6.2.1 Top of seal method with foam dam 


a) Fixed foam discharge outlets located above a 


b 


c 


ме 


ме 


mechanical shoe seal, above a tube seal weather 
shield, or above a secondary seal shall be used 
in conjunction with a foam dam. There are two 
methods of application of fixed foam discharge 
outlets. 


1) Fixed foam discharge outlets (normally 
Type II) mounted above the top of the tank 
shell, and 


2) Fixed foam discharge outlets mounted on the 
periphery of the floating roof. 


For this application, the fixed foam discharge 
outlets shall not be fitted with a frangible vapour 
seal device. 


The system design shall comprise of the following: 


1) Foam application rates shall be at least 
12.2 litre/min/nv for various types ofseals, such 
as mechanical shoe seal, tube seal with metal 
weather shield, fully or partly combustible 
secondary seal and all metal secondary seal 
(see Fig. 4A to 4D) and duration of foam 
application shall be at least 20 min. 


2 


— 


Foam discharge outlets shall be equally spaced 
around the periphery of the tank, and shall be 
designed to deliver foam at approximately 
equal rates. 

3) The above requirements apply to tanks 
containing hydrocarbons or flammable 
and combustible materials requiring 
alcohol-resistant foams. 

4) Minimum application rates specified above 
shall apply, unless higher application rates are 
specified under listings where Type П fixed 
foam discharge outlets are used. In such cases, 
duration of foam application may be reduced 
proportionately subject to a maximum of 
25 percent of duration specified in (a) above. 


5 


— 


Where the fixed foam discharge outlets are 
mounted above the top of the tank shell, a 
foam splashboard is necessary due to the effect 
of winds. 

6) Maximum spacing between discharge outlets 
shall be 12 m for dam height between 0.3 m 
and 0.6 m; and 24 m for height above 0.6 m. 


17 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


6.6.2.2. Below the primary seal or weather shield 


method 


a) Fixed foam discharge outlets located below either 
a mechanical shoe seal, a metal weather shield, or 
a metal secondary seal (see Fig. 5). 


b) Foam discharge outlets shall be equally spaced 
around the periphery of the tank, and shall be 
designed to deliver foam at approximately equal 
rates. 


c) The above requirements apply to tanks containing 
hydrocarbons or flammable and combustible 
materials requiring alcohol-resistant foams. 


d) A foam dam shall be installed where the top of the 
tube seal is less than 150 mm below the top of the 
pontoon. 


е 


— 


Foam application 


rates 


shall be 


at least 


20.4 litre/min/m? for various types of seals, 
such as mechanical shoe seal, tube seal with 
more than 150 mm between top of tube and top 
of pontoon and tube seal with foam discharge 


below metal 


secondary seal 


and duration 


of foam application shall be at least 10 min 
(see Fig. 5A, 5B and 5D). 


f) Foam application 


rates 


shall be 


at least 


20.4 litre/min/m? for tube seal with less than 


150 mm between top of tube and top of pontoon 


and duration of foam application shall be at least 


(see Fig. 5C). 


— 


g 


10 min. In this case, foam dam shall be provided 


Minimum application rates specified above shall 


apply, unless higher application rates are specified 
under listings where Type II fixed foam discharge 
outlets are used. 


h) 


Below-the-seal (or shield) application shall not be 
used with combustible secondary seals. 


J) Spacing between discharge outlets shall be as 


follows: 

SI Type of Seal Spacing 

No. m 

(1) (ii) (ш) 

1) Mechanical shoe seal type 39 

H) Tube seal with more than 10 
150 mm between top of tube and 
top of pontoon 

iii) Tube seal with foam discharge 10 
below metal secondary seal 

iv) Tube seal with less than 10 


150 mm between top of tube and 
top of pontoon 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


APPROVED 

DISCHARGE FOAM DAM 

DEVICE FOAM MAKER 
(TYPICAL) 


FOAM DISCHARGE 
PIPING 


FLOATING 
ROOF 


TANK SHELL 


DMS 


4A FOAM DISCHARGE ABOVE MECHANICAL SHOE SEAL 


APPROVED 
DISCHARGE 
DEVICE 


METAL SECONDARY SEAL 
FOAM DAM 


FOAM DISCHARGE 
PIPING 


FLOATING 


ROOF 


TANK 
SHELL 


ANNNNNNNNNNANNNNMNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNYN 


4B FOAM DISCHARGE ABOVE METAL WEATHER SEAL 


COMBUSTIBLE FABRIC OR 


B уы METAL AND COMBUSTIBLE 
DEVICE FABRIC SECONDARY SEAL 


FOAM DISCHARGE 
PIPING 


FLOATING 
ROOF 


TANK 
SHELL 


4C FOAM DISCHARGE ABOVE SECONDARY COMBUSTIBLE FABRIC SEAL OR 
METAL WITH COMBUSTIBLE FABRIC SECTIONS. 


18 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


METAL SECONDARY SEAL 


APPROVED 
DISCHARGE 
DEVICE 


FOAM DISCHARGE 
PIPING 


FLOATING 
ROOF 


TANK 
SHELL 


4D FOAM DISCHARGE ABOVE METAL SECONDARY SEAL 


Fic. 4 ТОР oF SEAL APPLICATION 


FOAM MAKER 
(TYPICAL) 


FOAM DISCHARGE 
PIPING 


TANK SHELL 


FLOATING 
ROOF 


ESSES 


5A FOAM DISCHARGE BELOW MECHANICAL SHOE SEAL - NO FOAM DAM 


7 FOAM MAKER 
Й WEATHER (TYPICAL) 
/ SHEILD FOAM DISCHARGE 
Й PIPING 
/ 
7 
/ 
/ РІРЕ SUPPORT 
1 
150 mm Й 
тіп 7 
Й 
Й 
7 
/ 
TANK Й 
SHELL Й FLOATING 


ROOF 


5B TOP OF SEAL 150 mm OR MORE BELOW TOP OF FLOATING ROOF 


19 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


FOAM DAM 300 mm 
MINIMUM HEIGHT 


WEATHER 
SHEILD 


FOAM DISCHARGE 
PIPING 


N 
ш 


LESS THAN 
150 mm 


ХХХХХХХХХХМХХХХМУХХААХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХ 


FLOATING 
ROOF 


5C FOAM DISCHARGE BELOW METAL WEATHER SHEILD 
TOP OF SEAL LESS THAN 150 mm BELOW TOP OF FLOATING ROOF 


METAL SECONDARY 

SEAL 

FOAM DISCHARGE 
PIPING 


ALTERNATIVE 
ARRANGEMENT 


ХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХУХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХХ\ 


FLOATING 
ROOF 


5D FOAM DISCHARGE BELOW METAL SECONDARY SEAL 


Fic. 5 BELOW THE SEAL APPLICATION 


6.6.2.3 Foam dam specification e) Dam shall extend at least 50 mm (see Fig. 6) above 
The following specification shall be followed for foam a metal secondary seal or a combustible secondary 
démis: seal using a plastic-foam log. 


f) Dam height shall be at least 50 mm higher than 


a) Foam dam shall be circular and constructed of at А 
any burnout panels in metal secondary seals. 


least 4 mm steel plate. 
Foam dam shall be at least 300 mm, but not more 
than 600 mm from the tank shell. 


h) To allow drainage of rainwater, the foam dam 
bottom shall be suitably slotted on the basis 
of 275 mm? slot area per m? of dammed area 
(0.04 in? of slot area ft? of dammed area), 
restricting drain slots to a maximum 9.5 mm in 
height as shown in Fig. 6. 


b) Foam dam shall be welded or otherwise fastened 8) 
to the floating roof. 

c) Foam dam shall be designed to retain foam at the 
seal area, at a depth to cover the seal area while 
causing the foam to flow laterally to the point of 
seal rupture. 


d) Dam height shall be at least 300 mm. 


20 


NOTE: DAM HEIGHT TO BE ATLEAST 
50 mm ABOVE TOP OF SEAL 


DRAIN SLOTS 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


FABRIC SEAL 


SHOE 


CIRCULAR 
DAM 


FLOATING 
ROOF 


FiG. 6 SEAL AREA PROTECTION ILLUSTRATION 


6.6.3 Covered Floating Roof Tanks 


Where the basis for design is a seal fire, the covered 
(internal) floating roof tank shall be considered as 
equivalent to an open-top floating roof tank of the same 
diameter for the purpose of foam system design. For a 
seal fire, the foam discharge system shall be designed 
in accordance with the requirements specified ш 
6.6.2.1(с) utilizing fixed foam discharge outlets. System 
design shall be based on protecting the tank requiring 
the largest solution flow, including supplementary hose 
streams. Alternatively, if the basis for design is a full 
surface fire, the covered (internal) floating roof tank 
shall be treated as equivalent to a fixed-roof (cone) tank 
of the same diameter for the purpose of foam system 
design and the system shall be designed in accordance 
with the requirements specified in 6.3. 


NOTE — Supplementary hose streams shall be available in all 
cases (see 6.3 to 6.6) shall be provided as called for in IS 13039. 


6.7 Foam Monitors and Hand Held Hose Lines 
Design Criteria 
6.7.1 General 


Monitors/nozzles can be considered as primary 
protection for bunds and flammable liquid spills. 


21 


Monitor nozzles shall not be considered as the primary 
means of protection for fixed-roof tanks over 18 m 
in diameter except for fighting spill fires. However, 
they are useful for supplementary protection. Foam 
handlines shall not be permitted to be used as the 
primary means of protection for fixed-roof tanks over 
9 m in diameter or those over 6 m in height except for 
fighting spill fires. Monitors shall not be used as the 
primary means of floating roof seal fire extinguishment 
because of the difficulty of directing foam into the 
annular space and the possibility of sinking the roof. 


6.7.2 Foam Application Rates 


To determine actual solution flow requirements, 
consideration shall be given to potential foam losses 
from wind, and other related factors. The design 
parameters for the use of monitors and hand held hose 
lines to protect tanks containing hydrocarbons shall be 
in accordance with the Table 1. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 1 Application Rates for Foam Monitor and 
Hand-held Hose Lines 


( Clause 6.7.2 ) 


SI No. Type of Liquids and Minimum Minimum 
Hydrocarbons Application Duration of 
Rate Discharge 
litre/min/m? min 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Flash point between 6.5 50 
32 °C and 65 °C 
ii) Flash point below 32 °C 8.1 65 
or liquids heated above 
flash points 
iii) Crude petroleum 6.5 65 


Good judgment should be used in applying foam to 
tanks containing hot oils, burning asphalts, or burning 
liquids that have a boiling point above the boiling 
point of water. Although the comparatively low water 
content of foams can beneficially cool such fuels 
at a slow rate, it can also cause violent frothing and 
'slop-over' of the tank’s contents. Water-soluble 
and certain flammable and combustible liquids and 
polar solvents that are destructive to regular 
(non-alcohol-resistant) foams shall use alcohol-resistant 
foams. For spill fires of liquids of a depth greater than 
25 mm, monitor and foam hose streams shall be limited 
for use with special alcohol-resistant foams approved, 
for the purpose. Monitors and hydrants (hand held hose 
lines) shall be located in the vicinity of the tanks in 
such a way that the entire surface area of the burning 
liquid are covered by their throw and shall also comply 
with the requirements stipulated in IS 13039. 


6.7.3 Tanks within Dyked Areas 


Dyked areas shall be areas bounded by contours of 
land or physical barriers that retain a fuel to a depth 
greater than 25 mm. Protection of these areas shall be 
achieved by fixed or portable monitors, or foam hand 
held hose lines. The minimum rates of application and 
duration of discharge shall be 6.5 litre/min/m? for a 
duration of 30 min. Fixed foam discharge outlets shall 
be sized and located to apply foam uniformly over 
the dyke area at the application rate specified above. 
Large dyke areas shall be permitted to be subdivided 
to keep the total design solution within practical limits. 


Monitors and hydrants (hand held hose lines) shall be 
located outside the dyke area. Where the monitor/hand 
held hose lines discharge is in the form of a compact, 
high-velocity foam stream, it shall be directed against 
the dyke walls, tank surfaces, or other structures to 
prevent its plunging directly into the burning liquid 
surface. In case of flammable liquids and polar solvents 
that are destructive to foams shall need to be protected 
with alcohol-resistant foams at discharge rate of 
6.5 litre/min/m? for a minimum duration of 30 min. 


6.7.4 Tanks in Non-dyked Spill Areas 


Non-dyked spill areas shall be areas where a flammable 
or combustible liquid spill might occur, uncontained by 
curbing, dyke walls, or walls of a room or building. To 
determine protection for spill fires, the potential spill 
area shall have to be estimated. Once this area has been 
determined, following table shall be used to calculate 
requirements to be used as design criteria for portable 
nozzles or monitors. 


6.8 Fixed Foam Spray Systems 


Fixed foam spray systems can be of two types depending 
upon the type of application namely aspirating type and 
non-aspirating type. 


6.8.1 Aspirating Type 


This type applies to systems which are designed to 
discharge foam in the form of a spray, and which are 
intended to provide primary protection for specific 
hazards. Foam spray systems are particularly suitable 
for hazards both outdoors and indoors in which 
flammable liquid may be spilled, sometimes in large 
quantities. Typical examples include loading racks, 
horizontal tanks, pump rooms and dip tanks. Protection 
of aircraft hangars up to 1 600 m? floor area and 7.5 m 
high may be achieved by systems designed inaccordance 
with the requirements and recommendations of this 
standard. Larger and/or higher structures may require 
special consideration over and above than those given 
in this standard. This relates only to spray discharge 
of aspirated foam, since some of the sprayers do not 
produce effective discharge pattern when used with 
water and AFFF only. 


NOTE — Foam nozzles, branch pipes, monitors, etc, that are 
capable of taking air under venturi effect may be used. 


Type of Foam Application Rate Duration of Discharge Anticipated Spill 
I/min/m° min 
Protein, fluoroprotein 6.5 15 Hydrocarbon 
AFFF, FFFP and alcohol resistant 
AFFF, FFFP 5 15 Hydrocarbon 
Flammable/combustible 
Alcohol resistant foams 6.5 15 liquids requiring such 


foams 


22 


6.8.2 Non-aspirating Type 


This covers systems which are designed to produce, 
discharge or distribute foam solution in the form of a 
series of fixed sprayer. Such systems may be used on 
either indoor or outdoor risks in which water sprays 
alone could be marginally effective, but where the 
addition of AFFF foam concentrate would improve the 
extinguishing performance. 


NOTE — These are not capable of taking air under venturi 
effect. 


6.8.3 Discharge Devices 


Discharge devices for foam-water deluge and spray 
shall be permitted to be air-aspirating, such as 
foam-water sprinkler and foam-water spray nozzles, or 
they shall be permitted to be non-air-aspirating, such as 
standard sprinklers. 


6.8.4 System Design and Installation 


6.8.4.1 The following discharge parameters shall be 
taken into consideration: 


a) Design discharge density shall be in accordance 
with the applicable occupancy standard for water 
or foam-water systems but in no case less than 
6.5 litre/min/m?. 


Water-soluble and certain flammable and 
combustible liquids and polar solvents that are 
destructive to conventional foams necessitate the 
use of alcohol-resistant foams. 


b 


x 


c) In all cases, the manufacturer of the foam 
concentrate and the foam-making equipment 
shall be consulted regarding limitations and for 
recommendations based on listings or specific fire 


tests. 


6.8.4.2 The discharge duration shall confirm to the 
following: 


a) Foam solution shall be designed to discharge 
for a period of 10 min (based on the density as 
specified in 6.8.4.1) over the entire system area for 
deluge and spray foam-water systems and over the 
design area for wet pipe, dry pipe, and preaction 
foam-water systems. 

b) Where actual system discharge exceeds the 

minimum as specified in 6.8.4.1 a proportionate 

reduction in the duration of foam discharge time 
shall be permitted, but in no case the duration shall 
be less than 7 min. 


6.8.4.3 The proportioning system selected shall be 
capable such that, actual calculated system discharge 
demand at the proper foam percent for the most 
hydraulically demanding condition and the, actual 
calculated system discharge demand at the proper foam 
percent for the least hydraulically demanding condition. 
Also, the foam liquid pressures shall be at least equal to 
the highest anticipated water pressure. 


23 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


6.8.4.4 Where foam concentrate pipelines to the 
protective system injection points are run underground 
or where they run above ground for more than 15 m, 
these lines shall be maintained full, and a means of 
checking the tightness of the system shall be provided. 
The temperature of the foam concentrate lines and 
components shall be maintained within the storage 
temperature limits specified for the foam concentrate. 


6.8.4.5 Drainage facilities shall be provided for the 
safe removal or retention of the largest anticipated 
flammable liquid spill including free water reaching 
the floor from fixed fire protection system, as well as 
discharge from hose streams. 


6.8.5 Foam Water Sprinkler Systems (Wet, Dry and 
Pre-action Systems) 


The total design area shall be 450 m? where applicable 
occupancy standards specify design areas different 
from that specified in, the occupancy standards shall 
take precedence. 


The coverage area of sprinkler shall not exceed 
9 m? per sprinkler and spacing shall not exceed 3.7 m 
between sprinklers on a branch line or between branch 
lines. Where applicable occupancy standards, such as 
IS 15105 specify sprinkler spacing different from that 
specified above, the occupancy standards shall take 
precedence. 


The temperature rating of sprinklers shall be within 
the range of 121 °C to 149 °C where they are located 
at the roof or ceiling. Where sprinklers are located at 
an intermediate level, the temperature rating shall be 
within the range of 57 °C to 79 °C unless ambient 
conditions require a higher rating. 


In automatic systems, the detection equipment shall be 
connected to a means for tripping water deluge valves 
and other system-control equipment. Supplemental 
manual means for this purpose shall also be provided. 


In automatic systems, foam concentrate injection shall 
be activated automatically by, or concurrently with, 
activation of the main water supply control valve. 
Manual operating means shall be designed for this 
purpose. Automatic detection equipment, whether 
pneumatic, hydraulic, or electric, shall be provided 
with complete supervision arranged so that failure 
of equipment, loss of supervising air pressure, or 
loss of electric energy results in clear notification of 
the abnormal condition. Where used in a corrosive 
atmosphere, the detection devices shall be of material(s) 
to resist corrosion. Automatic detection equipment of 
the electric type and any auxiliary equipment of the 
electric type, if in hazardous areas, shall be designed 
specifically for use in such areas. In automatic systems, 
manually operated tripping devices shall actuate the 
automatic control valve by mechanical, pneumatic, 
electric, or other approved means. The manual device 
shall be strong enough to prevent breakage. Manual 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


controls shall not necessitate a pull of more than 178 N 
(force or a movement of more than 350 mm to secure 
operation). 


6.9 See Annex C for details on various methods for 
foam injection and foam concentrate proportioning 
systems. 


6.10 System Hydraulics 


System piping shall be hydraulically designed to obtain 
reasonably uniform foam and water distribution and 
to allow for loss of head in water supply piping. The 
adjustment in pipe sizes shall be based on a maximum 
variation of 20 percent above the specified discharge 
rate per sprinkler or nozzle. Pipe sizes shall be adjusted 
according to detailed friction-loss calculations. These 
calculations shall show the relationship between 
the water supply and the water demand. Hydraulic 
calculations for determining the foam solution and 
water flow characteristics of systems covered by this 
standard shall be in accordance with IS 15105 or 
IS 15325 as the case may be. Piping carrying foam 
solution shall be sized as if carrying plain water. 


7 MEDIUM 
SYSTEMS 


See IS 12835 (Part 2). 


AND HIGH-EXPANSION 


8 FOAM SYSTEM PIPING 


8.1 Piping Network 


8.1.1 Pipe work shall be metallic (corrosion resistant) 
compatible with concentration or pre-mixed solution 
being used. Dry foam system pipe network may be 
galvanized provided it is well washed thoroughly after 
every use. Wet foam pipe-work should not be galvanized 
as this may adversely affect the foam concentrate or 
pre-mix solution. Corrosion resistant materials, such as 
stainless steel may instead be used, or the pipe-work 
may be protected with a suitable coating. Pipe shall 
be of steel or other alloy suitable for the pressure and 
temperature involved. Joints shall be welded, flanged 
or screwed with a taper thread. Where gaskets are 
required they shall be fabricated from a material which 
is non-combustible when tested in accordance with 
IS/ISO 834 (Part 1). Foam concentrates have a lower 
surface tension than water, and they may cause internal 
pipe scale or sediment to loosen, with the risk of 
blockage of sprayers, proportioning equipment, etc. 
Pipes and fittings shall be carefully cleaned before 
assembly, and any loose jointing material shall be 
removed. All pipework inside bund areas and within 
15 m of non-bunded tanks shall normally be buried 
under at least 0.3 m depth of earth, but may be permitted 
above ground if properly supported and protected 
against mechanical damage. All pipework within the 
bund area or within 15 m of the tank to be protected 
shall be designed to withstand the upward shock due 


24 


to a tank roof rupture. When pipework is buried, a 
metal flexible joint shall be provided at the base of each 
tank riser. The flexible joint shall consist of a system 
of suitable standard weight fittings made from steel, or 
ductile, or malleable iron. When pipework is supported 
above ground, it shall have the necessary upward and 
lateral support but shall not be held down within a 
distance of 15 m from the tank shell, so as to permit 
sufficient flexibility in an upward direction to obviate 
the need for a flexible joint. If threaded connections are 
used within this distance, they shall be back welded 
for strength. When tank risers are of 100 mm diameter 
or larger, they shall be welded to the tank by means 
of steel brace plates positioned perpendicular to the 
tank, and centered on the riser pipe. One brace shall be 
provided at each shell course. The design may be used 
instead of swing joints, or unconstrained pipework as 
described above. One flanged or union joint shall be 
provided in each riser within 15 m of the ground to 
permit hydrostatic testing of the pipework system up 
to this joint. 

NOTE — With all welded construction, this may be the only 

joint that can be opened. 


8.1.2 In systems with semi-fixed equipment on fixed 
roof tanks, the foam or solution laterals to each 
vapour seal shall terminate in a connection which is 
outside the bund walls and at least 15 m from tanks of 
15 m diameter or less, and one tank diameter from the 
shell of larger tanks. The inlet to the pipework shall 
be fitted with corrosion resistant metal connections 
provided with plugs or caps. Piping design shall 
be such that at the required rate of flow through the 
foam system pipelines, pressure at the foam inductor 
is adequate to give a minimum running pressure of 
3.5 kg/cm? at the foam pourers after taking into account 
losses like frictional loss, static loss, and loss across 
the inductor. Foam velocity in the pipelines under the 
above circumstances shall not exceed 3 m/s. All pipes 
and fittings and also their run and supports shall confirm 
to the relevant Indian standards. 


8.2 Drainage 


All dry piping shall be arranged to drain and shall have 
a minimum pitch towards the drain of 1 in 120. Drain 
valves shall be provided for premix or finished foam 
lines at low points in piping, whether below or above 
ground. 


8.3 Valves 


The laterals to each foam vapour seal box on fixed roof 
tanks shall be equipped with separate valves, which 
shall be outside the bund in fixed installations. Control 
valves to divert the foam or solution to the appropriate 
tank may be either in a central control house, or at 
points where lateral to the protected tanks branch from 
a main feed line. Control valves shall be located outside 
bunds and shall be not less than the following distances 
from the shell of the tank which they serve: 


a) 15 m for tanks less than 15 m in diameter; for tanks 
15 m in diameter or larger, except that control 
valves may be permitted at less than the above 
distances where they are adequately protected 
against fire. 

b) Where two or more foam proportioners of foam 

generators are installed in parallel discharging into 

the same outlet header, valves shall be provided 
between the outlet of each device and the header. 


c 


ме 


Water line to each foam ргорогіїопег ог foam 
generator inlet shall be equipped with a separate 
valves. 


Cutoff valves shall conform to IS 14846 for PN 1.0 and 
Class 2. In case of systems having working pressure in 
excess of 7 kg/cm?, P.N. 1.6 and Class 3, rating would 
be necessary for valves conforming to IS 14846. Cast 
steel valves of class 150 are however acceptable 
irrespective of the working pressure of the system. 
Other types of valves like rising spindle valves may 
be used, subject to compliance with relevant Indian 
standards. Butterfly valves also can be accepted subject 
to the condition that the valves of diameter exceeding 
150 mm shall necessarily be gear operated. 


8.4 Pipe Fittings 


Fittings installed underground shall be of cast iron 
‘heavy’ grade conforming to IS 1538 whereas those 
installed above ground shall normally be of ‘medium’ 
grade wrought steel or mild steel conforming to 
IS 1239 (Part 2) or malleable iron fittings conforming 
to IS 1879. 


8.5 Pipe Jointing 


Pipe threading shall be in conformance with IS 554. 
Precautions shall be taken to ensure that the openings 
are fully cut out and that no obstructions remain in the 
waterway. Cast-iron fittings shall not be used where dry 
sections of piping are exposed to possible fire or where 
fittings are subject to stress in self-supporting systems. 
Rubber or elastomeric-gasketed fittings shall not be 
used in fire-exposed areas unless the foam system 
is automatically actuated. Fittings carrying foam 
concentrate shall not be galvanized. 


8.6 Flushing Requirements 


Provision shall be made for flushing with clean 
water any line that is normally empty but which have 
contained foam concentrate, premix solution or foam 
after use or test of the system. Water supply mains, 
both underground and above ground, shall be flushed 
thoroughly at the maximum practicable rate of flow, 
before connection is made to system piping, in order 
to remove foreign materials which may have entered 
during installation. The minimum rate of flow for 
flushing shall be not less than the water demand rate 
of the system, as determined by the system design and 
available water supply. The flow shall be continued for 


25 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


a sufficient time to ensure thorough cleaning. Flushing 
water shall be disposed outside the system. All foam 
system piping shall be flushed after installation, using its 
normal water supply with foam forming materials shut 
off, unless the hazard cannot be subjected to water flow. 
Where flushing cannot be accomplished, pipe interiors 
shall be carefully examined for cleanliness during 
installation. Pipework scale traps shall be provided in 
the line upstream of foam making equipment. Strainers 
shall be inspected and cleaned after each use. Tanks 
and pipes which are normally filled with liquid shall be 
protected against freezing where appropriate. 


8.7 Strainer 


A strainer shall be fitted where a 9.5 mm diameter 
sphere will not pass through the waterways. Strainers 
shall be provided where solids of size large enough to 
obstruct openings or damage equipment are present. 
The ratio of the strainer’s open basket area to its inlet 
pipe area shall be at least 10 : 1. The net open area of 
the strainer shall be at least four times the area of the 
suction piping. 


8.8 Detection System 


The fire alarm and detection system shall comply 
with various provisions of IS 2189 and IS 15908. 
Automatic detection equipment, whether pneumatic, 
hydraulic or electric shall be provided with supervision 
so arranged that failure of equipment or loss of 
supervising air pressure or loss of electric energy will 
result in positive notification of the abnormal condition. 
The detection system shall activate a local alarm as well 
as an alarm at a constantly attended location. These 
shall also be actuated when the system is operated 
manually. In some special cases, it may be desirable 
to arrange the system to shut off automatically after 
a predetermined operating time. This feature shall be 
subject to approval of the authority having jurisdiction. 
Electric automatic detection equipment and any 
auxiliary electric equipment, if in hazardous areas, shall 
be expressly designed for use in such areas. Various 
types of approved flammable gas or fire detection 
devices may be used. These detectors usually activate 
the system by operating the water control valve or 
other actuating device. All other equipment shall be so 
interconnected that it is also activated so that properly 
mixed foam solution is supplied to the foam makers 
and foam distributed over the hazard. Small systems 
for localized hazard may be unsupervised subject to 
approval of authority having jurisdiction. As regards 
usage of special detectors, arrangements like LSHS 
cables and flame detection systems, attention is drawn 
to IS 2189. All operating devices shall be suitable 
for the service conditions they will encounter. They 
shall neither be readily rendered inoperative, nor be 
susceptible in inadvertent operation, by environmental 
factors, such as high or low temperature, atmospheric 
humidity or pollution or marine conditions. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


All automatically actuated fixed foam system shall 
have pressure switches installed in the downstream of 
discharge line of foam piping system. 


For special requirements to cater to peculiar situations 
specialist literature may be made but full details with 
necessary inputs from these standards shall be made 
available prior to installation. 


NOTE — Special literature, such as NFPA 72, BS 5839, 
EN-13565-2, may also be referred. 


9 FOAM PROPORTIONING SYSTEMS 


See Annex D for details on various methods for foam 
injection and foam concentrate proportioning systems. 


10 COMMISSIONING AND PERFORMANCE 
TESTS 


10.1 General 


The complete system should be inspected and tested to 
determine that it is properly installed, and that it will 
function as designed. A commissioning test programme 
should be submitted by the installer. 


10.2 Inspection 


A visual inspection should be conducted to ensure that 
the system has been installed correctly. Inspection 
should include conformity with design drawings and 
specifications, continuity of pipework, checking, 
removal of temporary blinds, accessibility of valves, 
control and gauges, and proper installation of 
foam-makers, vapour seals, and proportioning 
devices. All equipment should be checked for correct 
identification and operating instructions. 


10.3 Pressure Tests 


All pipework, except that handling expanded foam 
for other than base injection application, should be 
subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test at 14 bar or 
1.5 times the maximum pressure anticipated, whichever 
is the greater for a period of 2 h. All normally dry 
horizontal pipework should be inspected for drainage. 


10.4 Component Inspections 


All operating devices and equipment should be 
inspected for proper functioning and a record should 
be made to indicate that the required performance will 
be met. 


10.5 Discharge Tests 


Whenever possible, flow and distribution tests should 
be conducted to ensure that the hazard is fully protected 
in conformity with the design specification; and to 
determine the running pressure, actual discharge rate, 
consumption rate of foam concentrate, man power 
requirements and other operating characteristics. 
Wherever possible the foam discharged should be 
inspected and preferably tested to ensure that it is 
satisfactory for the intended purpose performance. 


26 


10.6 System Restoration 


After completion of the performance tests, the system 
should be flushed and restored to operational condition. 


10.7 Periodic Inspection, Testing and Maintenance 


The performance of all foam equipment and foam 
systems under emergency conditions is best ensured by 
periodic test and the owner of the installation has the 
total responsibility for ensuring that the system is in 
good working order at all times. The responsibility 15 in 
no way diminished by any periodic or regular servicing 
carried out by the installer or his agent. The continued 
effective performance of foam equipment depends on 
fully adequate maintenance procedures, with periodic 
testing where possible. The many variations in system 
design and equipment application for hazards requiring 
form, make it impossible to establish anything other 
than general procedures for periodic inspection. 


Each foam system should have its own 
servicine/maintenance check list which should be 
available to the owner when system is commissioned. 
Weekly visual programme of inspection to ensure 
that there are no leaks, and that there is no damage to 
pipework or foam-making units shall be carried out. All 
operating controls must be seen to be properly set, and 
all components are undamaged. It is recommended that 
every foam system should be serviced at least annually 
and this can be achieved by an inspection. If there are 
any associated electrical detection and alarm system, 
these should be serviced four times a year. A record 
confirming compliance should be maintained. 


10.8 Inspection Programme 
The following inspection programme is suggested: 


The owner should carry out a weekly visual programme 
of inspection to ensure that: 


a) there are no leaks; 

b) there is no damage to pipework or foam-making 
units; 

c) all operating controls and components are properly 
set and undamaged; and 


d) the water supply is available and at the right 
pressure. 


10.8.1 Monthly inspection involves that of all operators 
that are familiar with the equipment or system and that 
new employees have been instructed about its use. 


10.8.2 Quarterly inspection involve those relating to 
electrical detection and outdoor systems and that they 
are serviced by the nominated servicing organization 
and that an inspection report has been received. 


10.8.3 Half yearly  inspection/service involve 
confirmation that a full foam firefighting system 
(mechanical) has been carried out and that a 
confirmatory report to this effect has been received. 


10.8.4 Annual inspection involve ensuing that a foam 
concentrate or foam solution test report has been 
received. 


10.9 Servicing Schedule 


The following servicing schedules are suggested. 


10.9.1 All electrical detection and alarm systems 
should be thoroughly tested and serviced, quarterly. 


10.9.2 The following is the schedule suggested 
half-yearly: 


a) Foam producing equipment -- Proportioning 
devices, their accessory equipment and 
foam-makers should be inspected for mechanical 
damage, corrosion, blockage of air inlets and 
correct manual function of all valves. This may 
necessitate temporary isolation of the water main. 


b 


) Pipe work — Above ground pipework should 


be examined to determine its condition and 
that proper drainage is maintained. Pressure 
tests of normally dry pipework should be made 
when visual inspection indicates questionable 
strength due to corrosion or mechanical damage. 
Underground pipework should be spot checked 
for deterioration at least every 5 years. 


c 


x 


Strainers — Strainers should be inspected and 
cleaned. This should always be accomplished 
after any flow test. 


d) Valves — All control valves should be checked 
for correct manual function and automatic valves 
should in addition be functionally checked 
automatically. This may necessitate the temporary 
isolation of water or other liquid supply. A visual 
inspection should be made of foam concentrate 
and premix solution tanks and storage containers 


for evidence of deterioration. 


М7 


10.9.3 In addition to ће normal 6 monthly inspection, 
annual servicing of foam concentrate or solution 
sample testing shall be carried out. All foam 
concentrates or solutions should be carefully analyzed 
for changes in constitution and characteristics. Their 
storage in shipping containers and in storage tanks 
should be carried out according to the manufacturer's 
recommendations. Exposure to extreme heat, cold, 
contamination, or mixing with other materials should 
be avoided. Sedimentation or precipitate formation in 
containers or tanks of concentrate should be carefully 
checked. 


11 REQUIREMENTS 
SUBMISSION OF PLANS 


REGARDING 


11.1 Plans for submission shall be drawn up in 
accordance with the following requirements: 


a) Plans shall be clear, contain all required details 
including scale and point of compass, and shall be 
dated. 


27 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


b) Plans of new installation shall show the entire 
compound, all buildings therein, with their 
door and window openings, and the boundary 
walls. Buildings under construction and future 
extension envisaged, shall be indicated by the 
dotted lines. Plans of extensions to approved 
existing installations need not show the rest of 
the compound but sufficient details shall be given 
of the existing installations in correlation to the 
extension, to enable the Authorities’ inspection 
staff to check the plans and offer comments. In 
case of storied buildings, drawings submitted 
shall include plans of each storey together with 
sectional elevations. 


Material plans shall be on white paper or ammonia 
paper or ferro prussiate paper. 


с 


— 


d 


— 


Plans shall generally be prepared in accordance 
with SP 46, shall not exceed 850 mm x 1 200 mm 
in size and shall be drawn to a scale of 1 : 500 or 
1 : 1 000. In the case of very large compounds 
with more than one risk, it is advisable to submit 
separate plans for each risk with a key plan 
showing the relative situation of the various risks, 
etc in the compound. 


11.2 Detailing 


11.2.1 The drawings shall include and accompanied by 
the following information: 


a) Physical details of the hazard, including the 
location, arrangement, and hazardous materials 
involved; 

b) Type and percent of foam concentrate; 


c) Required solution application rate or submergence 
volume calculations; 


d) Water requirements; 


e) Calculations specifying required amount of foam 
concentrate; 


f) Hydraulic calculations; 


g) Identification and capacity of all equipment and 
devices; 

h) Location, routing and supporting details of 
piping, detection devices, operating devices, 
foam generators, discharge outlets, and auxiliary 
equipment; 

j) Complete details of the tanks being protected, 
wind girders, location of foam pourers, valves, 
foam monitors, hydrant outlets in the vicinity, etc; 


k) Schematic wiring diagram; and 
m) Explanation of any special features. 


11.2.2 Complete plans and detailed data describing 
pumps, drivers, controllers, power supply, fittings, 
suction and discharge connections, and suction 
conditions shall be submitted for approval before 
installation. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


11.2.3 Where field conditions necessitate апу 
significant change from the approved plan, revised ‘as 
constructed” plans shall be supplied for approval. 


11.2.4 Charts that specify head, delivery, efficiency, and 
brake horsepower curves of pumps shall be furnished. 


28 


11.3 Water Supply 


The drawings shall show water supplies and pipework 
therefrom up to the installation control valves. The 
drawings shall be on an indicated scale of not less 
than 1 : 100. A key to the symbols shall be included. 
The position and type of stop and check valves and 
any pressure reducing valve, water meter, water lock, 
orifice plate and any connection supplying water for 
other services shall be indicated. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 
554 : 1999 Pipe threads where pressure-tight 8757 : 1999 Glossary of terms associated with 
joints are made on the threads — fire safety (first revision) 
Dimensions,  tolerances and 13039 : 2014 Code of practice for external 
designation (fourth revision) hydrant systems provision and 
IS/ISO 834-1: Fire resistance tests — Elements maintenance (first revision) 
1999 of building construction: Part 1 14846 : 2000 Sluice valves for water works 
General requirements purposes (50 to 1200 mm) — 
1239 Steel tubes, tubulars and other Specification 
(Part 2:2011) steel fittings: Part 2 Steel pipe 15105 : 2021 Design and installation of 
fittines (fifth revision) fixed automatic sprinkler fire 
1538 : 1993 Cast iron fittings for pressure extinguishing Aus — Code of 
pipes for water, gas and sewage practice (first revision) 
(third revision) 15325 : 2020 Code of practice for design and 
1879 : 2010 Malleable cast iron pipe fittings — installation of fixed automatic 
Specification (third revision) зай но pA, ee Water 
spray system (first revision 
2189 : 2008 Code of practice for selection, T = . . 
installation and- maintenance of 15908 : 2021 Selection, installation and 
automatic fire detection and alarm maintenance of control and 
system (fourth revision) indicating equipment for fire 
. detection and alarm system — 
4989 : 2018 Foam concentrate for producing Code of practice (first revision) 
mechanical foam for firefighting — Е . : . 
Specification (fourth revision) SP 46 : 2003 Engineering drawing practice 
for schools and colleges 
7673 : 2004 Glossary of terms for firefighting (first revision) 5 
equipment (first revision) 
ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.1.5 ) 
GENERAL INFORMATION OF FOAM PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
B-1 GENERAL c) The system comprises simple equipment capable 


Fixed fire protection employing foam can be achieved 
by different types of application depending upon the 
nature and type of the risks to be protected. Merits and 
de-merits of each system are listed hereunder: 


B-2 FIXED AND SEMI-FIXED SYSTEMS 
B-2.1 Possible merits and demerits of the systems are 
as listed below: 


a) The total foam output may be applied to fuel 
surface. 


b) An even foam distribution may be achieved. 


29 


of withstanding fire exposure. 


d) Only moderate maintenance of the foam-making 
vapour seal box and pouring equipment is 
required. 


The above systems are suitable for the protection of 
outdoor vertical atmospheric storage tanks containing 
flammable and combustible liquids used in conjunction 
with fixed foam discharge outlets. The design shall 
always be based on protecting the tank requiring the 
largest solution flow including supplementary hose 
streams where provided. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


It 15 quite possible that the equipment attached to the 
tanks can be damaged by exposure or explosion from 
within or from the surroundings. 


It is likely that the foam may fail to seal the surface of 
the burning liquid as a result of prolonged free burning 
prior to foam discharge. Hence, it is always necessary 
to cool the exterior of the tanks, in addition, by a fixed 
automatic medium water spray system at a density of 
3 litre/min/m2 of the shell surface area for bulk storage 
tanks storing flammable liquids flashing at 32 °C and 
below. 


B-3SUB-SURFACE FOAM SYSTEMS 


B-3.1 These systems possess following advantages: 
a) Total foam output reaches the tank. 


b) With large tanks, suitably arranged inlets allow 
even foam distribution over the whole free surface 
area of the fuel. 


c) System is essentially simple and, being at ground 
level, is less likely to be damaged by fire or 
explosion. 


d) Circulation of cold fuel from the base of the tank 
to the burning surface caused by the rising foam 
stream can be utilized to assist extinction and to 
dissipate hot fuel layers at the burning surface. 


e) Essential equipment and operating personnel may 
be located at safe distance from the fire. 


f) It may be possible to use the normal product line 
for foam injection. 


g) System is easy to check and maintain. 


B-3.2 There are certain limitations associated with the 
subsurface foam systems as indicated below: 


a) Sub-surface systems not suitable for 


water-miscible fuels. 


аге 


b) Sub-surface systems аге not suitable for the 
protection of floating roof tanks because the roof 
will prevent complete foam distribution. 


c 


— 


Only foams which will tolerate severe mixing 
with fuel are suitable for subsurface application 
into a wide range of tanks of various heights and 
diameters. 


d 


М7 


The foam needs to Бе injected above апу water in 

the base of the storage tank, in order to prevent the 

foam being destroyed. 

e) Sub-surface systems may not be suitable for 
certain high viscosity fuels. 

f) Only fluoroprotein, AFFF and AR-AFFF type 

foams are suitable for this application. 


30 


B-4 SEMI SUB-SURFACE FOAM SYSTEMS 


B-4.1 These systems possess the following advantages: 


a) The total foam output reaches the surface of the 
burning liquid. 

b) With large tanks, the semi sub-surface units can be 
arranged to produce an even distribution over the 
fuel surface. 


c) Protein, fluoroprotein or AFFF or AR-AFFF 
concentrates may be used. 


d) Suitable for light fuels like gasoline and kerosene. 


e) Foam generating equipment and operating 
personnel may be located at a safe distance from 
the fire. 


f) Any type of foam is suitable for gentle application 
to the particular fuel. 


B-4.2 The following limitations are associated with 
these systems: 


a) Semi sub-surface systems may not be suitable for 
the protection of floating roof tanks, because the 
roof will prevent distribution. 


b) Certain high viscosity fuels may not be protected 
by this system. 


c) Circulation of the cold fuel which could assist 
extinction 1s not induced. 


d) The system may be difficult to check, test and 
maintain. The hose container need replacement at 
regular intervals. 


e) Not at all suitable for water miscible fuels. 


f) The foam generator has to produce foam at a 
pressure sufficient to overcome the high back 
pressure of the head of fuel as well as frictional 
losses in the foam pipework. Frictional losses 
with foam differ from those with foam solution. 


B-5 FIXED FOAM POURERS FOR OPEN TOP 
FLOATING ROOF TANKS 


B-5.1 These systems possess following advantages: 
a) Total foam output reaches the rim seal area. 


b) Using foam pourers and a foam dam, the 
equipment is simple and requires only moderate 
maintenance. 


c) Foam is applied gently without severe mixing 
with the fuel. 


B-5.2 The following limitations are associated with 
these systems: 


a) Where foam 15 injected below the pantograph 
or weather shield a foam generator might not be 
capable of operating against the pressure required 
to force foam around the rim seal area. 


b) Where foam is injected into the rim seal area, 
special pipework is needed to conduct foam from 
outside the shell onto the roof area. This needs 
to be hinged or jointed to allow for movement of 
the roof, and has to be protected or designed to 
withstand the effects of a rim seal fire. 


c) Adverse winds and obstructions projecting through 
the fuel surface may reduce the effectiveness of 
the system and allowance should be made in the 
rate of application of foam. 


B-6 FIXED FOAM 
(ASPIRATING TYPE) 


SPRAY SYSTEMS 


B-6.1 These systems possess the following advantages: 


a) Foam can be distributed evenly over the fuel 
surface producing rapid fire control. 


b) Hot surfaces in contact with the fuel can often 
be more effectively cooled by a spray discharge. 
Exposures may also be protected from heat 
radiation by the foam spray discharge. 


c) Equipment may be readily designed for automatic 
operation. 


d) While low expansion foam is not considered an 
effective agent for extinguishing three dimensional 
running flammable liquid fires, it can control the 
pool fire beneath the running fire, leaving control 
of the running fire to other means like dry powder 
fire extinguishers. 


е 


— 


With some flammable liquids Ше water spray 
distributed by foam sprayers can provide effective 
fire control as in high flash point hydrocarbons. 


B-6.2 The following limitations are associated with 
these systems: 

a) Foam discharge might be carried by the wind 
beyond the area of the fuel spill. 

b) Foam sprayers might have small passages 
susceptible to blockage. 

c) Fixed foam sprays applied horizontally might be 
obstructed by equipment positioned temporarily 
in the direction of discharge. 

d 


— 


Pipework for overhead spray nozzles might 
obstruct normal operations. The load they impose 
on the roof structure should be carefully calculated 
to avoid overloading. 


е 


wm 


Overhead application might need supplementary 
low level application in order to provide coverage 
below large obstructions as in beneath aircraft in 
hangars. 


f) Above ground pipework might be susceptible to 


31 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


damage by explosion. Pipework should therefore 
be positioned or protected to avoid this possibility. 
g) These systems are not suitable for use on water 


soluble liquids exceeding 25 mm in depth unless 
AR-AFFF type of foam is used. 


B-7 FIXED FOAM 
(NON-ASPIRATING TYPE) 


SPRAY SYSTEMS 


B-7.1 These systems possess following advantages: 


a) Spray can be distributed evenly over the fuel 
surface producing rapid fire control. 


b) Hot surfaces in contact with the fuel can often 
be more readily cooled by the spray discharge 
than by a foam blanket. Exposure may also be 
protected from heat radiation by the non-aspirated 
spray discharge. 

с 

d) 


— 


Equipment is readily designed to be automatic. 


While non-aspirated foam is not considered 
an effective agent for extinguishing three 
dimensional running flammable liquid fires, it can 
control the pool fire underneath the running fire, 
thus permitting fire control by other means. 

e) With some flammable liquids the water spray 
distributed by non-aspirated nozzles can provide 
effective fire control in the absence of foam 
solution. 


f) 


Ground level ‘pop-up’ non-aspirated nozzles 
deliver solution at the seat of the fire. 


B-7.2 The following limitations are associated with 
these systems: 


a) Non-aspirated foam discharge might be carried by 
the wind beyond the area of the fuel spill. 

b) Non-aspirated foam sprayers have small passages 
susceptible to blockage. 


с) Fixed non-aspirated foam sprays applied 
horizontally might be obstructed by equipment 
positioned temporarily. 


d 


М7 


Overhead pipework for overhead applicators 
might obstruct normal operations, or impose an 
undue load on the roof structure. 


e 


wm 


Overhead application might need supplementary 
low level application in order to provide coverage 
below large obstructions, such as aircraft in 
hangars. 


f) 


Above ground pipework might be susceptible to 
damage by explosion. 


g) Generally these systems are not suitable for use on 
water soluble liquid exceeding 25 mm in depth. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


B-S APPLICATION 


SI Hazard Low 
The typical application of low expansion type of foam | No. Expansion 
systems are illustrated below; (1) Q) (3) 
SI Hazard Low vii) | Oil filled transformers and Yes 
No. Expansion switchgear 
(1) (2) (3) уш) | Plastic packaging and storage Yes 
i) | Aircraft hangars Yes ix) | Plastic recycling Yes 
ii) | Cable tunnels No X) | Process areas Yes 
iii) | Flammable liquid storage tanks Yes xi) | Refuse handling and storage Yes 
iv) | Fuel transfer areas Yes xii) | Rolled paper No 
v) | Liquefied natural gas No xiil) | Tyre storage Yes 
vi) | Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) No xiv) | Warehouses — Classes A and B Yes 
fuels 
ANNEX C 
( Clause 6.9 ) 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON FOAM CONCENTRATES 
C-1 GENERAL for protein foam becomes quite critical. The foam 


Foam concentrates are mixed with water to form a 
foam solution. Foam concentrates are either specific 
to the fuel or chemical that they are to protect or are 
specific to the type of discharge device through which 
the solution will be discharged. 


C-2 MIXING RATE 


Correct amount of foam concentrate needs to be 
mixed with water. The amount is normally shown on 
the container or drum containing the concentrate. The 
container will normally display a figure or combination 
of figures. Generally used percents for foams are 
1 percent, 3 percent and 6 percent. The percent indicates 
how much foam concentrate is added to the water to 
make a solution. For a 1 percent foam, 1 part of foam 
concentrate and 99 parts of water. For a 3 percent 
foam, 3 parts of foam concentrate and 97 parts of water. 
For a 6 percent foam, 6 parts of foam concentrate and 
94 parts water. 


C-3 PROTEIN FOAM CONCENTRATE 


These are available in general either as a 3 percent or 
6 percent type concentrate. This type of concentrate 
is based on hydrolyzed protein, foam stabilizers and 
preservatives. It will produce highly stabilized air 
foam. Protein foam must always be used with an air 
aspirating type discharge device. Protein foam can 
become contaminated with fuel if plunged directly onto 
the fuel surface. Due to this, the application technique 


32 


should be applied as gently as possible to the burning 
liquid surface. Protein foam, because of its stability, 1s 
relatively slow moving when used to cover the surface 
of a burning liquid. 


C-4 FLUOROPROTEIN FOAM CONCENTRATE 


Available in either as a 3 percent or 6 percent type 
of concentrate. This product is manufactured using 
the same method as protein but with the addition 
of fluorocarbon surfactants. The addition of these 
surfactants in the concentrate improves the performance 
of fluoroprotein foam over protein foam in two areas. 
It makes the fluoroprotein foam more resistant to fuel 
contamination/pickup and makes the foam blanket more 
mobile when discharged onto the flammable liquid. 
Because the fluoroprotein foam is more resistant to fuel 
contamination, it allows the discharging foam to be 
applied directly to the fuel surface and the foam blanket 
will not become saturated by fuel vapour. This type 
of foam can be used with a high back pressure foam 
maker by utilizing the sub-surface method of forcing 
expanded foam into the base of a cone roof storage 
tank containing a hydrocarbon fuel. The expanded foam 
enters the base ofthe storage tank then floats up through 
the flammable liquid to the surface where it covers the 
surface with a foam blanket. Fluoroprotein foam 15 
also used in the hydrocarbon processing industry for 
storage tank firefighting. It 15 necessary to use with 
air-aspirating discharge devices with this foam 
application. 


C-5 AQUEOUS FILM FORMING FOAM (AFFF) 


Synthetic low-expansion foam concentrates аге 
available in two types: standard AFFF's, and AR-AFFF 
(alcohol resistant aqueous film forming foam). Both 
the AFFF's are listed for their percent to be added to 
water to extinguish hydrocarbon or non-miscible fuels. 
These are available in either 1 percent, 3 percent or 
6 percent type of concentrate. AFFF's are the most 
used foam concentrates for fixed systems. The 6 percent 
AFFF foams are not generally found due to the lack of 
hardware and discharge devices listed with them. The 
6 percent AFFF foams are typically used by firefighters 
and are carried on fire trucks to be discharged through 
fire hoses. 


AFFF foam solutions can be applied to a flammable 
liquid fire using either aspirating or non-aspirating 
discharge devices. The difference between the two is 
that the air-aspirating device entrains air and causes it 
to mix with the foam solution within the device. The 
non-air-aspirating device is incapable of this process. 
When flow rates and pressures are similar, AFFF 
solutions used with a non-air-aspirating discharge 
device will generally discharge/throw the foam a 
greater distance than the foam that is discharged from 
the air-aspirating discharge device. When using AFFF 
foams, application technique is not as critical as with 
proteins or fluoroproteins. AFFF foam can also be used 
successfully with the sub-surface injection method for 
standard hydrocarbon fuels and not for polar solvents 
and alcohol type fuels. 


C-6 ALCOHOL RESISTANT AQUEOUS FILM 
FORMING FOAM (AR-AFFF) 


These foams are unique because they are designed not 
only to extinguish hydrocarbon or non-miscible fuels 
or chemicals but also miscible fuels or chemicals. 
For fixed systems, the 3 percent AR-AFFF are being 
extensively with fixed proportioning devices, sprinkler 
heads, and other fixed discharge devices. When used 
on an alcohol fire, an air-aspirating nozzle will give a 
better performance over the non-air-aspirating nozzle. 
The increased expanded foam mass generated by the 
air-aspirating nozzle will give a more gentle application 
onto the surface of the alcohol liquid fire than will the 
non-aspirating nozzle. 


C-7 FILM FORMING FLUORO-PROTEIN 
(FFFP) 


This foam is a derivative of AFFF and fluoroprotein. 
Available in either as a 3 percent or 6 percent type 
of concentrate. These concentrates are based on 
fluoroprotein formulations to which an increased 


33 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


quantity of fluorocarbon surfactants has been added. 
These concentrates were developed to obtain the 
quick knockdown of AFFF with the added burn back 
resistance of standard fluoroprotein foam. It may be 
inferred that the efficiency of this concentrate lies 
somewhere between AFFF and fluoroprotein foam. 
These concentrates do not have the quick knockdown 
of the AFFF's when used on a spill fire. When used 
on fuel in depth fires they do not have the burn back 
resistance of fluoroprotein. FFFP foam can be generated 
with either air-aspirating or non-air-aspirating nozzles. 
When used through a non-air-aspirated nozzle they do 
not provide expansion ratios as good as AFFF when 
used through the same type of nozzle. 


C-8 MEDIUM-EXPANSION FOAM 
See IS 12835 (Part 2). 


C-9 HIGH-EXPANSION FOAM 
See IS 12835 (Part 2). 


C-10 SHELF LIFE 


Shelf life is the term used to describe the length 
of time which foam concentrates remain stable 
and usable without a significant change in their 
performance characteristics. The shelf life depends 
upon the composition of the concentrate, the ambient 
temperature storage range encountered, the container 
materials and if the concentrate is stored in its original 
container. 


C-11 COMPATIBILITY 


Compatibility is the ability of one foam concentrate 
to be mixed with another concentrate of the same type 
and proportioning ratio without altering the chemical, 
physical or performance characteristics of the mixed 
foam concentrates. All foams are compatible when 
applied on a fire simultaneously. However, they should 
not be mixed together. 


С-12 | ENVIRONMENTAL 
ТОХІСІТУ 


ІМРАСТ AND 


Approved foam concentrates are specifically formulated 
to provide maximum firefighting capabilities while 
at the same time providing minimal environmental 
impact and human exposure hazard. All concentrates 
are expected to be readily biodegradable both in the 
natural environment and in sewage treatment facilities. 
The concentrates are not considered primary or 
secondary skin irritants, however, prolonged contact 
may cause some dryness of the skin since they contain 
detergents. 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 9 ) 
FOAM GENERATING METHODS 


D-1 GENERAL 


D-1.1 The process of producing and applying 
firefighting foams to the hazards require three separate 
operations as stated below, each of which consumes 
energy. 


a) Foam proportioning process; 
b) Foam generation phase; and 
c) Foam distribution process. 


Figure 7 shows the schematic of the relationship among 
the three operations stated above. 


D-1.2 Normally, air foam generation and distribution 
occur simultaneously within the same device. There 
are several types of proportioning foam. The design 
and performance requirements of foam systems dictate 
the choice of types proportioning, generating, and 
distributing equipment for the protection of specific 
hazards. 


D-2 FOAM CONCENTRATE PROPORTIONING 
SYSTEMS 


D-2.1 General 


All foam systems required a foam concentrate to be 
mixed with water in a specified correct proportion to 
provide a foam-making solution. Methods by which the 
same Is achieved, are listed as follows: 


a) By premixing the concentrate in water; 


b) By induction of the concentrate into the water 
stream; 


c) By displacement of the concentrate in the water 
stream; and 


WATER PUMP 


i 


PROPORTIONING 
PROCESS 


I 


d) By injection of the concentrate into the water 
stream. 


D-2.2 Premixed Foam Solution 


This method involves mixing appropriate quantities of 
water and foam concentrate for storage as a premixed 
foam solution (premix). The foam system can then be 
supplied with premix when required either by pumping 
if the premix is stored in an atmospheric tank ог by 
pressurisation if the premix is stored in a pressure 
vessel. Different types of foam have different shelf life 
as concentrate and premised. The following points are 
of great importance: 


a) Foam concentrate should be suitable for storing 
for long periods as a premixed solution. Higher 
concentrations may sometimes be employed to 
reduced problems of deterioration that is by using 
a 6 percent concentrate at 10 percent solution 
strength. 


b 


wm 


High storage temperatures tend to accelerate any 
deterioration due to ageing of the solution. 


с 


— 


Premix method usually employs a pressurised tank 
for the smaller risk where a quick acting automatic 
system is required. Nitrogen or carbon dioxide is 
generally used for expelling the tank contents. 


D-2.3 Induction 


In this method, the acceleration of a water stream 
through an inductor produces a fall in water pressure 
which is utilized to induce foam concentrate into the 
water stream in the required proportions. There are 
several arrangements available and each has a particular 
application. Some of the mostly adopted methods of 
induction are discussed in brief as under. 


GENERATION 
PROCESS ( GAS / AIR ) 


FOAM DISTRIBUTION 
ON RISK 


AIR / LIQUID 
EMULSION 


Fic. 7 SCHEMATIC ILLUSTRATION OF FOAM GENERATION 


D-2.3.1 Self Induction 


Self-inducting foam-making equipment incorporates 
a foam of inductor to draw in foam concentrate 
via an Induction or pick-up tube (see Fig. 8). This 
arrangement may be referred to as “end of line' 
induction. This method may be used for fixed or 
portable branch pipes and monitors. The following 
points are of great importance: 


a) Concentrate should be made available at the 
nozzle; and 


b) Bottom of the concentrate container generally 
should be not more than 2 m below the induction 
point. The length and size of the induction 
hose or pipe should depend upon the design of 
inductor. 


D-2.3.2 In-line Induction 


An inductor is arranged in the hose or pipework 
between the fire pump and the foam-making units, 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


usually at some distance from the latter (see Fig. 9). 
Foam concentrate may therefore be introduced at a 
safe distance from the fire. Variation of concentration 
may be achieved by use of a manually controlled 
metering valve. The following points are of great 
importance: 


a) In-line inductor should be suitable for the 
particular foam-maker with which it is to be 
used. The device is very sensitive to downstream 
pressures and is accordingly designed for use 
with specified length of hose or pipe between 
it and the foam-maker. Location of the 
foam-maker at a different level from the inductor 
also affects down-stream pressure. The pressure 
drop across the inductor is usually about one- 
third of the inlet pressure. 

b) Bottom of the concentrate container generally 

should be not more than 2 m below the induction 

point. The length and size of the induction hose or 
pipe should depend upon the design of inductor. 


PICK-UP TUBE 


Fic. 8 SELF-INDUCTING FOAM MAKING EQUIPMENT 


35 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


FOAM ENTRY 


LOW PRESSURE 
CHAMBER 


SS 
SS N 
SSSI Z N 
< Z“ 


> 


MOM 


[a a aa aa aaa a a a a a a a aa aaa a a a a a ЛУ LLL 


NON-RETURN 
BALL 


FLOW 
| 
NSC SS 
Š 
FILTER 


Si 
NS 


VEN 
WN 
ГА 
N MATT 


< 
=Z 


2 < 7m 2 
== L= NN 


BYPASS 
VALVE 


Fic. 9 IN-LINE INDUCTION FOAM MAKING EQUIPMENT 


D-2.3.3 Bypass Induction 


This method combines the best features of D-2.3.1 
and D-2.3.2 without some of their disadvantages. A 
small proportion of the water being supplied to the 
system is diverted to an inductor positioned some 
distance upstream from the foam-maker (see Fig. 10). 
This inductor induces a highly concentrated solution 
which it discharges via a bypass line to the specially 
designed low pressure entry point below foam-making 
in the system where mixing the main stream reduces 
the concentration to the required value. The following 
points are of great importance: 


a) Bypass inductor may be installed as much as 
150 m from the foam-maker or 20 m below it as 
for use with jetty monitors. The size of piping 
should be as required. 


b) Bottom of the concentrate container should be not 
more than 2 m below or 20 m below it as for use 
with jetty monitors. The size of piping should be 


as required. 


D-2.3.4 Around-the-Pump Induction 


This arrangement consists of an inductor installed in 
a bypass line between the discharge and suction of 


wm 


the fire pump (see Fig. 11). A small proportion of the 
water being applied to the system is diverted to the 
inductor, which draws the required quantity of foam 
concentrate from a container and delivers this as a 
highly concentrated solution to the pump suction where 
it is diluted by the main water stream to the required 
concentration. Concentration may be varied by use of 
a manually controlled metering valve. The following 
points are of great importance: 


a) Care should be exercised when working the pump 
from a hydrant supply to ensure that the required 
inductor inlet to back pressure ratio is achieved. 
This is usually about 3 to 1. Equipment should 
be available to control the pump suction pressure 
automatically as the pump demand varies. 


b 


— 


Foam proportioning 15 not sensitive to variations 
in system flow. 


c) Bypass stream to the inductor is supplied from the 
pump discharge. This factor should be recognized 
in determining the net delivery of the water pump. 


d) Bottom of the concentrate container should be 
not more than 2 m below the induction port. The 
length and size of the induction hose or pipe 
should be as required. 


36 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


HYDRAULIC REMOTE 
CONTROL MONITOR 


PLATFORM LEVEL 


RISER PIPE RISER PIPE 


BYPASS INDUCTOR 


NON-RETURN VALVE 
FOAM CONCENTRATE 
| CONTROL VALVE 


CONCENTRATE 
WATER VALVE TANK 


TANK AIR 
VENT VALVE 


POWER WATER 
VALVE 


Fic. 10 By-Pass INDUCTION FOAM MAKING EQUIPMENT 


37 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


SOLUTION DISCHARGE LINE 


ДР 


SHUT OFF FIRE PUMP 
VALVE IN 


BYPASS LINE 


FOAM 
CONCENTRATE 
PICK UP 


WATER SUCTION LINE 


METERING VALVE 
(IF FITTED ) 


FOAM 


CONCENTRATE 
TANK 


Fic. 11 AROUND THE Pump INDUCTION FOAM MAKING 


D-2.3.5 Displacement Proportioner (Bladder Pressure 
Proportioning Tank) 


Foam concentrate is stored in a flexible bag within a 
pressure vessel. A device for producing a moderate 
pressure drop when the firefighting system is operating, 
has its high and low pressure sides connected to the 
pressure vessel in such a way that a feed from the high 
pressure side of the water supply flows into the vessel to 
displace the foam concentrate by applying pressure to 
the bag. The concentrate then flows to the low pressure 
side of the device where it mixes with the main water 
flow (see Fig. 12). A variety of arrangement may be 
used ranging from a single pressure vessel to a battery 
of vessels connected by a manifold. Twin vessels are 
often used so that when one is exhausted, the other 
may be operated. The first vessel is then recharged, 
thus securing continuous operation of the system. 
This arrangement is suitable for both large and small 
systems. The following shall also be considered: 


a) Units are able to cater for a variation in water flow 
rates. 


b) Pressure drop across the proportioner varies from 
0.1 bar to 1.0 bar, depending upon the range of 
water flows. 


c) Multiple units permit recharging with foam 
concentrate during operation, if this is required. 


D-2.4 Injection 


Foam concentrate is supplied to a metering device 
under a pressure greater than that of the water supply, 


38 


by means of a foam pump. Several arrangements are 
available and each is suited to a particular application. 


An orifice is used to provide a fixed flow of foam 
concentrate into the water stream. Alternatively a 
constant flow valve may be used to maintain accurate 
proportioning the system when the water of foam 
concentrate pressure vary. The following points are of 
significant importance: 


a) System is suitable only for a fixed water flow rate; 
and 


b) A separate pump is required to deliver the 
concentrate. 


D-2.4.1 Variable Flow Injection 


This unit is situated in the fire water main and is fed 
with foam concentrate at pressures higher than or equal 
to the water pressure (see Fig.13). Regulation of the 
concentration is effected automatically whether water 
or foam concentrate pressure vary or whether the water 
main flow varies. 


D-2.4.2 Balanced Pressure Proportioning 


By means of an auxiliary pump, foam compound is 
injected into the water stream passing through ratio 
flow controller (see Fig. 14). The resulting foam 
solution is then delivered to a foam-maker or play pipe. 
The inductor may be inserted in the line at any point 
between the water source and foam-maker or branch 
pipe. The following shall be considered: 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


FILTER CAP 


FOAM CONCENTRATE — 


FLEXIBLE MEMBRANE 


FOAM CONCENTRATE STORED 
IN FLEXIBLE MEMBRANE 


PERFORATED 
SYPHON TUBE 


—— WATER 


VALVE OPEN 


INTERCONNECTED 
PRESSURE VALVES 
STORAGE 


TANK 


FLOW 
INDICATOR 


DIRECTION OF 
WATER FLOW 


FOAM 
SOLUTION 


WATER MAIN 
SUPPLYING FOAM 
MAKING EQUIPMENT 


Fic. 12 DISPLACEMENT PROPORTIONATE TANK 


FOAM 
ATMOSPHERIC UE 
FOAM CONCENTRATE FOAM NON-RETURN 
TANK CONCENTRATE VALVE 
STRAINER 


SYSTEM FLUSHING FOAN 


E CONCENTRATE 
( NORMALLY CLOSED) 
TANK DRAIN FLUSHING 
VALVE VALVE 
PRESSURE RELIEF 
VALVE 
FOAM 
VARIABLE FLOW CONCENTRATE 


INJECTOR UNIT 


WATER 
FIRE PUMP 


FOAM MAKING SOLUTION 
TO SYSTEM (S) 


Fic. 13 VARIABLE FLOW INJECTION 


39 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


EXPANSION DOME AND 
CLEAN OUT OPENING 


CONNECTION 
WITH FUNNEL 


PRESSURE VACUUM 
VENT 


FOAM LIQUID 
RETURN VALVE 


FOAM CONCENTRATE 
STORAGE TANK 


WATER 
SUPPLY 


FOAM CONCENTRATE 
PUMP AND MOTOR 
ASSEMBLY 


FiG. 14 BALANCED PRESSURE PROPORTIONING 


a) Automatically maintains the desired concentration C) A separate pump is required to deliver the 


irrespective of either fluid operating pressure, concentrates. 
provided that minimum recommended differential d) The water main pressure drop may be up to 1 bar. 
pressure is not exceeded. depending upon the flow ratio. 


b) Units are able to cater for flow ratios up to 10 to 1. 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword and Clause 5.1 ) 
SUITABILITY OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF FOAM 


Type of Foam Characteristic Application Suitable for 


Hydrocarbon | Polar Solvent 


Protein Foam a) Can be used at 3 percent and | а) Fires of Class А 
6 percent concentrations and B 
b) Pre-mixable b) Mainly 
c) Low expansion foam adapted for hydrocarbon Ses No 
all types of nozzles, Inductors, fuel fires 
foam chambers and discharge | c) Fuel spills 
units 


d) Good fire resistance and stability 


Fluoroprotein а) Can be used at 3 percent and | а) Fires of Class A 
Foam [FP] 6 percent concentrations and B 

b) Pre-mixable b) Airport 

c) Low expansion foam application 


d) Good fire resistance against| ©) Oil refineries 
re-ignition d) Mineral oil fires Yes No 


e) Oil repellent e) Marine jetties 


f) Can be directly sprayed on 
surface and also used for 
subsurface injection 


g) Good storage life 


40 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


Type of Foam 


Characteristic 


Application 


Suitable for 


Hydrocarbon 


Polar Solvent 


Film Forming 
Fluoro-protein 
foam [FFFP] 


a) Can be used at 3 percent and 
6 percent concentrations 


b) Pre-mixable 
c) Low expansion foam 


d) Forms a vapour sealing film 
over the fuel 

e) Excellent fire resistance against 
re-ignition 

f) Can be directly sprayed on 
surface and also used for 
subsurface injection 

g) Long storage life 

h) Quick knockdown of fire 


a) Fires of Class А 
and B 


b) Airport 

application 
c) Oil tankage 
d) Oil fires 


Yes 


Film Forming 
Fluoro-protein 
foam [FFFP] 


[Alcohol 
resistant] 


Aqueous Film 
Forming Foam 


[AFFF] 


a) Can be used at 3 percent 
concentration for hydrocarbon 
fires and 6 percent concentration 
for polar solvent fires 

b) Pre-mixable 

c) Low expansion foam 

d) Multi-purpose alcohol resistant 

e) Forms a rapid vapour sealing 
film over the fuel 

f) Excellent fire resistance against 
re-ignition 

g) Highly effective for 
hydrocarbon/polar solvent fires 

h) Produces a thick visible foam 
blanket with exceptional 
burnback resistance 

j) One product covers all types of 
risks. 

k) Long storage life 

a) Can be used at 1 percent, 
3 percent concentrations for 
hydrocarbon fires and 3 percent, 
6 percent concentrations for 
polar solvent fires based on the 
type of concentrate 

b) Pre-mixable 

c) Low expansion foam 

d) Forms a vapour sealing film 
over the fuel 

e) Inhibits fuel flash 

f) Long storage life 

g) Quick knockdown of fire 


a) Fires of Class A 
and B 

b) Organic 
etc. 


acids 


c) Hydrocarbon 
and their blends 


d) Polar solvents 


a) Mineral oils 
b) Fuel spills 

c) Oil tanks 

d) Petrol stations 


e) Hydrocarbon 
flammable 
liquid fires 


Yes 


Yes 


Yes 


41 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


Type of Foam Characteristic Application Suitable for 
Hydrocarbon Polar Solvent 

Alcohol a) Can be used at 3 percent} а) Polar solvents 

resistant- concentration for hydrocarbon b) Organic acids, 

Aqueous Film fires and 6 percent concentration etc. 


Forming Foam 
[AR-AFFF] 


for polar solvent fires 
b) Pre-mixable 
c) Low expansion foam 
d) Multi-purpose alcohol resistant 
e) Forms a rapid vapour sealing 


c) Hydrocarbon 
and their blends 


d) Mineral oils 


film over the fuel us XES 
f) Excellent fire resistance against 
re-ignition 
g) Highly effective for 
hydrocarbon/polar solvent fires 
h) One product covers all types of 
risks. 
j) Long storage life 
Synthetic foam | a) Pre-mixable a) Cellars 
b) Low, medium апа high b) Storage areas 
expansion foam concentrate c) Forest fires 
depending on type of foam dj Hotel and tinel Ye ЫБ 


generator 


c) Fire extinction is achieved by 
rapid smothering and cooling 


fires 


e) Liquified gases 
like LPG and 
ІХС, etc 


42 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX F 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


Organization 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety 
(DIFR), New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


Chhatariya Rubber & Chemicals Industries, 
Mumbai 


City and Industrial Development Corporation 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, Pune 

Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 

Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Goa 

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

F.M. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


Fire & Emergency Services, J&K, Srinagar 


Fire & Security Association of India, Chennai 
Fire Protection Association of India, Mumbai 
GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Thane 
H. D. Fire protect Pvt Limited, Thane 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri D. К. SHAMI (Chairman) 


Suri D. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 
SHRI P. K. DEsHMUKH (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


SHRI R. S. CHIMOTE 
SHRI SUVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
SHRI A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. TULANI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JAIN 
SHRI AMIT SAINI (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. K. HEPAT 


SHRI S. A. HAVELIWALA 
Suri Н. S. HAVELIWALA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND P. MANDKE 


CONTROLLER QA (FE) 
JoINT CONTROLLER QA (FE) (Alternate) 


DiRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK MENON 
SHRI NITIN V. RAIKER (Alternate) 


SHRI R. B. BHUTDA 
SHRI VIPAN GoEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. SINGH 
SHRI BASHIR AHMED SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAS RIZWI 
PRESIDENT 


SHRI S. P. GARG 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR KALKAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI HARISH N. DHARAMSHI 
SHRI K. T. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI AASHISH R. GOKHALE 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


43 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization 


Johnson Controls (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


K. V. Fire Chemicals (India) Pvt Ltd, 
Navi Mumbai 


Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services, 
Bengaluru 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Association of Fire Officers, Mumbai 


National Building Construction Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RESQ Technologies, Ahmedabad 


Safex Fire Services Limited, Mumbai 
Shah Bhogilal Jethalal & Bros, Ahmedabad 


State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Surex Production and Sales Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Swastik Synergy Engineering Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services 
Department, Chennai 


The Supreme Industries Ltd, Mumbai 
UL India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 
Uttar Pradesh Fire Services, Lucknow 


West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, 
Kolkata 


In Personal Capacity (8-152, Ist Floor, East of 
Kailash, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (4-45, Sector-70, Noida) 


In Personal Capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANTOSH MUZUMDAR 
SHRI Nitin RASTOGI 


Suni RAjEsH H. SABADRA 
Suri Upay K. Sunorr (Alternate) 


Suri K. U. RAMESH 
SHRI K. SRINIVASA (Alternate) 


SHRI 5. S. WARICK 


SHRI SANJAY SHARMA 
Suri A. K. Дровеу (Alternate) 


Suri P. S. RAHANGDALE 
Suet H. D. Paras (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 


SHRIMATI SUNITA PURSWANI 
Suri R. K. AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ISHWAR IYER 
Suni S. K. NANDY 


SHRI VARADENDRA КОТІ 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


Suni Кон V. SHAH 


SHRI JITENDRA SHAH 
SHRI SANDIP SHAH (Alternate) 


Унві MuKESH M. SHAH 
SHRI ABHAY D. PuRANDARE (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 


SHRI DEBASHIS NEOGI 


SHRI Мокезн D. SHAH 
SHRI KUNAL ZATAKIA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. VIJAYASEKAR 
SHRIMATI N. PRIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
Suri G. К. SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH SHANMUGAM 
Suri S. P. TEJ KUMAR BEHARA (Alternate) 


Suri P. К. Rao 
SHRI AMAN SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHIJIT PANDEY 
SHRI KAMAL Nanny (Alternate) 
SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


Suni S. K. DHERI 


Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


Suri К. C. SHARMA 


44 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (274, Tapovan Senior 
Citizens Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


Representative(s) 
SHRI T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (Civit. ENGINEERING), BIS 


Fire Detection Alarms and Suppression System Subcommittee, CED 22:4 


Organization 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


ASTRAL Polytechnik Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central for Fire Explosive Environment Safety, 
(DRDO), Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, Pune 


Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi 


DSPA Fire Suppressions India Pvt Ltd, Pune 
EAST Corp, Thane 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


FOGTEC Brandschutz GmbH & Co KG, Mumbai 


F. M. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


FYRPROTEK (Fire Engineers & Consultants), 
New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Thane 
Honeywell International (Т) Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Institution of Fire Engineers (India) Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Maple Engineering Design Services (India), 
Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 
Suri D. K. SHAMI (Convener) 


Suri D. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI SELVAKUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


Suri RITESH PATEL 
Suri Manos Duar (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


Suri RAJIV GOEL 
Suri R. S. Снімоте (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. Turanı (Alternate) 


Унві M. K. JAIN 
SHRI AMIT SAINI (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. K. HEPAT 


Сог V. V. KADAM 
Cor N. K. N. Rao (Alternate) 


DiRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETAN UDGIR 
SHRI HEMANT KHADSE 


SHRI VIPAN GOEL 
Suri R. B. Buutpa (Alternate) 


SHRI JACKSON JOSE 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI GULSHAN KHURANA 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANDAR SAWANT 
SHRI AKHAND KUMAR (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


Suri B. S. A. NARAYAN 
Suri H. R. RANGANNATH (Alternate) 


45 


IS 12835 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Mumbai Deputy FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 
Newage Industries, Mumbai SHRI Аѕнок M. SHAH 
SHRI SHETUL A. SHAH (Alternate) 
Nitin Fire Protection Industries Ltd, Mumbai SHRI Nitin M. SHAH 
SHRI PRAVIN SHAH (Alternate) 
Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram Suri Алт RAGHAVAN (Alternate) 
Proion Consultants, New Delhi SHRI SANDEEP GOEL (Alternate) 
Realty Automation and Security Systems Pvt Ltd, SHRI ANANT GOKHALE (Alternate) 
Pune 
Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai SHRI VARENDRA КОТІ 


SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida SHRI GIRISH CHANDRA MISHRA 


SCHRACK SECONET AG, Gurugram SHRI AJIT SAINI 
Steel Authority of India, Salem SHRI D. KUMARESAN 
The Supreme Industries Ltd, Mumbai SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
Suri G. K. SAXENA (Alternate) 
Johnson Controls (India) Private Limited, SHRI SANTOSH MUZUMDAR 
Gurugram Suri AsHISH DILEEP SAWANT (Alternate) 


West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, Kolkata | REPRESENTATIVE 
In Personal Capacity (4-45, Sector-70, Noida) Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


In Personal Capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman Suri К. C. SHARMA 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (274, Tapovan Senior SHRI T. R. A. KRISHNAN 
Citizens Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 

In Personal Capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, Suni S. К. DHERI 
New Delhi) 

In Personal Capacity, (4-59, Sector 35, Noida) SHRI KANWAR А. SINGH 


46 


(Continued from second cover) 


Latest trends in the design and installation of foam systems have been considered and drafted according the 
prevailing capabilities in the country. One percent foam is being considered for the first time for particular type of 
foam which is being increasingly used worldwide to fight high hazard tank farm fires. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS 15 а statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Асі, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (14921). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 С.І.Т. Scheme VII М, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-В, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


