1s 13930 : 1994

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard SHIPBUILDING - SHIPS' MAIN ENGINE FRESH WATER COOLING SYSTEM CODE OF PRACTICE

UDC

629'12 : 621'436-713'1

(0 BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

.

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

January

1994

Price Gromp 6

Shipbuilding

Sectional Committee, TED 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after thedraft finalized by the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. This standard has been prepared to specify recommendations and requirements for main diesel engine cooling fresh water pipiqg system in ships with the object to ensure uniformity and proper working of the system. In preparing this standard due consideration has been practices regarding the use of ferrous materials. given to factors involved and current

Failure of the component parts of fresh water piping systems may occur as a result of impingement attack, arising from excessive turbulence. Such a condition may be brought about by poor design, workmanship or the use of too high a water speed. Excessive water speed may arise as a result of poar design. Failure may also occur by pitting resulting from deposit attack and cracking due to stress corrosion or by general wastage. Attention shall be given to the design, fabrication and installation of system to ensure streamlined flow. In particular, abrupt changes in the direction of flow, mismatched pipe bores, tube bore Adequate provision is to be made in protrusions and other restrictions to flow shall be avoided. the fresh water systems for drainage and venting of the system pipework and equipment. Consideration is to be given to the fittjng of automatic air eliminators in preference to vent cocks. At each stage of construction it is the responsibility of the user of this Indian Standard compliance with the requirements of the statutory authorities and/or classification applicable. The Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given at Annex A. to ensure society as

IS 13930 : 1994

Indian Standard

SHIPBUILDING-SHIPS'MAINENGINE FRESHWATERCOOLINGSYSTEMCODEOFPRACTICE
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies requirements for the materials, design, installation, inspection and testing of ship's main engine fresh water cooling piping system including all fittings which form part of such systems. 1.2 For the purpose of this standard afresh water cooling piping system includes all pipes and fittings from engine outlet to engine inlet, excluding the heat exchangers but including all other fittings, various safety and relief valves and pressure and temperature gauges. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian Standards sary adjuncts to this standards :
IS No. 812 : 1957 Title

3.3 Piping System All pipes, valves and fittings from engine outlet to engine inlet, but excluding all pumps and heat exchangers. 3.4 Flow Conditions The expected conditions of water flow in individual parts or sections of the piping system. To meet varying design requirements three conditions are recognised.

a) Continuous

Flow -Where the water in a system or part of a system if flowing continuously under the ship's normal operation conditions.

are neces-

b) No

Flow - Air vents and where a branch connection to a main pipe has its other end closed. The water in that branch is regarded as having no flow condition. Intermittent Flow - All systems and parts of the system not covered by (a) and (b).

Glossary of terms relating to welding and cutting of metals fibre asbestos Compressed jointings ( second revision 1 Glossary of terms for safety and relief valves and their parts

d

2712 : 1979
3233 : 1965

3.5 Purchaser The ship owner or ship operator according the circumstances of the particular ship. 3.6 Manufacturer The ship builder or authorised 4 RATING OF SYSTEM 4.1 The design pressure rating of the system shall not be greater than IMN/Ma ( 10 bar ). 4.2 The fresh water cooling system shall be divided into three separate systems for following reasons: a) The cooling circuits are either totally closed or closed with free out flow; b) The temperature levels are different eaeh system; and c) The pressure levels are also different each system. in in sub contractor. to

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition to those given in IS 812 : 1957 and IS 3233 : 1965 shall apply: 3.1 Design Pressure The maximum pressure to which the system can be subjected when in service and is the value u?ed in design calculations. This pressure may result from a combination of circumstances unlikely to occur under normal working condiBut it shall not be more than the highest tions. set pressure of the safety valve or relief valve, if provided. 3.2 Test Pressure The pressure to which the system and its components are subjected under test conditions. Test pressure of the system should be minimum 1'5 times of the working pressure of system. However, recommendation, if any, of engine manufacturer(s) to be considered. 1

4 3 Usually the slow speed marine engines are fresh water eooled by three different systems: i) Jacket cooling fresh water system; ii) Piston cooling fresh water systemt and iii) Fuel valve cooling fresh water system.

IS 13930 : 1994 4.3.1 Jacket Cooling Fresh Water System

The closed circuit jacket cooling system totally closed, includes the cylinder liners, covers and turbo blowers. The temperature and pressure levels shall be maintained by providing temperature control valve and in some cases, throttling piece(s) in the system. The system shall be continuously vented. In some engines turbo blowers are cooled by the piston cooling system, In case of sGme of the higher capacity engines, waste heat of engine jacket cooling water is utilised as heat source for fresh water generator which generates fresh water from sea water by The capacity evaporation at negative pressure. is limited to the heat available in the jacket cooling water which, in turn depends on the engine load. For heat recovery at partial load extent of heat recovery may be conditions, obtained from the engine builders. Normally, not more than 30% of the heat from cooling water shall be utilised for fresh water generator. 4.3.2 Piston Cooling Fresh Water System The piston cooling system shall be a closed circuit with free outflow from the engine to fresh water drain tank. For keeping the required control valve shall be system temperature provided. In some type of engines the pistons by lubricating oil. 4.3.3 Ft!el Valve Cooling Fresh
( Nozzle Cooling System >

have no scope in fresh water system. Where galvanised pipes are used they shall be treated properly to avoid galvanising material to get mixed with cooling water and entering the engine parts. 5.2 Pumps
5.2.1 Type of Pump

5.1.2 Plastic and composites

Normally, centrifugal type pumps shall be employed in fresh water cooling system. Usually, two pumps shall be installed in each system, one as working and the other as stand by. Sometimes a separate preheater pump of a small capacity along with heater is connected in parallel to main circuit. Since the cooling system is critical, it is preferable to have auto cut-in to start the standby pump in the event of the failure of the running pump. 5.2.1.2 Since piston cooling pumps take suction from piston cooling drain tank, it may be of a submerged type, mounted directly on the tank or a self priming type placed on top of the tank. 5.2.2 Capacity of Pumps The pump capacity in each system shall be decided according to the guidelines given by the engine supplier and with due consideration to the hydraulic performance of the centrifugal pumps and estimated losses in layout of piping systems. 5.2.3 Mounting of Pumps
5.2.3.1

5.2.1.1

are cooled
System

Waler

The fuel valve cooling system shall be a closed circuit with free outflow from the engine outlet tank. The static to fuel valve expansion pressure requirement shall be met by keeping the expansion tank at a higher level. In certain engines, fuel valves are cooled by engine fuel oil in a close circuit with fuel oil coolers in the system wherein the heated fuel is cooled by circulating sea water. There are some marine engines where fuel valves are not cooled either by circulating fresh water or fuel oil. 5 MATERIALS 5.1 Pipes 5.1.1 In general, galvanised steel pipes are used except where the water is treated with nitrite base corrosion inhibitors since this creates sludge due to chemical action. The use of copper or copper based alloy pipes and fittings is to be avoided. Steel pipework and fittings for steel framed engines and aluminium alloy pipe work and fittings for aluminium framed engines are preferred. The water is to be treated with an approved corrosion inhibitor. The main engine manufacturer is to provide storage and mixing tanks, for this inhibitor as specified.

Pumps shall be mounted in such a wry that they are readily accessible for maintenance.

5.2.3.2 In case of horizontally mounted pumps, the pump and motor shall be aligned before mounting rigidly and as a further precaution flexible coupling shall be used. A common base frame for the pump and motor is preferable to misalignment. In case of vertically avoid mounted pumps, rigid mounting shall be provided at the base of the pump only. 5.2.3.3 In order to prevent air intake into thejacket cooling system through the glands the height between the expansion tank and jacket cooling fresh water pump inlet shall be kept as. large as possible. 5.2.3.4 The fuel valve cooling pumps shall be positioned near to the fuel valves and well below. the fuel valve expansion tank. 5.2.3.5 All pumps shall be fitted with compound/ pressure gauges complete with isolating valve of 2

IS 13930 : 1994 -needle type gump. 5.3 Tanks 5.3.1 Jacket
Tank Cooling Fresh Water Expansion

to check

the performance

of the

Heating water.

coil

shall be provided

to preheat the

5.3.4 Others In addition to expansion and drain tank a separate tank of relatively big capacity to act as storage/mixing tank where corrosion inhibitor can be mixed with fresh water should be included as a part of the main engine fresh water cooling system. Material for the tanks and connected fittings are to be as stipulated in the ship's specification/ acceptable to the engine supplier. Separate note on surface treatment shall be put for the internal surfaces of expansion tanks and drain tanks. 5.3.5 Low level indication/alarms specification are to be provided. 5.4 Heater 5.4.1 Heater of suitable capacity shall be provided in the jacket cooling system to preheat the main engine before starting and to maintain the temperature whenever temporarily stopped. The heater capacity depends on several factors such as quantity of fresh water in the system, dimensions of pipes, coolers, etc, as well as on the ambient temperature and required heating up time. 5.4.2 The heater shall be connected in parallel to the supply line because of the large water quantity delivered by the pump. The bypass water flow shall be set either by a valve or with an orifice plate. 5.5 Separator 5.5.1 Air Separator A centrifugal air separator ( de-aerating tank ) shall be fitted in the jacket cooling system near to the engine outlet to discharge any air or gas mixed with cooling water. For smaller engines ( capacity to be decided with engine suppliers ) air ventilation pipe to be provided in consultation with engine manufacturer. 5.5.2 Piston Cooling Water Separator The piston cooling water may get contaminated with oil and shall, tlierefore, not to be led directly back to the suction of the pumps. An efficient oil separator shall be provided as per the recommendations of the engine builder. 5.6 Coolers 5.6.1 Coolers shall be provided to remo$e the heat transferred from the engine to the cooling 3 as per ship's

This tank shall be provided to maintain a static pressure on the system and to replace the water losses. The minimum height of the tank above the crank shaft and the capacity of the tank shall be decided according to the recommendation The outlet pipe from the of the engine builder. tank shall be large enough to maintain the static pressure. Air pipe, overflow pipe, chemical filling, fresh water filling, level gauge, low level alarm, heating coil, if required to be provided on the tank. The system vents shall be connected into the tank below the minimum possible water level. The tanks shall be provided with drain pipe and cock having locking arrangement. If not practicable to locate expansion tank at the required height due to space restriction, a double acting pressurising valve is to be fitted to the top of the tank in lieu of the vent pipe in order to maintain the required pressure after system is pressurised. The ship builder is to produce an inhibitor mixing tank to afford means of chemical dosage to protect the system from corrosion and freezing. 5.3.2 Piston Cooling Water Drain Tank The fresh water piston cooling drain tank shall be designed with integrated piston cooling leakage water tank as per the recommendations of the engine builder. The tank form shall be such that with a minimum water level the pump suction pipes submerge sufficiently for safe The oil contaminated leakage water running. shall be drained into a leakage tank which is integral with but isolated from the piston drain tank by a wall or a frame plate. A skimmer unit or any other system of filteration of leakage water shall be provided. The tank shall be equipped with air pipe, overflow pipe, chemical and fresh water filling, sounding, level alarms, heating coils and drain connection. 5.3.3 Fuel Valve Expansion Tank This tank shall be provided to maintain a static pressure and to replaces the water losses. The minimum height of the tank above the crank shaft and the capacity of the tank shall be decided according to the recommendation of the engine builder. The tank shall be equipped with filling, venting, and chemical filling lines. .drain, overflow

1s 13930 :1994 water. The capacity shall be determined consultation with the engine builder. 5.6.2 Jacket Fresh Water Cooler The cooler shall be located close to suction side of the pump so that it shall work under a lower pressure and the pressure at engine inlet shall be achieved with a smaller pump. 5.6.3 Piston Cooling Fresh Water Cooler The cooler shall be installed between the piston cooling water pump and the engine inlet. The working pressure corresponds to the delivery head of the pump. 5.7 Control Valves Maintaining a particular temperature in the fresh water systems is very important for the proper functioning of the engine. An automatic temperature control valve shall be provided at the inlet or outlet of cooling water to the engine so that the temperature of water shall be controlled irrespective of the engine load. The valve shall not be located at the highest point in the line, in order to avoid air collecting in it which can lead to operation problems. 5.8 Throttling Piece This shall be used for setting the prescribed system pressure at engine inlet. In order to ensure proper working of throttling piece a flow stabilizer where required shall be fitted. 6 DESIGN 6.1 General 6.1.1 In designing a fresh water system it shall be noted that certain configurations and some types of fittings which give an appreciable pressure loss shall be avoided, if possible. OF PIPE LINE SYSTEM in 6.1.2 Pipes used in the system shall comply with required pressure ranges and shall conform to relevant Indian Standards. The type and material of the flexible pipes, bellows and expansion pieces are to be of approved type. 6.1.3 pipe tight kept In order to keep pressure losses low, the run shall be as short and direct as possible, right angle bends and T-pieces shall be to a minimum.

6.1.4 The diameter of each pipe run shall be determined from considerations of the water flow quantities and a permissible `maximum velocity-pipe diameter' specification. The length of the pipe shall be such that removal/maintenance is easy.

6.1.5 The flexible pipes are to be used only upto the bore size of 50 mm. For bigger sizes expansion pieces/bellows may be used. Securing arrangements of flexible pipes, expansion pipes and bellows are to be of approved standards. 6.2 Recommended Velocities 6.2.1 The water velocities for pipe shall not exceed specified values. The values given in Table 1 are for guidance only. 6.3 Development of the Design 6.3.1 Review Basic Design Data
6.3.2 List pump sizes recommended by suppliers for a typical duty. List standard modules for pump heat exchanger and components of the main system.

6.3.3 Study purchaser's specification and note special requirements for pipe materials, valves, joints, fabrication and erection. 6.3.4 Study statutory and classification requirements for the systems. society

Table 1 Recommended Water Velocities ( Clause 6.2.1 >
Nominal Diameter, mm 32
1.2 :p5 3.5 to 4.3 1.2 :s 3.5 to 4.3

40
1.4 to 1.7 6.3 to 7.7 1.4 :p7 6.3 ;;

50
l-6 :; 11.0 1:q5 1.6 :pg 11.0 $5

65
1.8 21 22.0 :;*o 1.8 :l 22.0 2:;

80
1.9 :% 34.0 4zo :z 2.2 34-O 4&

100
2.0 to 2.3 57.0 6?0 2'0 :?? 57.0 6%

125
2.1 to 2.4 93.0 lds90 2'1 to 2.4 93.0 lo:0

150
2.2 ?5 140'0 I$0 Fz 2.5 140.0 so

175
2.3 to 2.5 199.0 2lzo fz 2.5 199-O 2IZ0

200
2.4 to 2.6 271-O 29Yo 2;: 2.6 271.0 2&o

225
2.4 ?6 343.0 37Yo ";," 2.6 343.9 3E.o

250
2.5 to 2.7 441.0 47Fo :z 2-7 441.0 4E.o

300
2.5 :F; 636.0 68:oo 2.5 to 2.7 636.0 as?0

Suction Pipe

Velocity m/s Rate of flow ma/h Velocity m/s Rate of flow ma/h

Deli- i i$i

4

IS 13930: 1994
6.3.4.1 All pipes are to be hydraulically

tesed to requisite pressure by the supplier and test reports are to be obtained.

6.3.6.4 Calculate flow quantities required systems and matching pump capacities.

in

6.3.5 Establish if any special requirements are disclosed by the above procedures and if they conflict with standards normally followed by sub contractors or builders. Initiate procedures to resolve points of difference and obtain outstanding information. 63.6
6.3.6.1 Preparation of Flow Diagrams

6.3.6.5 Establish maximum velocities acceptable in system and calculate matching pipe size and indicate it in the diagram. 6.3.6.6 Make first order estimate of probable straight pipe lengths and static heads, list fittings and calculate probable flow resistance. This calculation shall be kept under review as the design is progressed. If the system resistance is higher than acceptable, the pipe bores shall be reconsidered and the calculation adjusted until the results are satisfactory. 6.3.6.7 Results obtained shall be checked with an economic analysis of the cost of pumping the quantity required with various flow resistance and pipe size to ensure they are pumps compatible. 6.3.7 Preparation of Isometric Sketches 6.3.7.1 Flow paths can be readily visualised and piping layout generally decided by means of such sketches which can be supplementary and/ or alternative to flow diagrams and piping arrangement drawings.

Sketch single line flow diagrams indicating pumps, machinery units and ancillary units specified ( see Fig. 1 >. The pumps heat exchangers, etc, are to be capable of functioning when the ship is trimmed and/or listed to specified limits. 6.3.6.2 Add legend and a list of symbols and abbreviations which shall be used to identify pipe line fittings. Symbols used shall conform to relavent Indian Standards. 6.3.6.3 Add specified fittiugs to diagram, paying due regard to features mentioned elsewhere in this standard which shall keep flow resistance to the minimum for the pipe bore size adopted and allow preferential flow, for example, through by-passes where required. DQ
SCREWED LIFT VALVE

t
-#

99

3-WAY AUTO TEMPARATURE CONTROL VALVE THROTTLING PIECE NOZZLE AIR SEPERATOR COOLING

COOLING

PUMPS OhR FLOW
l

Frct.1

SCHEMATIC ARRANOEMENT OF FRESHWATER COOLING SYSTEM
5

IS 13930: 1994

6.3.7.2 Such isometric sketches shall show the general arrangement of equipment and piping, with limited details, to determine optimum layout and nozzle orientation on equipment. Instrumentation requirements for pipe connections may also be determined. 6.3.0 Ordering of Requirement List of special fittings required, for example special valves, control valves, spectacle piece, shall be prepared from the available sketches. Preliminary requisitions for such fittings and for pumps, piping, etc, shall be issued. Such requisitions shall be kept under review as the systems are developed. 6.3.9 Piping Layout If model techniques are not employed nor alternative, permanent records of the layout found acceptable, it will be necessary to prepare pipe arrangement drawings. Such drawings shall: a) Determine scale and show orientation.

k) Lay pipes in such a way that they shall not touch the tank top. It is advisable to give sufficient clearance between the pipes and the tank top to avoid pipes submerging in bilge water and also for inspection of the tank top and also opening flanges. m) Show the essential minimum details of seatings of equipment, ladder ways, etc, to enable to design the fully co-ordinated pipe layout. n) Specify that lifting eyes to be provided for enabling motors of pumps, etc, which are weighing more than 30 kg to be removed. p) Show the bends to t%oe where running: in straight length to dompensate for exfinsion and contraction of the pipes.

9) Show

suitable openings to be provided on floor plates wherever valves are fitted below floor. accessibility for the location where a closing length is to be made from dimensions lifted at site.

4 Provide

b) Show the essential minimum detail of associated equipment and ship structure to determine system component locations and clearances. Such outlines shall contrast with piping. c) Provide clearances for all equipment access and maintenance. for

s) Avoid pockets and vertical

loops where possible but provide additional dra.ins and vents where such configurations are unavoidable. mentation system connections.

d) Provide accessibility to all system components which may require manipulation, inspection and maintenance. e) Provide easily portable sections, short bends or make up pieces to facilitate removal of equipments and fittings. f) Show piping by single line except where double- line is essential to demonstrate clearance.

t> Provide and indicate location of instrud Show enlarged
detail section to indicate orientation and flow direction through special control valves or other fittings which are of unusual construction. component pipes and fittings. unit numbers of all

VI Show

WI Indicate
Include x>

d

Arrange pipe runs on fore and aft line or athwartships except where large size or other criteria justify the minimum length between two points being used. As far as possible the pipes shall be laid along the bulkhead, deckhead, shipside and under the floor plates so that space in the compartment can be untilised to the best possible extent. to give direct runs whrre possible and minimum fabrication costs. Such pipes to be routed to take advantage of ship structure for supports and pipe supports to be shown on drawings.

non-standard joints, materials, fittings, testing procedures, purchaser's special requirements, etd, with drawings. essential dimensions for locating pipe centre lines in the ship where these may be required to produce pipe fabrication sketches or pipe support dimensions. indicate terminal points of lines where continuations will be arranged by other piping designers and detail connecting flanges.

Y) Clearly

h) Give preference to large bore pipe runs

2) Piping in general shall be kept away from
electric switch boards and other electric equipments. Flanges shall be arranged as far away from electric cables as practicable. If unavoidable, suitable protection shall be provided.
.

3

Keep the number of joints to a minimum practicable number.

6

IS 13430 : 1994
6.3.10 Checking of System 7.3 Pipe Supports 7.3.1

On completion of the drawings the system resistance losses shall be re-calculate, the pipe and fitting schedules reviewed and requisitions for equipment confirmed. 6.4 Pressure
Loss Items

Pipe lines shall be routed to enable the surrounding structure to provide logical points of support, anchorage, guidance or restraint. Supporting of the largest of critical piping systems shall take prime consideration over others and the location of supports and anchors shall be shown on arrangement drawings.

The pressure loss through proprietory items may be obtained from the manufacturer's specification. The extra losses to be determined are those occurring in the pipes, valves, bends and other fittings. 7 PIPE WORK FLEXIBILITY INSTALLATION 7.1 Flexibility
of Piping Systems

SUPPORT

AND

7.1.1 Piping systems shall be designed with adequate flexibility so that expansion of the piping machinery, vibration and working of the ship shall not result in overstressing of tne system or leakage at joints.

1.3.2 The design of supports is to be capable of adequately supporting the piping system without undue distortion. In addition to pipeline gravitational loads, the supports shall provide for concentrated loads imposed by valves and risers, for axial loadings due to expansion and the pressure of fluid, and for inertia effects due to ship movements. Hangers for supports shall be provided close to concentrated weights, at horizontal changes in line direction, and or adjacent to pipe risers. 7.3.3 Pipe work adjoining flexible units shall be supported as closely as possible to the flexible unit. The support shall be designed to prevent the pressure loads transmitted by the flexible unit distorting the attached pipe work and equipment. 7.3.4 The intervals of supports for pipes shall be decided according to the bore and configuration of pipe work. 7.3.5 All pipe work shall be examined during the sea trial to determine whether additional hangers are necessary due to unforeseen vibrations. 8 PIPING INSTALLATION

7.1.2 Flexibility shall normally be provided by the use of plain piping bent to normal specified radius and off sets in the piping. 7.1.3 Where space limitations prevail or where piping is to be attached to resiliently mounted machinery use may be made of flexible pipes or bellows expansion pieces. They shall be installed in unstressed condition. 7.1.4 Pressure of fluid in a piping system can in way of bends result in distortion particularly and flexible units if adequate anchorage is not provided. Attention is drawn to the necessity of making such provision as stated in 7.3.3.
7.2 Flexible Piping Units or Assemblies

8.1 Pipe Jointing Jointing material shall conform to Grade C of IS 2712 : 1979. Other materials may be adopted by agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer. Jointing material shall be pre-cut and so dimensioned that it will not project into the bore of the pipe. It is recommended that the gaskets be full face and located on the bolts except where raised face flanges are in use. 8.1.2 Pipe Erection 8.1.2.1 Flange face shall be closely mated and bolt holes in alignment before making up the joints. The pipes shall not be strained into position in order to make them fit. Pipes which do not fit satisfactorily shall be returned to the workshop for correction and re-stress relieving where necessary. 8.1.2.2 Mating pipes, valves and fittings shall be installed with their bores concentirc and in 7

7.2.1 The design and construction of these components shall be suitable for the pressure, vacuum and temperature under all conditions likely to occur in service, including ambient temperature and shall also be capable of absorbimposed by attached ing the movements machinery and pipe work.

7.2.2 The material of these components, including any fittings if separately attached shall be suitable for containing fresh water and be compatible with the material of the piping system to which they are attached. 7.2.3 Resistance to damage by fire or other means shall be considered and where deemed necessary a protective arrangement shall be given around the flexible components. 7.2.4 Flexible pipes shall be limited to only one compartment of the ship and that too for small lengths only.

IS1393O:lY94
line, and care taken to ensure that any jointing fitted does not protrude into the bore. `X1.2.3 Care shall be taken with alignment of piping when making screwed, brazed or welded joints. 8.1.2.4 The installation of bellow pieces or flexible units shall b= carefully carried out to ensure that they are not pre-stressed. 8.1.2.5 The closing length of piping shall be manufactured to a sufficient degree of accuracy so that it can be fitted in place without undue manual effort. 8.1.2.6 The pipes or any of the fittings in the system when mounted shall not touch another pipe or fitting or any structural member of the ship. If this is entirely unavoidable, then clamps shall be provided at such points of contact to ensure rigidity of the assembly and to avoid abrasive wear of the material due to vibration and rubbing. 9, INSPECTION 9.1 Component Installation AND TESTING Inspections and Tests Before

9.1.3.1 Hydraulic
pumps:

tests and capacity

tests for

a) All pumps intended for essential services are to be tested hydraulically and for capacity at manufacturer's works; h) Pump housings and cylinders are to be tested to at least 1'5 times the working pressure; and c) Pump capacities are to be checked with the pump running at rated speed with rated pressure head. Capacity test may be dispensed with when previous satisfactory tests have been carried out on similar pumps.

9.1.3.2 The completed pipes and fittings shall be
tested with fresh water with filling, air evacuaconnections tion and test gauge provided. The test pressure shall be maintained for not less than ten minutes after the filling valves are closed to demonstrate the integrity of all connections. After testing all such components shall be drained. All terminals shall be blanked before the component is despatched to ship. 9.2 System Installation Inspections and Tests After

9.2.1 System Inspections Afrei Installation
Before any testing is carried out shall be inspected to check that: the system

,9.1.1 Pipes shall be internally

cleaned and made free from scales. If conditions like corrosive .atmosphere exist, pipes shall be suitably protected on the exterior. Where fabricated pipe work is to be used, pipes shall be shot blasted in random lengths before fabrication.

.9.1.2 Shop Inspection shall be checked to ensure that they are correct and in accordance with drawings, especially details of terminals and materials. 9.1.2.2 All components shall be mined for faults and irregularities. visually exa-

a) Pipes are pained as per the colour code where required. The colour of the paint on the pipes shall be as specified in relevant Indian standards unless specified otherwise in the ship's specification. b) The installation is in accordance pipe arrangement drawings. with the and

9.1.2.1 All components

c) The location and fitting of supports hangers are adequate. __ The e>

4 The joints are accessible for maintenance.
fittings are installed correctly for the required direction of flow, especially valves and filters. for operation

9.1.2.3 Welded and brazed joints shall be examined to ensure that fillets are regular and continuous in form. Wherever practicable it shall be established that there is no lack of root penetration or evidence of non-fusion or burn through excessive penetration of the pipe in way of the joint. 9.1.3 Shop Test Each completed pipe and fitting shall be hydraulically tested to 1'5 times the maximum pressure to which the system can be subjected under service conditions.

f) The valves are accessible and maintenance.

g) Loads are not imposed on pump castings and other fixed components due to distortion of pipes or lack of support of adjoining fittings. h) All valves and necessary remote control shall operate through their full limits open-shut-open. In case of safety and relief/automatic temperature control valves, etc, are to be set to the requisite temperatures/pressures.

8

IS 13930 : 1994

j) All bellow pieces and flexible
installed correctly limits specified. discharge within

the

pipes are operating

j) Piston cooling water k) Fuel valve cooling water 11 COMMISSIONING

- high temperature high temperature

k) Pumps _. _ are fitted with required suction and
pressure gauges.

d Valves and fittings are correctly Iabelled.
lo INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROL

11.1 To ensure the proper commissioning of system following operations shall be carried out:

4 cleaning of pipes;
10.1 Different instruments such as thermolevel indicators, meters, pressure gauges, therrmostats, pressure switches, flow switches, etc, shall be used for indicating the system conditions and also for controlling the conditions within the required limits. 10.2 Methods of Warning of System Failure Lights and audible alarms shall be installed on the system to indicate the failure of the fresh water cooling system. 10.2.1 Initiation of Warning Flow switches, level switches, pressure switches, temperature switches, etc, shall be used to initiate the warning of the system failure. 10.2.2 The use of audiable alarms mended to indicate the following: is recomb) checking the main items and control devices; c) filling of system; d) setting of operating conditions; of equipment

e) running test to prove that system; and f) checking for leaks. 12 SEA TRIAL 12.1 System Tests Each a> pump shall be primed before starting.

b) The system shall be circulated with water

at the maximum pressure attainable by the pumps under normal service conditions. to ensure that air is released from high points. for leaks. from joints and glands.

a) Jacket cooling water b) Piston cooling water cl Fuel valve cooling
water

-

low pressure low pressure low pressure low level low level

cl All air vents shall be operated

4 The system shall be examined
vibration and additional where necessary.

e) Note shall be made of undue noise and
supports fitted f) The temverature and pressure controls in fresh water cooling system are important for the proper functioning of the engines. Control valves to be arranged as per the engine manufacturer's recommendation. Engine valves are to be set to the requisite pressure/temperature.

4 Jacket cooling water
expansion tank

4 Piston cooling water
drain tank f) Fuel valve cooling water expansion bank g) Piston cooling water drain tank h) Jacket cooling water

-i low level high level high temperature

s) Complete

system shall perform satisfac-torily in all specified conditions of list and trim of the vessel.

9

IS 13930: 1991

ANNEX A ( Foreword )
COMMITTEE Shipbuilding
Chairman
CAPT

COMPOSITION Committee,
Representing

Sectional
lnstitution

TE 17
Bombay

K.K.

LOHANA

of Naval Architects,

Members
SHRI S. N. BASSI SHRI S. K. BOSE ( Aiternate ) SHRI S. K. BHATIA SHRI K. K. TIWARI ( Alternate ) SHRI R. ROY CHOWDHURY DEPUTY CHIEF SURVEYOR SHRI A. K. CHOPRA SHRI D. G. SARANGDHAR( Alternate SHRI JAYWANT Y. CHOWGULE SHRI A. R. I. HAVALDAR ( Alternate HEAD OF DESIGN DEPARTMENT HEAD OF STANDARD CELL ( AIterna te GENERAL MANAGER SHRI G. SHARMA ( Alternate ) SHRI P. R. GOVIL SHRI M. K. AGARWAL ( Alternate ) R. ADM. Y. N. INAMDAR SHRI JOSEPHISAAC SHRI U. S. BHOWMICK ( Alternate ) SHRI MADAN LAL KOCHAR SHRI P. K. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) CMDE R. NATH VSM CMDE R. K. BHATIA VSM ( Alternate CAPT H. K. D. PATEL SHRI K. PREMKUM~R LT CDR S. S. JASWAL SHRI K. R. R. CHODHARY ( Alternate SHRI R. SEN SHRI A. SENGUPTA SHRI R. BHAVE( Alternate ) .SHRI G. SINHA SHRI S. K. HALDER ( Alternate ) CAPT K. S. SOOD SHRI S. SRINIVASAN SHRI K. P. RAO ( Alternate ) .SHRI N. S. VIJAYARA`GHAVAN, Director (Transport Engineering ) Garden DGTD, Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, Calcutta New Delhi

Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta DG Shipping, Bombay Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay

) ) )

Small Shipowners Mazagon Dock

Association,

Goa

Ltd, Bombay Corporation of India, Bombay (SBR), New Delhi

The Shipping Ministry

of Surface Transport

The Institute of Marine Engineers Cochin Shipyasd Ltd, Cochin American Directorate Bureau of Shipping, General

( India ), Bombay

Bombay New Delhi

of Naval Designs,

)

The Indian National Shipowners Association, Bombay Goa Shipyard Ltd, Goa Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi Chowgule Steamships Ltd, Bombay Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay Flakt India Ltd, Calcutta Gil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehradun Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam Director General, BIS

)

( Ex-officio Member )

Member
Director ( Transport

Secretary
Engineering ), BIS

SHRI N. S. JUDGE

Marine
Convener

Piping

Subcommittee,

TE 17 : 1
Ltd, Bombay

SHRI R. SEN

Chowgule

Steamships

Members
SHRI .I. R. AGGARWAL SHRI SANJAY AGGARWAL ( Alternate SHRI J. T. CHRISTO SHRI M. G. VIJAYAN ( Alternate ) ENGINEERAND SHIP SURVEYOR SHRI SUNIL GHODGAONKAR SHRI R. SINGH ( Alternate ) SHRI M. C. KESAVRAO SHRI R. N. SAHU ( Alternate ) Govardhan Das P A ( Calcutta Ltd, Cochin Bombay ), Calcutta

)

Cochin

Shipyard

Directorate General of Shipping, Goa Shipyard Ltd, Goa Hindustan Shipyard

Ltd, Visakhapatnam

( Contfnued

on page 11 )

10

IS 13930 : 1994
( Continued from page 10 ) Members
SHRI A. K. KOLI SHRJ V. P. JIRAFE ( Alternate ) SHRI S. MAJHJ CAPT MOHAN RAMAN LT N. BANERJEE( Alternate ) SHWJ D. K. SEHGAL SHRJ B. B. SIKKA ( Alternate ) SHRJ A. SENGUPTA SHRJ S. V. RAMCHANDANI ( Alternate ) SHRI J. D. GROVER ( Alternate ) SHRI SUDESH KUMAR SHRI GUR SARUP ( Alternate ) ,SHR~M. P. SUNDERE~AN

Representing
Mazagon Dock Ltd. Bombay & Engineers Jalandhar Bombay Bombay Garden Reach Shipbuilders Indian Navy, New Delhi Leader Engineering Lloyd's Register Works,

Ltd, Calcutta

of Shipping, of Shipping,

Indian Register Indian Tube

Co Ltd,

Jamshedpur

11

Barean of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 3Copyrigbt .5IS has the copyright of all any form without the prior ahe course of implementing grade designations. Enquiries Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference:
DOC :

its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.

TED

17 ( 956 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Date of Issue{ Text Affected

Amend No.

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS . Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43, ( 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 15 19, 632 92 95, C 632 78 91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telaphones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Regional Offices: Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI

110002

Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road,

160036 600113

MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 430093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAfPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Paragon Enterprises, Delhi, India

