HRA ATP IS 17931 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Urea Ura wl defen & fare 
agug A a4 wis fea er 
an — fare 


Form Fill Seal Bags Made from 
Polyethylene for Packaging of 
Polymer Materials — Specification 


ICS 83.080.20 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAP Yaa, 9 JEg Ve WHS AMI, Ag N - 110002 
S ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 9 


Plastics Packaging Sectional Committee, PCD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Plastics Packaging 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


Bags made of single-family polyethylene films are being used widely for packing granular and dry powdered material in 
bulk quantities. These bags are manufactured using multilayer tubular film, to achieve a very high production rate during 
the packaging process. These bags are majorly used in Form, Fill, Seal (FFS) process and to some extent in the offline 
filling process. Outstanding advantages of the FFS system for the value chain have made these FFS bags the most 
preferred heavy-duty shipping bags followed by plastic woven fabric bags and multilayer paper bags. 


This standard is being prepared taking into consideration the increased use of heavy-duty polyethylene film bags for bulk 
packaging of polymer raw materials. These bags are leakproof and have the advantage of being resistant to moisture 
ingress, pilferage-proof packaging, better stackability, and better aesthetics. 


The objective of this standard is to guide the film manufacturers and the polymer manufacturers and the user of film bags 
for packaging, in specifying the material of construction, film performance criteria, bag dimensions and, bag performance 
criteria to their mutual benefit. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For deciding whether a requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 'Rules for rounding off numerical values 
(second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 


Indian Standard 


FORM FILL SEAL BAGS MADE FROM POLYETHYLENE 
FOR PACKAGING OF POLYMER MATERIALS — 
SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements of 
polyethylene films and the bags made thereof, for the 
packaging of polymer materials, which are in granular 
form or in dry powder form. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following Standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 

196 : 1966 Atmospheric conditions for 
testing 

2508 : 2016 Polyethylene films and sheets — 
Specification (third revision) 

2798 : 1998 Methods of test for plastics 
containers (first revision) 

4905 Random sampling and 

2015/1SO randomization procedures (first 

24153 : 2009 revision) 

7328 : 2020 Specification for polyethylene 
material for moulding and 
extrusion (second revision) 

10146 : 1982 Specification for polyethylene for 


its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 


IS No. 


11342 : 1994/ 
ISO 6591-2 
1985 


11343 
2004/ISO 
6590-2 : 1986 


13360 


(Part 3/Sec 10) 
: 2021/1SO 
1183-1 : 2019 


(Part 3/Sec 11) 
: 2021/80 
1183-2 : 2019 


(Part 4/Sec 
1/Subsec 1) 
2018/ISO 
1133-1 : 2011 


(Part 4/See 
1/Subsec 2) 
2018/ISO 
1133-2 : 2011 


IS 17931 : 2022 


Title 


Packaging — Sacks made from 
thermoplastic films — 
Description and method of 
measurement (first revision) 


Packaging — Sacks made from 
thermoplastic films — 
Vocabulary (first revision) 


Plastics — Methods of testing 


Physical and dimensional 
properties, Section 10 
Determination of density of non- 
cellular plastics — Immersion 
method, liquid pyknometer 
method and titration method (first 
revision) 


Physical and dimensional 
properties, Section 11 
Determination of density of non- 
cellular plastics — Density 
gradient column method (first 
revision) 


Rheological properties, Section 1 
Determination of the Melt Mass- 
Flow Rate (MFR) and the Melt 
Volume-Flow Rate (MVR) of 
thermoplastics, Subsection 1 
Standard Method (first revision) 


Rheological properties, Section 1 
Determination of the melt Mass- 
Flow Rate (MFR) and the Melt 
Volume-Flow Rate (MVR) of 
thermoplastics, Subsection 2 
Method for materials sensitive to 


IS 17931 : 2022 


IS No. Title 


time-temperature history and/or 
moisture (first revision) 


(Part 5/Sec 1) : Mechanical properties, Section 1 


2021/ISO 527- Determination of tensile 
1 :2019 properties — General 
requirements (second revision) 
(Part 5/Sec 3) : Mechanical properties, Section 3 
2018/ ISO 527- Determination of tensile 
3 :1995 properties — Test conditions for 


films and sheets (first revision) 


(Part 5/Sec 6) : 
1999/ISO 
7765-1 : 1988 


Mechanical properties, Section 6 
Determination of impact 
resistance by the free-falling dart 
method — Staircase methods 


(Part 5/Sec 23) Mechanical properties, Section 
1996/ISO 23 Determination of tear 


6383-2 : 1983 resistance of plastics film and 
sheeting — Elmendorf method 

(Part 9/Sec 5) : Optical properties, Section 5 

1999 Determination of haze and 


luminous transmittance of 
transparent plastics 


(Part 11/Sec 1) 
: 1999/ISO 
8295 : 1995 


Special properties, Section 1 Film 
and sheeting — Determination of 
coefficients of friction 


3 GENERAL TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For this standard, the following terms and definitions 
shall apply: 


3.1 Plastic Film Bag — A container made essentially 
from a flattened tubular film of polyethylene flexible 
film as described in IS 2508, closed at least at one end 
or closed at both ends with a valve for filling of 
material. 


NOTE — Hereafter where the word bag, FFS bag, or 
heavy-duty bag is used in the text of this standard, the 
fabricated bag made from polyethylene film is to be 
understood. If no prefix is applied to a term under the 
definition, it is to be understood as an FFS bag. 


3.2 Flat Film — A thin flexible film made of 
polyethylene material in the form of a flat ply. The film 
shall be of a multilayer construction. 


3.3 Tubular Film — A thin flexible film made of 


polyethylene material in the form of a cylindrical tube. 
The film shall be of a multilayer construction. 


3.4 Ply — A flat or tubular film of polyethylene 
material, used for forming the walls of the bag. 


3.5 Tube — Flexible film in the form of a flattened 
cylinder. The tubular film may be a circular seamless 
film produced on a blown film plant or a flat film 
fabricated into a cylindrical tube by the longitudinal 
overlap of film edges and joined to form a center seal 
tube using heat sealing, ultrasonic welding, and hot air 
welding or combination thereof. The bags produced 
from a flat film and fabricated into a cylindrical tube by 
the longitudinal overlap of film edges and joining are 
known as centre seal bags. 


3.6 Flatten Tubular Film — A tube comprised solely 
of flattened cylindrical plies with or without gusset. 


3.7 Gusset — A fold inserted in the longitudinal edge 
of a tube or bag. 


3.8 Gusseted Tube — A tube with folds inserted in the 
longitudinal edges. 


3.9 Longitudinal Overlap — Areas of the longitudinal 
edge of a flat ply which are superimposed for joining to 
form a center seal tube. 


3.10 Transverse Overlap — Areas of cut tube ends 
which are superimposed for transverse joining to form 
a bottom and top closures. 


3.11 Joining — Bonding together of ply or tube to form 
a bag. The bonding process can be heat sealing, hot air 
welding, radio frequency or ultrasonic welding. 


3.12 Transverse Joining — Joining of transverse 
overlap ends of the cut tube at one end or both ends to 
form a bottom and top closure of the bag. The width of 
the seal line typically varies in the range of 2 to 6 mm, 
as per requirement. 


3.13 Gusseted Bag — A bag manufactured from a 
gusseted tube. 


3.14 Open Mouth Bag — Tube closed at the bottom 
end with an open top. An intermediate product of bag 
fabrication process. 


3.15 Seal Strength — Force per unit width of seal 
required to progressively separate two flexible films 
through the seal or joint, under the conditions of the 
test. 


3.16 Form Fill Seal (FFS) Process — A type of 
automated assembly-line product packaging system, 
commonly used in the bulk packaging industry. It 


consists of a vertical form fill seal machine which 
converts the flat or tubular film into a bag by first 
forming bottom closure and then filling the bag with 
material, followed with sealing of open mouth of the 
bag to form a top closure and discharge of filled bag 
from the filling station. 


3.17 Hot Seal Strength (Hot-Tack) of Film — Hot 
seal strength is a measure of the strength of a heat seal, 
tested immediately after sealing and the seal is in hot 
condition. During the high speed FFS packaging 
process, the newly formed hot seals are frequently 
exposed to disruptive forces, such as when contents are 
dropped into the bag. These forces act on the hot seal 
and if there is inadequate resistance the entire seal or 
part of the seal can break. 


3.18 Film Perforation — Holes pierced through the 
flexible film walls of the bag to facilitate the release of 
displaced air from the bag during the material filling 
process. The hole size and shape shall be designed in 
such a way that the inside material is protected from the 
outside environment. 


3.19 Film Embossing — A process typically 
conducted on bag walls using a set of patterned 
knurling rolls, in which a pattern of points or straight, 
angled lines is rolled on the plastic bag walls to improve 
bag to bag cohesion and thus enhance stackability 
during storage or transport. Generally, length way 
continuous bands, typically of 40 to 80 mm width are 
embossed on both sides of the film tube. 


3.20 Film Haze — The cloudiness or opacity in a 
transparent film or the portion of the light that is not 
transmitted through a film in a straight line. 


3.21 Film Openability — Ability of tubular flattened 
film to open easily during the bagging process for 
material filling. Plastic films tend to adhere together, 
often making it difficult to separate layers. Film 
openability is improved by the addition of anti-blocking 
additives. 


3.22 Coefficient of Friction (COF) Property of Film 
— The ability of film to slide smoothly on guiding rolls 
without any slip-stick effect during the bagging process 
is determined by COF property. Slip additive is added 
to polymer during the film extrusion process to 
decrease COF and to improve film sliding property. 


3.23 Surface Treatment of Films — The ability of 
polymer films to retain printing ink is primarily 
governed by the character of their surfaces and can be 
improved by one of several surface-treating techniques. 


IS 17931 : 2022 


For additional terms and definitions, IS 11342 and IS 
11343 may be referred. 


4 MANUFACTURE 
4.1 Raw Material 


4.1.1 Primary raw material used for manufacturing film 
shall consist of Linear Low Density Polyethylene 
(LLDPE), and Low Density Polyethylene (LDPE) 
according to IS 7328. However High Density 
Polyethylene (HDPE) as per IS 7328 may or may not 
be used depending upon the functional requirement of 
a bag packed in form fill seal machine (FFS). To 
achieve desired film properties, the combination of 
various types of polyethylene, such as High density 
polyethylene (HDPE), Linear low density polyethylene 
(LLDPE), Low density polyethylene (LDPE), and 
polyolefin based plastomers may be used. 


4.1.2 Melt Flow Index (MFI) of polyethylene raw 
material shall be as agreed to between the buyer and the 
seller, and, shall be in the range 0.02 to 4.0 g/10 min 
when determined in accordance with IS 13360 (Part 
4/Sec I/Subsec 1) or IS 13360 (Part 4/Sec 1/Subsec 2) 
under test conditions 190 °C temperature and 2.16 kg 
load. 


4.1.3 Density of polyethylene raw material shall be as 
agreed between the buyer and the seller, and, shall be 
in the range 913 to 957 kg/m? at 27 °C and 915 to 960 
kg/m? at 23 °C when determined in accordance with IS 
13360 (Part 3/Sec 10) and IS 13360 (Part 3/Sec 11). 


4.1.4 Antioxidants, slip, antiblock, antistatic, UV 
stabilizer additives and colour pigment masterbatch 
may be used in the manufacturing of film. Polyethylene 
raw materials used for the manufacture of masterbatch 
may include copolymers of ethylene and higher olefins 
with density 910 to 930 kg/m? at 27 °C, in which the 
higher olefin constituents does not exceed 10 percent 
(m/m). 


4.2 Film Manufacturing 


4.2.1 Thickness and Mass — Film used in the 
manufacture of bags shall be multilayer and in tubular 
film form or flat film. For packing granular material, 
the film shall have a minimum thickness of 120 microns 
when measured as mentioned in Annex A. The 
minimum mass shall be 111 grams per square meter 
(GSM) when measured following the procedure given 
in Annex B-2. 


4.2.2 Visual Observation — Film shall be uniform in 
texture and finish, with no visible defects, such as 
holes, tears, or blisters. The film shall be free from pin- 


IS 17931 : 2022 


holes, streaks, particles of foreign matter, and gauge 
variation bands. The film shall show no impression of 
handling on the surface of the film. The film shall have 
a uniform and wrinkle-free surface, good film 
openability, and good heat-sealing properties. As 
agreed between buyer and seller, the film shall be 
defined for colour and haze (opacity). For polymer 
packaging application, white colour films with a 
minimum haze value of 80 percent is commonly used. 


4.2.3 Film Embossing — Smooth surface of plastic film 
bags have lower Coefficient of Friction (COF) and 
therefore, has difficulty in stacking filled bags due to 
sliding tendency. Embossing effect on the bag walls 
using a set of knurling rollers may be employed to 
enhance inter bag cohesion. Alternately, the application 
of glue or varnish overcoat on the outer surface of bags 
or any other suitable methods to improve inter bag 
cohesion may be employed. The embossed pattern on 
the bag walls shall be performed from inside to outside 
so that the raised embossed pattern is on the outer side 
of the bag walls. Type of embossed pattern, embossed 
size, shape, and embossing density per unit area, may 
vary depending on the desired stackability and shall be 
specified as agreed between buyer and seller. 


4.2.4 Surface Treatment of Films and Printing — 
Electrical discharge treatment, such as corona 
treatment, has been found to increase the wetting 
tension of a polymer film and its ability to accept and 
retain printing ink. The film tube shall be surface 
treated sufficiently to achieve desired treatment level 
for better ink adhesion and printing quality. The film 
shall be printed in mono or multicolor using 
flexography, gravure, or digital printing process. The 
normal range of surface treatment is 36-44 dynes/cm. 


4.2.5 Film Roll Packing — The flatten tubular film 
produced shall be wound and supplied to FFS bagging 
units in the form of neatly and firmly wound rolls. The 
film rolls shall have clear edges and be free from 
telescopic winding. The film rolls shall be packed and 
labelled as agreed to between the buyer and seller. Each 
individual roll shall be packed using suitable protective 
covering such as foam sheet, corrugated paper sheet, 
stretch wrap film or a combination thereof to prevent 
damage. Edge protectors may also be used wherever 
necessary to avoid film damage. The film roll is an 
intermediate product of the FFS bag fabrication and 
bagging process. 


4.2.6 Storage Condition — Film rolls shall be stored in 
a ventilated, cool and dry place, covered warehouse at 
a temperature below 40 °C, and protected from direct 
sunlight, smoke, fumes, open flame, and radiation. 


5 CONSTRUCTION 


5.1 Material Holding Capacity of Bag 


The bag shall have a nominal capacity of holding 25 kg 
material. 


5.2 Bag Design 


A tubular gusseted bag with bottom end and top end 
closures is the commonly used bag design for the online 
FFS packaging process and is considered for this 
standard. 


The length, width, and gusset depth of the bag shall be 
according to the dimensions of the FFS forming and 
sealing system, bulk density of polymer material to be 
filled, and the type of material (powder or granular) to 
be filled. The tolerance in length, width, and other 
dimensional parameters of the bag shall be in 
accordance with the acceptable limits given in 7.4. 


The gusseted flattened tubular film of desired cut length 
is closed at both ends by transverse overlapping of tube 
ends followed with transverse joining as shown in Fig. 
1, as top weld and bottom weld. Primarily these bags 
are closed at the bottom and then filled from the open 
top mouth and therefore are without a side filling valve. 
The bag formation during the FFS process is described 
in 5.5. 


5.3 Dimensional Designations of Bag 


This part of the standard specifies a method for 
measuring and expressing the dimensions of empty 
bags as shown in Fig. 1. The dimensions in millimeters 
shall be specified for various dimensional designations 
as given in 5.4, when measured as mentioned in Annex 
B-1. 


5.4 Description for Dimensional Designations of Bag 


5.4.1 Total Bag Length (Lt) — Distance between the 
top edge and bottom edge of the bag. Total bag length 
(Lt) is the total of (et + L + eb). 


5.4.2 Bag Length (L) — Distance between the 
transverse, top and, bottom weld lines of gusseted bag, 
measured at the center, perpendicular to the bottom. 


5.4.3 Bag Width (W) — Distance between longitudinal 
edges of the gusseted bag, measured at the center, 
parallel to the bag bottom. 


5.4.4 Gusset Depth (g) — Width of fold inserted in the 
longitudinal edges of a gusseted bag. 


5.4.5 Corner Seal Weld (C) — Diagonal seal weld at 
four corners of the bag. The slanting length of the 
diagonal seal weld is determined by the gusset depth 
and is defined by C, and C2. Diagonal weld seal at bag 


corners facilitates the formation of flat top and flat 
bottom for filled bags, comparable to brick type 


Sack Top 


i W 


er 
z Top weld 


a, 


IS 17931 : 2022 


structure. 


— "| 


Corner seal weld (C) 


J 
inside edge of gusset 


C Bottom weld 


I 
Sack Bottom i 


ky 


Keys: 


Total bag length (Lt); bag length (bottom weld to top weld) (L); bag width after gusseting (W); gusset depth (g); corner seal weld (C land C2); 
top end strip (et); bottom end strip (eb); thick dotted line indicate transverse seal weld line width, (st) for top weld and (sb) for bottom weld. 


FIG. 1 DIMENSIONAL DESIGNATIONS OF GUSSETED BAG WITH TRANSVERSE SEAL CLOSURES FOR ONLINE FFS 
PROCESS 


5.4.6 Weld Line Width(s) — Width of transverse weld 
line at bottom closure (sb) and at top closure (st). 


5.4.7 End Strip Length (e) — Distance between the 
transverse bottom weld line and bottom edge (eb) and, 
transverse top weld line and top edge (et), measured at 
the center, parallel to the bag length. The end strip 
length (e) also includes the weld line width (sb) for 
bottom end strip length and (st) for top end strip 
length. 


5.5 Description of Bag Formation Process 


5.5.1 The bag shall be formed, filled, and sealed on the 
form, fill, and sealing machine. Film bags shall be 


produced from flattened tubular gusseted film, cut to 
the required length. The bag essentially shall be closed 
across the bag width at the bottom and top ends to form 
closures. 


5.5.2 During the online FFS process, the tubular 
gusseted film in roll form is unwounded from the roll 
and is formed into an intermediary, open mouth bag 
by first forming bottom closure with an open top. 
These bags are then filled online with the 
predetermined quantity of polymer product and 
subsequently sealed at the top end to form the top 
closure. The bags are filled with material, leaving 
adequate headspace in the bag for sealing operation. 


IS 17931 : 2022 


The entire FFS process takes place in a continuous 
mode and consist of several stages includes unwinding 
of film from the roll, intermediary bag formation with 
bottom sealing, product filling from the top end, 
sealing of top end to close the filled bag and, discharge 
of filled bag from filling station on to the release 
conveyor belt. During the bag fabrication process, the 
film tube shall be able to unwind easily, open easily, 
slide smoothly on guiding rolls, and weld effectively 
to form durable and leak-proof closures. 


6 SPECIMEN CONDITIONING 


The film specimens shall be conditioned for a 
minimum of 24 h to moisture equilibrium from the dry 
side in the standard atmosphere of 65 + 5 percent 
relative humidity and 27 + 2°C temperature as laid 
down in IS 196, prior to testing. 


7 REQUIREMENTS 
The bags shall conform to the following requirements: 
7.1 Material holding capacity 


The material holding capacity of the bag shall be 25 
kg. 


7.2 Film Thickness 


The film thickness shall be as agreed between buyer 
and seller, however, shall not be less than 120 microns 
(4.2.1). The film thickness shall be measured in 
accordance with Annex A. The tolerance on film 
thickness at any given point and the average thickness 
of polyethylene film for various thicknesses shall be 
+8 percent for peak to peak and +5 percent for average 
thickness. 


7.3 Bag Dimensions 


The bag dimensions may vary as per the bulk density 
of polymer to be packed and shall be as agreed 
between buyer and seller. Bag dimensions such as total 
bag length (Lt), bag length (L), bag width (W), gusset 
depth (g), corner seal weld (C); top end strip (et); 
bottom end strip (eb); transverse weld line width, (st) 
for top weld and (sb) for bottom weld, shall be 
measured as per the procedure described in Annex B- 
1. The measured dimensions and tolerance shall 
comply with the specified dimensions. 


i) Tolerance on total bag length, mm 


The tolerance on total bag length shall be as given 
below: 


700 mm and up to 900 mm — +10 mm 


ii) Tolerance on bag width, mm 


The tolerance on bag width shall be as given 
below: 


350 mm and up to 600 mm — +5 mm 
iii) Tolerance on gusset depth, mm 


The tolerance on gusset depth shall be as given 
below: 


Up to 80 mm — +3 mm 


iv) Gusset offset, mm 


The gusset offset, defined as the difference in 
gusset depth of the top and bottom layer of the 
gusseted tube measured at the linear edge when 
superimposed one above the other, shall not be 
more than 3 mm. 


v) Tolerance on the top end strip (et) and bottom end 
strip (eb) shall be +3 mm. 


vi) Tolerance on transverse weld line width, (st) for 
top weld, transverse weld line width, (sb) for 
bottom weld, and corner seal weld (C) shall be +1 
mm. 


7.4 Mass of Bag 


The mass of the empty bag may vary with bag 
dimensions and shall be determined by the actual 
weighing of the empty bag using a suitable weighing 
scale, accurate to the +0.5 g. The mass of the bag shall 
also be determined by the method described in Annex 
B-3. The tolerance on the mass of the bag shall be +3 
percent. 


7.5 Performance Requirements for Film 


7.5.1 Visual Inspection — The visual inspection 
parameters shall be prior defined and agreed upon 
between buyer and seller. The film used for making 
bag walls shall be uniform in colour, texture, and 
finish. The film shall be free from pinholes, fisheyes, 
gels, un-melted polymer streaks, and particles of 
foreign matter. There shall be no other visible defects, 
such as holes, tears, blisters, wrinkles, or black dots. 
Film sample selected for testing of properties given in 
7.5.2 to 7.5.9, shall be visually inspected for any 
defects and shall be free from folds, creases, 
perforations, and embossing. 


7.5.2 Haze — The haze or opacity of polyethylene film 
when tested as per IS 13360 (Part 9/Sec 5) shall be 80 


percent, minimum. The test specimen shall be a disc 
shape of 50 mm in diameter or a square with 50 mm 
sides. The specimen shall be free of dust, scratches, 
voids, or any visible defects. Film haze varies with 
film thickness and colouration. 


7.5.3 Coefficient of Friction — The dynamic 
coefficient of friction for the film, when tested in 
accordance with the test as prescribed in IS 13360 
(Part 11/Sec 1), shall be > 0.4. The test shall be carried 
out on the outer surface of the film and shall be 
mentioned in the test report. If desired by the buyer, 
the coefficient of friction for the film to film may also 
be determined and reported. 


7.5.4 Ash Content —The film, when tested for ash 
content in accordance with the test procedure given in 
Annex C, shall not be more than 2.2 percent. 


7.5.5 Tensile Strength at Yield — The tensile strength 
at yield of the film when tested in accordance with the 
test procedure given in IS 13360 (Part 5/Sec 1) and IS 
13360 (Part 5/Sec 3), shall be >13 MPa (132 kgf/cm?) 
in the lengthwise direction and in the crosswise 
direction. 


7.5.6 Nominal Tensile Elongation at Break — The 
Nominal tensile elongation at break of the film when 
tested in accordance with the test procedure given in 
IS 13360 (Part 5/Sec 1) and IS 13360 (Part 5/Sec 3), 
shall be >700 percent in the lengthwise direction and 
>750 percent in the crosswise direction. 


The test specimen for tensile strength at yield and 
nominal tensile elongation at break shall be strip- 
shaped with 15 mm width and 150 mm minimum 
length. The gauge length marks shall be 50 mm + 1 
mm apart and approximately equidistant from the 
midpoint. The initial distance between grips shall be 
100 mm +5 mm (refer to Specimen Type 2 of IS 13360 
(Part 5/Sec 3)) and the tensile testing speed 500 
mm/min. At least 10 specimens each, shall be tested 
for lengthwise and crosswise directions. 


7.5.7 Dart Impact Resistance — The dart impact 
failure load of polyethylene film when tested in 
accordance with the test as prescribed in Method A of 
IS 13360 (Part 5/Sec 6), shall be >660 gf for 120- 
micron thickness film. For film thickness higher than 
120 microns, the dart impact strength of film shall 
comply to 5.5 gf/micron of film. Test method A 
employs a dart with 38 mm +1 mm diameter 
hemispherical head dropped from a height of 0.66 m + 
0.01 m. 


7.5.8 Tear Resistance —The tear resistance of 
polyethylene film when tested in accordance with the 


IS 17931 : 2022 


test as prescribed in IS 13360 (Part 5/Sec 23), shall be 
>960 gf in the lengthwise direction and >2 400 gf in 
crosswise direction for 120-micron thickness film. 
Tear strength of film shall comply to 8 gf/micron of 
film for lengthwise and 20 gf/micron of film for width- 
wise directions. The test specimen shall be of D-shape, 
constant radius type with a radius of 43 mm, length 75 
mm, and the initial slit of 20 mm. 


7.5.9 Heat Seal Strength (Hot-tack) — The hot-tack 
strength of film when tested in accordance with the test 
procedure given in Annex D, shall be greater than 8 
N/25 mm. The test specimen shall be strip-shaped with 
25 mm width. 


7.5.10 Ink Adhesion Test — Printing shall be neat and 
clean without any defects. Printed bags when tested for 
ink adhesion in accordance with the test method 
described in IS 2798 and as given in Annex E of this 
standard, shall not show any significant removal of the 
print. All prints shall be legible. 


7.5.11 Drop Impact Resistance of Filled Bags —The 
filled bags, when tested for drop impact test, according 
to the method given in Annex F, shall not burst or tear 
and there shall not be any material spillage from weld 
seams or from other parts of the bag. 


8 STORAGE 

All filled bags shall be stored in a ventilated, cool and 
dry place, covered warehouse at a temperature below 
40°C and protected from direct sunlight, smoke, 
fumes, open flame, and radiation. 

9 MARKING 

9.1 Marking on Bag 


Each filled bag shall be marked or labelled with the 
following information: 


a) Name of the product; 

b) Indication of source of manufacturer and address; 
c) Bag number and batch number; 

d) Month and year of manufacture; 

e) Net weight of material packed (kg); 


f) Polymer identification code and recycling symbol 
according to IS 14534; 


g) Pictorial symbol for recommended handling and 
storage instructions; and 


IS 17931 : 2022 


h) Any other statutory requirements. 


9.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of this 
standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


10 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ECO 
MARK 


10.1 General Requirement 


10.1.1 The product shall conform to the requirements 
for quality, safety and performance prescribed. 


10.1.2 The manufacturer shall produce to BIS the 
consent clearance as per the provisions of Water 
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 along 
with the authorization, if required under Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 and the Rules made thereunder 
while applying for the ECO-Mark. The manufacturer 
shall produce documentary evidence with respect to 
the compliance of regulation under Prevention of Food 
Safety and Standards Act, 2005 and Drugs and 
Cosmetic Act, 1940 and Rules made thereunder, 
wherever necessary. 


10.1.3 The product must display a list of critical 
ingredients in descending order of quantity present 
expressed as a percent of the total. The list of such 
ingredients shall be identified by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


10.1.4 The product packaging shall display in brief the 
criteria based on which the product has been labelled 
as ‘Environment Friendly’. 


10.1.5 The material used for product packaging shall 
be recyclable or biodegradable. 


10.1.6 It shall also suitably mention that the ECO 
MARK label is applicable only to the packaging 
material/package if the content is not separately 


covered under ECO MARK. It may be stated that ECO 
MARK is applicable to the product or packaging 
material or both. 


11 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA 
CONFORMITY 


FOR 


11.1 The compliance to the present standard comprises 
performance testing of both, bags and the film used for 
making bag walls. 


11.2 Sampling 


11.2.1 Lot — All bags filled on the FFS machine, if 
produced using identical construction film and under 
similar manufacturing conditions shall be grouped 
together to constitute a lot. 


11.2.2 The conformity of the lot to the requirements of 
the standard shall be determined based on the test 
carried out on the samples selected from it. 


11.2.3 Tests for determining the conformity of the lot 
to the requirements of specification shall be done on 
each lot separately. The conformity of the lot to the 
requirements of the standard shall be determined based 
on tests carried out on samples selected from it. The 
bag samples shall be selected at random from the lot 
for testing purposes. To ensure the randomness of the 
selection, the procedure given in IS 4905 may be 
followed. Film test specimens from the bag walls shall 
be drawn from a middle portion of the selected sample 
bags and shall be free from creases or any defects. 


11.2.4 The number of bag samples to be selected for 
testing shall be in accordance with col 3 of Table 1 for 
visual inspection, film thickness, bag dimensions, and 
mass of bag requirements, and shall be in accordance 
with the col 4 of Table 1 for tensile strength at yield, 
nominal tensile elongation at break, dart impact 
resistance and tear strength requirements. The bag 
samples shall be selected in accordance with col 5 of 
Table 1 for the determination of film properties, haze, 
COF property, ash content, hot seal strength, ink 
adhesion property, and drop impact resistance of filled 
bags. 


IS 17931 : 2022 


Table 1 Sample Size and Criteria for Conformity 
(Clause 11.2.4) 


SI No. Number of bags in a lot Sample size for visual Sample size for tensile strength Sample size for determination of 
inspection, film at yield, nominal tensile haze, COF property, ash content, 
thickness, bag elongation at break, dart impact hot seal strength, ink adhesion 
dimensions and mass resistance and tear resistance property and drop impact resistance 
of bag requirements requirements of filled bags requirements 

a) 2) (3) (4) (5) 
(i) up to 250 000 4 2 1 
(ii) 250 001 to 500 000 8 4 2 
Gii) 500 001 to 1 000 000 12 6 3 
NOTE — For bags with change in raw material f) Film COF property shall be as agreed between buyer and 


formulation, film thickness, film tube dimensions or print 
matter, the bags shall be grouped under new lot. 


11.3 Criteria for Conformity 


11.3.1 The lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements 
of this standard if the following conditions are satisfied: 


a) 


b) 
c) 


d) 


e) 


The number of samples not complying with visual 
inspections shall not be more than 1 percent of the sample 
size. 

Film thickness shall be as agreed between buyer and seller 
and comply with the tolerances specified in 7.2. 

Bag dimensions shall be as agreed between buyer and seller 
and shall comply with the tolerances specified in 7.3. 

None of the bags weighs less than the respective lower 
specified limit after allowing tolerance of + 3 percent on 
individual bag specified in 7.4. A higher mass of bag may 
be accepted. 

Film haze property shall be as agreed between buyer and 
seller and shall comply with 7.5.2. 


g) 


0) 


(k 


Oo 


D 


seller and shall comply with 7.5.3. 

None of the film samples has ash content greater than the 
specified value given in 7.5.4. 

The average values of tensile strength at yield, nominal 
tensile elongation at break, dart impact resistance and tear 
resistance are not less than the value specified in 7.5.5 to 
6.5.8 and none of the individual test values is more than 10 
percent below the specified value. 

The average values of hot seal strength of film shall not be 
less than the value specified in 7.5.9 and none of the 
individual test values is more than 10 percent below the 
specified value. 

Film printing shall be neat and clean and shall not show any 
significant removal of printed matter after the ink adhesion 
test specified in 7.5.10. All prints shall be legible. 

None of the bags shall fail in the drop impact resistance test 
as specified in 7.5.11. 


11.2.2 The film used for making bags shall be declared as 
conforming to the requirements of the standard if all test results for 
different characteristics given in 11.3.1 are found to meet the 
relevant requirements of the standard. 


IS 17931 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.2 and 7.2) 


DETERMINATION OF FILM THICKNESS 


A-1 APPARATUS 


A dead weight dial micrometer with a flat anvil of 6 
mm diameter or larger in the area and 4.8 mm diameter 
flat surface on the head of the spindle or a spring dial 
micrometer (dial thickness gauge) which has been 
calibrated against a dead weight dial micrometer shall 
be used. In case of dispute, only a dead weight dial 
micrometer shall be used and the reading shall be 
taken between 15 s and 2 min after the load is applied. 


A-2 SPECIMENS 


Test five specimens, at least 100 mm x 100 mm in 
area, taken uniformly across the width of the bag 
walls. 


A-3 PROCEDURE 


Dry and clean the surface of the anvil and spindle 
head, and of the specimen. Place the specimen on the 
anvil and lower the spindle head on to it slowly. The 
total load applied by the spindle shall be 110 g. Make 
one measurement on each specimen approximately at 
the centre of the specimen. Take the mean of the 
measurements of all the specimens of a sample to 
obtain the average thickness of the sample. 


A-4 ACCURACY 


This method can produce measurements with a 
maximum error of +0.002 5 mm. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.2.1, 5.3, 7.3 and 7.4) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR BAG DIMENSIONAL PARAMETERS, FILM MASS PER UNIT AREA 
AND MASS OF BAG 


B-1 METHOD OF MEASUREMENT FOR 
VARIOUS BAG DIMENSIONS 


B-1.1 Apparatus 


Metallic ruler or a suitable measuring instrument 
graduated in millimeters, and capable of measuring 
dimensions of tubular film or bag to an accuracy of 1 
mm. 


B-1.2 Measurement procedure 


Lay each bag as selected in Table 1 on the flat 
horizontal surface of the working table. Render it free 
from creases and wrinkles and measure total bag 
length (Lt), bag length (L), bag width (W), gusset 
depth (g), corner seal weld (C); top end strip (et); 
bottom end strip (eb); transverse weld line width, (st) 
for top weld and (sb) for bottom weld, about the 
middle to the nearest 1 mm. Measure at least 10 
samples. 


B-1.3 Calculation and expression of results 


Calculate the dimensions as the mean of the 
determinations for each dimensional parameter of the 
bag as specified in 7.3 and express them in millimeters 
to the nearest millimeter. 


10 


B-2 METHOD OF TEST FOR 
DETERMINATION OF FILM MASS PER UNIT 
AREA 


Lay each bag as selected in Table 1 flat on a table. 
Render it free from wrinkles and cut out the film using 
a 100 mm x 100 mm template from the center portion 
of the bag walls. Weigh the cut piece sample precisely 
and compute the mass of film in gram for one square 
meter (GSM). 


B-3 METHOD FOR CALCULATION OF MASS 
OF BAG 


B-3.1 Calculation of mass of the bag 


Calculate the mass of bags with the help of the 
following formula as the case may be: 


M = (Lt) x 2 (W+2g) x mx 10° 
where 


M = mass of bag, in gram; 

Lt = total length of the bag, in mm (measured for 
bottom edge to top edge); 

W = width of the bag, in mm; 

g = depth of gusset, in mm; 


m = mass of film, in gram per square meter (g/m”); 


B-3.2 Report 


The calculated mass of the bag shall be reported in 
gram (e). 


IS 17931 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 7.5.4) 


DETERMINATION OF ASH CONTENT 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


The procedure is used to find out the inorganic residue 
in the film sample by ashing it in a muffle furnace. A 
weighed amount of film specimen is heated to 550°C. 
The polymer content of the sample (organic portion) 
is burnt at 550°C until a constant mass of inorganic 
matter is obtained. The residue (inorganic matter) is 
reported in terms of percentage ash content in each 
sample. 


C-2 TEST APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Weighing balance, accurate to 0.001 g, bunsen 
burner, silica triangle and tripod, silica crucibles 
(enough volume to accommodate 10 g of sample), 
crucible holder, gloves. 

C-2.2 Muffle furnace, capable of being controlled 
thermostatically at 550°C + 10°C. 

C-2.3 Desiccator, containing an effective drying 
agent, such as silica gel, that does not react chemically 
with ash components. 


C-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


C-3.1 Clean the crucible and heat at 550°C + 10°C for 
10-15 min and cool it in a desiccator. 
C-3.2 Weigh the empty crucible to the nearest 0.001 


g. 


11 


C-3.3 Weigh nearly 10 g of film sample in the crucible 
(nearest to 0.001 g). 


C-3.4 Heat the crucible directly on the burner so that 
the sample burns slowly, and loss of ash is avoided. 
Continue burning until no more smoke is evolved. 
Necessary care shall be taken to effective venting of 
smoke. Use of air pollution control devices such as wet 
scrubbers and electrostatic precipitators for effective 
filtering and removing of suspended particulate 
matters, soot and ash from exhaust smoke stream 
before it exits the smokestack is suggested. 


C-3.5 Transfer the crucible in the muffle furnace, 
which is already maintained at approx. 550 °C and 
keep it inside for about 2 h. 

C-3.6 Remove the crucible from the furnace and cool 
it to room temperature in a desiccator, weigh it and 
record the weight to the accuracy of 0.001 g. 

C-3.7 Keep the crucible in the muffle furnace for 
another half an hour, cool in a desiccator and weigh 
again. Repeat the procedure until the constant mass is 
obtained. 


C-4 REPORT 


Weight of ash 
Weight of film sample 


Percent ash content = x 100 


IS 17931 : 2022 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 7.5.9) 


HOT SEAL STRENGTH (HOT-TACK) OF FILM 


D-1 TEST PRINCIPLE 


D-1.1 Hot seal strength (hot-tack) tester measures the 
strength of heat seals formed between thermoplastic 
surfaces of flexible films, immediately after the seal 
has been made and before it cools to ambient 
temperature. This property is important since this 
situation frequently occurs on vertical Form Fill Seal 
(FFS) packaging. In this process, the material intended 
to be packed are dropped into the bag immediately 
after the bottom seal is made. Since the content can be 
heavy, around 25 kg in weight, the hot seal must be 
able to withstand high loads, thus requiring a high hot- 
tack force. 


D-1.2 This test method is restricted to instrumented 
hot-tack testing, requiring a testing machine that 
automatically heat seals a test specimen and after the 
conclusion of the sealing cycle, determines the 
strength of a hot seal at specified grip separation rate. 
The measured hot seal strength is plotted against the 
sealing temperature to determine the maximum hot 
seal strength (hot-tack) of the film and the sealing 
temperature range. 


D-2 TERMINOLOGY 


D-2.1 Adhesive Failure — A failure mode in which 
the seal fails at the original interface between the 
surfaces being sealed. 


D-2.2 Burnthrough — A state or condition of a heat 
seal characterized by melted holes and thermal 
distortion. Burnthrough indicates that the sealing 
conditions (time or temperature, or both) were too high 
to produce an acceptable seal. 


D-2.3 Cohesive Failure — A failure mode where 
either or both sealed film plies fail by splitting 
approximately parallel to the seal, and the seal itself 
remains intact. 


D-2.4 Cooling Time — Time in the instrument cycle 
between the opening of the seal bars and the 
termination of the peel force measurement. 


D-2.5 Cycle — The combination of instrument 
mechanical and electrical operations automatically 
performed from initiation of sealing through peeling 
apart a seal and measuring the hot-tack strength. The 
cycle can be broken down into four phases:sealing, 
delay, withdrawal, and peel as shown below. 


12 


The Four Phases of One Instrument Cycle 


| Seal | Delay | Withdrawal ner (force) 


Measurement 
Increasing Time —> 


=0 


time 


D-2.6 Delay Time — The time interval from when the 
heat-seal bars open after sealing two film surfaces, to 
the point at which withdrawal of the sample from the 
seal bars is initiated. 


D-2.7 Dwell Time — The time interval during the seal 
phase when the sealing bars are in contact with, and 
exerting pressure on the films being sealed. 


D-2.8 Heat Seal (Hot-tack) Strength — Force per 
unit width of a seal needed to peel apart a hot seal 
measured at a specified time interval after sealing but 
prior to the temperature of seal reaching ambient. The 
desired outcome of the test is to peel apart the seal 
formed by the test instrument. Other types of film 
failure in the tensile phase of the instrument test cycle 
may not represent hot-tack strength. 


D-2.9 Heat Seal (Hot-Tack) Curve — A plot of 
measured seal strength as a function of sealing 
temperature at a fixed dwell time and sealing pressure. 


D-2.10 Heat Sealability The ability of 
thermoplastic polymers and blends, when comprising 
a sealing surface of a flexible film, that defines how 
well the material bonds to itself or a dissimilar material 
upon the application of pressure, heat, and dwell 
(time), as judged by the heat seal curve. 


D-2.11 Seal Initiation Temperature — Sealing 
temperature at which a heat seal of minimum 
measurable strength is produced. 


D-2.12 Sealing Interface — Interface of the two film 
surfaces being sealed. 


D-2.13 Sealing Pressure — Force per unit area of seal 
applied to the material by the sealing bars during the 
sealing process, with simultaneous transfer of heat, to 
fuse two surfaces together to form a seal. 


D-2.14 Sealing Temperature Maximum 
temperature reached at the interface between the two 


film surfaces being sealed during the dwell time of the 
sealing cycle. 


D-2.15 Withdrawal Time — Time interval from the 
end of the delay phase to the beginning of the peel of 
the hot seal. 


D-2.16 Ultimate Seal Strength — Final value of 
strength that is reached after the heat seal has both 
cooled to ambient temperature and achieved stability 
in strength. 


D-3 APPARATUS 


Hot-tack tester is used for testing the hot seal strength 
under accurately controlled conditions. This test 
method measures the hot seal strength of flexible 
films. 


D-3.1 Capabilities 


An automated sealing and tensile testing instrument 
having the following minimum capabilities: 


i) Equipped with two heated seal bars (seal bar 
width of 10 mm each) for making heat-seals; 

ii) User- selectable and precise control of seal bar 
temperatures, sealing pressure and sealing 
dwell time; 

iii) Automatic activation of the withdrawal and 
pull cycles when seal bars open; 

iv) User-selectable constant rate of grip 
separation; 

v) Electro-mechanical system to measure the 
force required to peel apart the seal; 

vi) Display of observations and measurements in 


SI units; and 

vil) A suitable computing system, software and 
display screen to control a foresaid operations, 
calculations of responses and display of the 
results in digital and graphical format. 


D-3.2 Test Parameter Setting 


A wide range of setting for each test parameter enables 
testing of various materials to suit each application: 


i) Sealing temperature for top and lower sealing 
jaws, set individually; 

ii) Sealing pressure; 

iii) Sequence timers for Dwell time and Delay 
time; 

iv) Grip separation rate or peeling speed; and 

v) Output configuration and recording. 


D-3.3 Calibration 


13 


IS 17931 : 2022 


Calibration of the hot-tack tester shall be performed in 
accordance with the equipment manufacturer’s 
instructions and should include, seal bar temperature, 
seal bar pressure, phase times (dwell time, delay time 
and withdrawal time), peeling rate and force 
measurement transducer. The interval between 
calibrations shall be determined based on the 
frequency of use and stability of calibration. 


D-4 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 
D-4.1 Sample Shape and Size 


D-4.1.1 The test specimens shall consist of rectangular 
strips of uniform width 25 mm and specimen length 
300 mm. Tolerance shall be +0.5 percent. A width- 
thickness ratio of at least 8 shall be used. 


D-4.2 Sample Preparation 


D-4.2.1 The film specimen shall be uniform in 
thickness, texture and shall be free from folds, tears, 
gels, pin-holes and particles of foreign matter which 
are likely to cause premature failures. The edges shall 
be parallel to within 5 percent of the width over the 
length of the specimen between the grips. 


D-4.2.2 Wherever possible, the test specimens shall be 
selected such that thickness is uniform to within 10 
percent of the thickness over the length of the 
specimen between the grips in the case of materials 
200 microns or less in thickness and to within 5 
percent in the case of materials greater than 200 
microns in thickness but less than 1 000 microns in 
thickness. 


D-4.2.3 Specimens shall be prepared by cutting test 
material in the Machine Direction (MD). For cutting 
of specimens, devices that use razor blades have 
proven especially suitable for materials having an 
elongation-at-break above 10 to 20 percent. The use of 
punch press or striking dies is not recommended 
because poor and inconsistent specimen edges may be 
produced. 


D-5 TEST PROCEDURE 
D-5.1 Operation Sequence of Test 


The hot-tack tester simulates heat sealing on an 
automatic packaging machine. It makes a hot seal and 
stresses it under pre-programmed conditions. 


D-5.1.1 First the operator selects the desired test 
parameter values in the monitoring system supported 
with suitable software by using the keyboard. The film 
sample is then first fixed in the lower specimen grip 


IS 17931 : 2022 


which is connected to a peeling actuator and then the 
other end is fixed in the upper specimen grip which is 
connected to a load cell transducer. The testing 
sequence is then activated, and the lower sample grip 
is moved to its upper position. The sample is 
automatically folded between the sealing bars with a 
special specimen fold insertion mechanism. The hot 
sealing bars maintained at pre-set temperature start 
closing to the pre-set sealing pressure and after the pre- 
set dwell time elapsed, the seal bars open. At the end 
of the sealing time, and after a pre-set delay time 
elapsed, the peeling actuator with lower specimen grip 
moves down with a pre-set test speed and peels the hot 
seal totally apart. During peeling, the force transducer 
attached to the upper specimen grip measures the hot- 
tack force. The signal from the transducer is 
transmitted to the computing system to initiate data 
processing, displaying and storing of the test data. The 
maximum force required to peel apart the seal is the 
hot-tack force at a given seal temperature. 


D-5.1.2 Two sample strips are sealed by applying 
pressure from seal bars under defined conditions of 
temperature, pressure and contact time (dwell time). 
The strips may be either the same film or dissimilar 
films. Some instrument designs allow the use of a 
single strip of film which is cut during the sealing 
phase to form two strips. 


D-5.1.3 The grips are specially designed for easy 
attachment of the sample. The clamping plates of the 
grips are automatically activated and firmly hold the 
sample during the test. Vertical movement of lower 
grip is controlled by an electric motor that enables 
accurate positioning and speed. The fully automatic 
folding device provides perfect alignment of sample 
for sealing process and a fully operator-independent 
operation. 


D-5.1.4 Both seal bars shall be heated at a selected 
temperature to achieve a good quality seal. The seal 
bar faces may either be smooth or textured and may be 
coated or covered with a material to promote easy 
release from the hot film. The sealing bars are teflon 
coated to prevent sample sticking. The sealing bars 


include integrated heating elements and 
thermocouples to keep the selected sealing 
temperature constant regardless of the ambient 
temperature. 


D-5.1.5 When the bars of the sealing unit open, the 
sealed strip specimen is automatically withdrawn from 
between the seal bars by retraction of the grips holding 
the ends of the specimen. 


D-5.1.6 As the grips move apart at a set speed and the 
sealed sample is peeled to eventual failure at the seal, 


14 


the maximum force required to peel apart the seal is 
measured by the testing machine. 


D-5.1.7 The computing system record and store the 
test data and plots the measured hot seal strength 
versus sealing temperature and report the sealing 
temperature at which the maximum hot seal strength 
(hot-tack) is observed. 


D-5.2 Test Procedure 


D-5.2.1 Check the availability of compressed air with 
desired pressure. 


D-5.2.2 Ensure the sealing bar surfaces are clean 
before test. 


D-5.2.3 Turn on the computing and monitoring system 
of the testing equipment and open the hot-tack test 
software. 


D-5.2.4 After initialization of software, enter preset 
values of sealing parameters to the machine controller. 
Sealing conditions for hot-tack testing shall be the 
same for all makes and types of test equipment. 


a) Temperature — Set both sealing bars to the 
same temperature, which may vary depending 
on the properties of the material under test. In 
running a hot-tack curve, seal temperature is set 
initially just below the softening temperature 
and typically increased in 5 °C to 10 °C 
intervals, to locate maxima or other features of 
the curve, smaller steps of temperature increase 
may be desirable. 

b) Dwell time — Must be long enough for the 

sealing interface to come to the set temperature 

of the seal bars, which depends on the thickness 
and construction of the material. The dwell time 

for testing shall be set at 1 s. 


c 


wm 


Sealing pressure — The sealing bar pressure 
shall be maintained at 30 N/cm’. 


d 


wm 


Sealing area — The sealing area shall be fixed 
that is, 10 mm x 25 mm. 


D-5.2.5 Clamp the specimen strip to be tested in the 
bottom and then in the top grip, observing alignment 
precautions and proper orientation of the heat-seal side 
in accordance with seal test requirements. 


D-5.2.6 Enter the desired instrument cycle parameters 
into the machine controller. Following parameters are 
commonly used for routine hot-tack testing but may be 
varied over the ranges provided by each machine 
manufacturer, depending on the intended application 


of the data. Values of all instrument cycle parameters 
must be included in the report. 


The other test parameters are: 
a) Delay time — 0.1 s. 
b) Clamp separation rate — 200 mm/s. 


D-5.2.7 Start the machine. It will progress through the 
sealing, delay, withdrawal, and hot-tack strength 
testing phases of the test cycle and automatically 
record and store numerical test data. 


D-5.2.8 After all specimens have been tested at the 
current temperature level, set the machine to the next 
temperature level and proceed with testing to develop 
data for the hot-tack curve. Leave all other variables 
constant. Continue the testing with a stepwise increase 
in temperature levels till a progressive decrease in the 
force to failure is observed. In this region of the curve, 
the specimen can fail by a variety of non-peel methods, 
such as excessive stretch, breaking, tearing, distortion, 
shrinkage, or burn through, etc. 


D-5.2.9 When a hot-tack strength is being measured at 
a series of sealing temperatures, a minimum of three 
replicates shall be used to determine the mean value at 
each temperature. When the measurements are not part 
of a series where an identifiable trend is expected, a 
minimum of five replicates shall be employed. 


D-5.2.10 Remove strip from grips. Observe and record 
the mode of specimen failure. For meaningful 
evaluation and comparison of materials and with all 
types of testing machines, this step is essential. The 
mode of failure shall be determined visually for each 
specimen tested in accordance with the following or a 
similar classification, and the results shall be included 
in the test report. 


The broad classification of failure modes include: 


a) Adhesive peel failure of the seal; 


15 


IS 17931 : 2022 


b) Cohesive failure of the material; 

c) Delamination of the surface layer (s) from the 
substrate; 

d) Break of material at seal edge; 

e) Break or tear of material remote from seal; 

f) Elongation of material; and 

g) Peel with elongation of the material. 


Refer to Fig. 2, for failure mode details. 


D-5.2.11 If molten plastic sticks to the seal bars, heat 
up the bars above the melting point of the polymer and 
do the cleaning with a clean and dry, linter-free soft 
cotton cloth. 


D-5.2.12 Before shutting down bring the seal bars 
temperatures to ambient by a selection of suitable test 
conditions as above. 


D-5.2.13 Turn off the electric power of the machine. 
D-6 CALCULATIONS 


Computer-controlled versions of the testing machines 
do all the necessary calculations automatically and 
graphically illustrate test data. 


D-7 REPORT 
Report the following information with values: 


a) Hot seal strength (hot-tack) — maximum peel force 
recorded for hot seal strength, N/mm. 


b) Hot-tack initiation temperature — temperature 
where a low but measurable hot-tack strength is 
obtained, °C. 


c) The hot-tack temperature range — (the temperature 
range, °C from minimum to maximum temperature 
where seals with medium hot-tack strength, exceeding 
6 N/25 mm are produced). 


d) Test specimen failure mode (as per Fig. 2). 


IS 17931 : 2022 


SEAL SEPARATION MODES 


sealed 
unsealed sealed 1 & peeled 1 unsealed 


ADHESIVE PEEL 


sealed 
& peeled 


sealed unsealed 


COHESIVE PEEL 


unsealed 


[i 
[i 
sealed i 
' 


& peeled 


unsealed sealed unsealed 


DELAMINATION 


INTERFERENCES 


Though the diagrams show only one web being 
affected, it is possible for either or both webs to partially or 
fully exhibit interferences. Delamination, when not a designed 
seal separation mode, is an interference. 


= 


material 
break 


unsealed sealed 


MATERIAL BREAK 


yy 


remote material 
break 


1 I 
i} ' 
1 ' 
1 ' 
1 ' 
1 ' 
1 ' 


sealed 


unsealed 


MATERIAL BREAK (REMOTE) 


elongation of 
unsealed sealed unsealed material 
MATERIAL ELONGATION 


eat 
=- 
~ 


' 
' 
elongation of sealed & i 


unsealed ' sealed 


PEEL WITH ELONGATION 


FIG 2 SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF TEST STRIP FAILURE MODES 


peeled material - unsealed 


IS 17931 : 2022 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 7.5.10) 


INK ADHESION TEST FOR PRINTED BAGS 


E.1 PROCEDURE 


E-1.1 Apply two strips of 25 mm wide transparent 
pressure sensitive tape or cellophane adhesive tape to 
the printed area of the bag, one piece running across 
the length and the other running across the width of the 
bag. Press the adhesive tape firmly on to the bag and 
leave it for 15 s. 


E-1.2 Remove the tape by pulling slowly at about 1 
cm/s pulling rate from one end at 90° to the bag 
surface. 


E-2 RESULT 


E-2.1 There shall be no removal of the print from the 
surface of the bag and the print shall be legible to the 
naked eye after the test. 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 7.5.11) 


DROP IMPACT TEST FOR FILLED BAGS 


F-1 PRINCIPLE 


F-1.1 The test procedure is used to determine the drop 
impact performance of the filled bag. This test 
simulates the bag performance during end-use 
applications such as repeated handling and drops 
impacting of bag undergoing during loading, 
unloading and stacking operations. 


F-1.2 In drop impact testing, the filled bag is raised 
above a rigid surface and released to strike this surface 
after a horizontal free fall. The atmospheric conditions, 
the height of the drop and the position of the package 
are set in advance. 


F-2 FILLING BAGS FOR TESTING 


Bags shall be filled with a material with the intended 
commodity or, if this is not possible, with similar 
material to provide the same degree of filling. The bulk 
density and mass of this filling material, if used, shall 
be within +2 percent of the values for the material to 
be packed with which the bag is intended to be used. 
Ensure that the top and bottom closure welds shall be 
comparable in performance to the FFS process. 


F-3 CONDITIONING 


Filled and sealed bag samples shall be conditioned for 
a minimum of 2 h before the drop impact test, in 
accordance with the conditioning parameters given in 


6. 


17 


F-4 APPARATUS 


The apparatus necessary to carry out the drop test shall 
include the following: 


F-4.1 Bag lifting arrangement, which will not damage 
the bag during either lifting or release. 


F-4.2 Means of holding the bag prior to release in its 
predetermined height and position. The difference in 
the behavior of a bag suspended from the top side or 
supported underneath in a bottom edge drop can be 
significant, and the method of holding the bag before 
dropping shall be included in the test report. 


F-4.3 Release mechanism to release the filled bag in 
such a way that its fall is not obstructed by any part of 
the apparatus before striking the hard impact surface. 


F-4.4 Impact surface shall be horizontal to the ground, 
flat and massive enough to be immovable and rigid 
enough to be non-deformative under test conditions. In 
normal circumstances, the impact surface provided 
shall be sufficiently large to ensure that the bag falls 
entirely upon the impact surface and shall be of one 
piece, with a mass at least 50 times that of the heaviest 
bag to be tested. 


F-5 DROP IMPACT TESTING OF BAGS 


F-5.1 Drop testing shall be carried out using a suitable 
bag drop mechanism. Each bag shall be dropped from 
a height of 3.0 m for the test requirements as follows: 


a) Height of drop = 3.0 m (one time for face side 
and one time for back side); 


IS 17931 : 2022 


b) Height of drop = 3.0 m (one time for left edge 
and one time for right edge); and 


c) Height of drop = 3.0 m (one time for bottom 
edge and one time for top edge). 


F-5.2 As given in Fig. 3, place the bag under test 
centrally on the platform which is within + 2 percent 
of the predetermined drop height as defined by the 
distance between the lowest point of the bag at the time 
of drop release and the nearest point of the impact 
surface. 


F-5.3 The bag shall be released from its predetermined 
position within the following tolerances: 


a) For drops on any side, the impacting surface 
of the bag shall be parallel, to within 2’ to the 
impact surface; 


b) The velocity of the bag at impact shall be 
within +1 percent of that which would be 
achieved by a free fall. 


F-6 CRITERION FOR PASSING THE TEST 


F-6.1 After each drop there shall be no rupture or loss 
of contents. A slight discharge for powder material 
from micro perforations, upon impact shall not be 
considered a failure of the bag provided that no further 
leakage occurs after the bag has been raised clear of 
the ground. 


Fic. 3 EXAMPLE OF APPRATUS FoR DROP IMPACT TEST FOR FILLED BAGS 


18 


IS 17931 : 2022 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Plastics Packaging Sectional Committee, PCD 21 


Organization(s) 
In personal Capacity 
All India Food Processors Association (AIFPA), 
Delhi 
All India Plastics 
(AIPMA), Mumbai 


Bisleri International Pvt Ltd, Delhi 


Manufacturers Association 


Central Institute of Plastics 
Technology (CIPET), Chennai 


Chemco Plastic Industries Private Ltd, Mumbai 


Engineering & 


Chemicals and Petrochemicals Manufacturers 


Association (CPMA), New Delhi 


Coca-Cola India, Gurgaon 


Confederation of Indian Food Trade & Industry 
(FICCI), New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute 
(CFTRI), Mysore 


CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology 
Lucknow 


Research, 
Essel Propack Limited, Mumbai 


Federation of Indian Packaged Drinking Water 
Manufacturers Association (FIPMA), Mumbai 


Foundation for Innovative 
Sustainability (FIPS), Mumbai 


FSSAI, New Delhi 
GAIL India Ltd., NOIDA 


Packaging and 


Haldia Petrochemicals, Kolkata 
HPCL— MITTAL Energy Limited (HMEL), Noida 


IIT Roorkee-Saharanpur Campus 


Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment (ICPE), 
Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 
PROF (DR) N. C. SAHA (Chairman) 
SHRI MOHIT CHAUDHARY 


SHRI KAILASH B. MURARKA 
SHRI KISHORE SAMPAT (Alternate) 


SHRI K. GANESH, 

Ms SALONI CHADHA (Alternate) 
DRS.N. YADAV, 

DR SMITA MOHANTY (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV SARAOGI 
SHRI RUPANDE SAMPAT (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHINDER SINGH 
DR KANAK B DAS (Alternate) 


SHRI VIRENDRA LANDGE 
SHRI RAJENDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ MEHTA 


DR RAJESHWAR MATCHE 
DR ARUN P. SELVAM (Alternate) 


DR V. P. SHARMA, 
DR A. B. PANT (Alternate) 


SHRI HARIHARAN K. 
DR GURUNATH (Alternate) 


SHRI APURVA DOSHI 


SHRI M. K. BANERJEE 


DR DHIR SINGH 


SHRI MANISH KHANDELWAL 
SHRI NITIN GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJ K. DATTA, 
SHRI SRIKANTH RAMANI (Alternate) 


SHRI VINEET K GUPTA 
SHRI ALAKESH GHOSH (Alternate) 


DR YUVRAJ SINGH NEGI 


SHRI T. K. BANDOPADHYAY 


DR TANWEER ALAM 
SHRI MADHAB CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


19 


IS 17931 : 2022 


Organization(s) 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), R&D, 
Panipat 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi 


National Association for Feeders 
Industries (NAFNI), Mumbai 


National Dairy Development Board, Anand 


and Nipples 


Nestle India Ltd, New Delhi 


PET Packaging Association for Clean Environment 
(PACE), New Delhi 


Pigeon India, Grater Noida 

Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Skypack India Pvt. Ltd, Haryana 


Sumitomo Chemical India Ltd, Mumbai erstwhile 
Excel Crop, Mumbai 


Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd (Sun Pharma), 
Mumbai 


Uflex, Noida 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


BIS Director General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI DHANANJAY SAHOO 
SHRI PONNUSWAMY K. (Alternate) 
ER ANAND KISHORE 


SHRI HARISH SHROFF, 
SHRI ASHOK ANEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. PUNDIR, 
SHRI S. K. GOSWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI BARUN BANERJEE, 
SHRIMATI SARITA DEVI (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY HABBU 

SHRI PANKAJ UPPAL (Alternate) 
MS SIMPLE BAJAJ 

MS SNEHA GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. V. RAJU 
DR SUNIL MAHAJAN (Alternate) 


SHRI N. A. HASHMI 
DR A. K. TYAGI (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVEEN TALWAR 
SHRI JAGBIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI PRASAD GHATE 


SHRI SHANTANU CHOWDHARY 


SHRI JEEVRAJ PILLAI 
SHRI RAHUL DUBEY (Alternate) 
SHRI M. A. U. KHAN 
SHRI H. WADHWA (Alternate) 
SHRIMATI MEENAL PASSI, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD 
(PCD) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex- 


Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SHIVAM DWIVEDI 
Scientist ‘B’ (PCD), BIS 


20 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 21 (18361). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


