IS : 8920 - 197%

Indian

Standard
OF

METHODS FOR SAMPLING BURNT CLAY TILES
Building Materials and Components Scctionnl Committee, BDC
Chairman SIIRI G. D. JooJ,RKAR Telegaon (Dist Pune) Members
SHRI

Sampling 31

Representing Doors, Windows and Shutters mittee, BDC 11, ISI Sectional Com-

J. S.

BED1

SHRI A. K. S~~TI ( Alternate SHRI B. 13. BHATTACIIARJE~

)

Concrete Reinforcement BSMDC 8. ISI

Sectional

Committee,

SHRI T. SUN ( Alternnle ) Italab Engineering Pvt Ltd, Bombay J. D. DAnOoA SHRI N. R. PATI%A~AT,.% ( Akernale ) Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of SHRI K. H. GANDIII Defence). New Delhi SHRI SAT PAL SINGF~ ( Alternate ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) SHRI S. K. GUI~NANI SHRI M. S. EKB~T~ ( Alternate ) Pozzolanas Sectional Committee, BDC 16, IS1 SHRI P. .J. JAGUS SHRI M. R. VINAYAI~.~ ( Altern& ) Builder's Hardware Sectional Committee, BDC SHRI K. P. JAIN 15, IS1 Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI KARAMJIT SINan Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional SHRI K. K. KH~NNA Committee, BDC 28, IS1 SHRI A. C. MANivaN ( Alternnte ) Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta DR T. KRISHNAN Sanitary Appliances and Water Fittings Sectional SHRI S. R. KS~1RS4cz.41~ Committee, BDC 3, IS1 SHRI R. P. MIS~RA ( Alternnte ) Clay Products for Building Sectional Committee, SHRI N. C. M.~JUXDAR BDC 30, IS1 Biturn;;;?: Ia; Products Sectional Committee, SHRI M. R. M.4I.YA
SHRI

SHRI S. K. DUTT.~ ( Alternate ) COL Y. P. MISRA

Wool Products Sectional

Committee,

BDC 20, IS1

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Cofiyright 1979 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:8920

-1978
page 1 ) Representing Ccntr;\oy;itding Research Institute (CSIR), Mem hers

( Continuedfrom

DR MORAN RAI

SRRI R. K. GOEL ( Alternate ) DR A. K. MULLICK DR M. P~NCHOLY SHRI S. S. RAJPUT
SHRI E. K. RAMACHANDRAN LALA G. C. DAS ( Alternate ) SRRI N. MOHAN RAO SHRI V. B. GHORPADE SHRI A. C. SEERAR SHRI C. A. TANEJA DR B. N. SIN~H, Director (Stat)

Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi Sieves Sectional Committee, BDC 19, ISI Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun National Test House, Calcutta

Development Organization Research and ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi ( Alternate ) Timber Sectional Committee, BDC 9, ISI Gypsum Building Materials Sectional Committee, BDC 21, IS1 Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oJicio Member ) Secretary SHRI N. C. TYA~I Deputy Director (Stat),

ISI

2

IS:8920-1978

Indian

Standard
OF

METHODS FOR SAMPLING BURNT CLAY TILES
0.
0.1 tion and the

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Instituon 23 August 1978, after the draft finalized by the Building Materials Components Sampling Sectional Committee had been approved by Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Clay tiles are extensively used in flooring, roofing, roof finishing and lining works. With the adoption of complete mechanized plants in the these tiles will be produced in larger production of clay products, numbers and will find greater application in general building construction. It is, therefore, imperative that due consideration is given to the sampling procedures which would help in proper and objective evaluaThis standard, prepared at the tion of the quality of the clay tiles. instance of the Clay Products for Building Sectional Committee, lays down the methods for sampling of clay tiles as duly evolved on the basis of the statistical principles and practical considerations. 0.3 The procedures for sampling of different types of clay tiles have been indicated in the respective material specifications. However, in view of the experience gained in course of years, it was felt necessary to revise these methods and unify them into a separate single standard so as to give more details of sampling for the various characteristics constituting the quality of clay tiles. It is hoped that this standard would help in the development of proper sampling of clay tiles in the country. 0.4 In reporting the results of a test or analysis, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the methods conformity of burnt clay tiles.
2. TERMINOLOGY for sampling and criteria for

2.1 Lot tured under

A collection of clay tiles of the same type and size manufacrelatively similar conditions of production. For the purpose
values ( revised ).

*Rules for rounding off numerical

3

IS : 8926 - 1978 of sampling of clay tiles a In case a consignment has size, and manufactured under it shall be divided into lots of
2.2 Sample testing. 2.3 Defective requirements. 2.4 Average observations 2.5 Range observations. 3. SCALE lot shall contain a maximum of 50000 tiles. tiles more than 50 000 of the same type and relatively similar conditions of production, 50 000 tiles or part thereof. drawn from a lot for inspection a.nd/or

-

Ghouls
A

of tiles

tile the quality

of which

does not meet the specified divided by the number of

- The sum of the observations and denoted by;_.
The differcncc between

the maximum

and the minimum

OF SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY FOR VISUAL AND DIMENSIONAL CHARACTERfSTICS
shall be selected its conformity and inspected for each lot separately for to the requirements of the relevant speci-

3.1 Sample ascertaining fication.
3.1.1 depend and 2 of detailed

The number of tiles to be selected for the sample from a lot shall upon the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with co1 1 Table 1. All thcsc tiles shall be selected following the methods in 5.
TABLE 1 SCALE OF SAMPLING AND NUMBER OF DEFECTIVES ( Clauses 3.1.1, 3.2 and 4.1 ) PERMISSIBLE

NO.OB TILES INTHELOT

NO.

TILES TO BE SELECTED m THE SMIPLE
OF

PERMISSIBLE No. OF DEFECTIVETILES IN
THE SAMPLE

No.OFTILESTO BETESTED FOR
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS

(1)

(2)

up
1 001 3 001 10 001 35 001

IO
I, ), )) ))

1 3 10 35

000 000 000 000

20 32 50 80 125

(3) 1 2 3 5 7

(4) 3 5 8 10 13

50 000

3.2 Criteria be inspected

for Conformity for visual, dimensional,

All the tiles selected as in 3.1.1 shall weight and warpage characteristics, 4

IS a 8920 - 1978
wherever applicable, in accordance with the relevant material specification. If the number of defective tiles found in the sample~is less than or equal to the corresponding number as specified in co1 3 of Table 1, the lot shall be considered as satisfying the requirements of these characteristics. However, if the number of defective tiles in the sample is greater than the corresponding permissible number of defectives, the lot shall be deemed as not having met the requirements of these characteristics. 4. SCALE OF SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CONFORMITY

4.1 The lot which has been found satisfactory in respect of visual and dimensional requirements ( see3.2 ) shall next be tested for physical characteristics like compressive strength, transverse strength or flexural strength or breaking load, impact test, water absorption and permeability, whichever are applicable. The tiles for this purpose shall be taken at random from those already selected, tested and found nondefective under 3.1.1 and 3.2. The number of tiles to be selected and tested for each of the physical characteristics specified in the relevant material specification shall be in accordance with co1 4 of Table I. 4.2 Criteria for Conformity for Impact Test and Permeability In the case of impact test and permeability all the tiles tested under 4.1 shall pass the requirements of the relevant tests, otherwise the lot shall not be declared as conforming to the requirements of these characteristics. 4.3 Criteria for Conformity for Other Physicai Charztcteristics In case of the other physical characteristics, namely, compressive strength, transverse strength or flexural strength or breaking load and water absorption, from the test results (separately for each test) the average X and the range ( R ) shall be calculated.
NOTE - In case the number of test results is 10 or more, ?`? shall be calculated and used in place of R ; R`being the average of the ranges, R, calculated for the sub-groups of five test results.

4.3.1 Tf the specification limit for the characteristics is given as a minimum, then the value off theexpression ( x'--0*4R) shaI1 be calculated from the relevant test results. If the vahte so obtained is greater than or equal to the minimum limit, the lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of that characteristic. 4.3.2 If the specification limit for the characteristic is given as a maximum, then the value of the expression ( F +0'4R ) shall be calculated from the relevant test results. If the value so obtained is less than or 5

IS:8920

-1978 shall be declared as conforming to

equal to the maximum limit, thelot the requirements of that characteristic. 5. METHODS OF SAMPLING

5.1 The sample may be drawn in accordance either by : (a) simple random sampling, or by method.

with IS : 4905-1968* (b) stratified sampling

that

5.1-l In simple random sampling the sample is taken in such a way every tile in the lot has the same chance of appearing in the sample. sampling the lot is divided into convenient sections ) and the sample is taken from each section of the

5.1.2 In stratified ( real or imaginary lot at random.

5.2 The sample shall be taken by one of the methods given in 5.2.1 and 5.2.2, sampling being arranged so as to yield the number of tiles required in the sample. Tiles damaged in handling or transit shall not be taken as samples. 5.2-l Sampling in Motion - Whenever practicable a sample shall be taken while the tiles are being moved, for example, during loading or unloading. The lot shall be divided into a number of convenient portions ( not less than ten j such that when equal number of tiles are drawn from each of these portions the number of tiles required for the inspection and testing is provided. Alternatively the required number of sample tiles may be obtained by picking an equal number of tiles at regular intervals as the lot is being moved. To make the start in a random manner, the procedure shall be adopted. From the random number tables given in IS : 4905-1968* a random number shall be chosen which shall be less than the number constituting the sampling interval. The sampling shall start by picking the tile whose serial number in the lot corresponds to this random number. Subsequently, the tiles shall be picked up at the chosen interval. 5.2.2 Sampling from Stack When it is necessary to take a sample from a stack, the stack shall be divided into a number of real or imaginary sections and the required number of tiles drawn from each section as indicated in 52.1. The stacks should be accessible from all sides. The width of the The maximum height of the stack should be 1'5 m. stack should be twice the maximum dimension of the tile. For this
*Methods for random sampling.

6

IS:8920

-1978

purpose tiles in the upper layer of the stack shall be removed to enable tiles to be sampled from places inside the stack. 52.3 Sampling J?om Wagons, Trucks, and Shipholds - In case of tiles loaded in wagons/trucks/shipholds if it becomes necesary for any reason to take samples in that state, the tiles for the sample shall be taken at random from a number of wagons/trucks/shipholds in such a way that when equal number of tiles are drawn from each ofwagons/ trucks/shipholds the number of tiles required for the inspection and testing is provided.

7

AnEttDUENT NO. t TO IS:8920-1978

JULY 1980 OF BURNT Cl_AY TILES

METHODS FOR WPLIN6 Corr3enda --_

wapt 4, 2kbk '15' fm `13'.

I, 802 4, ltmt "k&l

- Substitute

Bcprqgrapby

unit.

xsx,

Rev Deul

