IS 16109 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


Uda HAF 
ada cet — fatertte 


Indian Standard 
TURNTABLE LADDER — SPECIFICATION 


ICS 13.220.10 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


September 2013 Price Group 4 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fire Fighting 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Turntable ladders are provided in metropolitan cities or at other installations for fighting the fires in high rise 
buildings, oil installations where water or foam is intended to be used as the principal fire extinguishing medium 
as a water/foam tower. It may also be used for rescue purposes either as ‘staircase’ or by lowering a person in a 
sling cradle from the head of the ladder where means of escape are blocked by smoke, heat and fire or otherwise. 


Even the best designed electronically/hydraulically turntable ladder shall not serve the purpose for which it is 
intended unless it is correctly employed and operated and regularly maintained. This fact emphasizes enormous 
care and gives greater importance for the appliance which is meant for special use as a water tower or for rescue 
purpose, either as a staircase by lowering a person in a string from the head of the ladder. 


Although there are several makes of turntable ladders in use in this country, those widely used are either 
electronically or hydraulically operated turntable ladders. Where as the principles for the selection, operation 
and maintenance of all such appliances are more or less based on the same principles, though details vary. The 
recommendations in this standard have, therefore, been framed particularly for the electronic/hydraulic turntable 
ladder. Keeping in view the necessity of adequate manpower requiring handling of such appliance, necessary 
recommendations for this has been included in this standard. 


It is recommended that the manufacturer should guarantee the availability of spare parts of turn table ladder and 
other equipments for at least ten years from the date of supply. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is compiled with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16109 : 2013 


Indian Standard 
TURNTABLE LADDER — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the recommended practice and 
procedure for the selection, operation and maintenance 
of 30 m electronic/hydraulic turntable ladder. 


2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


8) 


h) 


The turntable ladder shall be designed 
specifically for the purpose of fire fighting 
and rescue to enable fireman to go up and 
down. It shall comprise of ladder sections with 
acage mounted at the end of top ladder section 
and the entire unit shall be mounted on a 
turntable. The entire unit shall be mounted 
on a suitable heavy duty diesel engine chassis. 
The turntable ladder shall be telescopic type. 
The turntable ladder shall be capable of use 
at any angle of elevation without any 
reduction in load capacity of the cage. It shall 
also rotate 360° continuously at any angle of 
elevation subject to ladder remaining clear of 
vehicle body. 


The height of the ladder, when fully elevated 
and extended shall be not less than 30 m from 
the ground. 

The appliance shall be fast on the road and 
easily manoeuvrable in crowded streets and 
around sharp corners. The overall dimensions 
shall be as compact as possible. 

The turntable ladder shall be electronically/ 
hydraulically controlled, permitting precise 
and easy operations under the most difficult 
conditions, with ample reserve strength and 
stability. 

Full safety interlocks shall be incorporated in 
the design so as to ensure the complete safety 
in operation and long years of reliable and 
trouble free service. 

The design of the turntable ladder shall allow 
a very large safety margin for all operations 
and in all climatic conditions. The safe 
working load rating shall include an allowance 
for the weight of the water, in the water system 
and reaction from the monitor jet when 
operating. 

The ladder shall have automatic plumbing 
system (Levelling system) to adjust at an angle 
up to 8.5°. 


aD) 


k) 


m) 


There shall be a full back-up system for all 
ladder movements and outrigger movements, 
in case of failure of main system. 

If a computer control system is used, it shall 
be checked for interference sensitiveness and 
shall comply with interference sensitiveness 
class B for circuit linked interference. 

All the ladder control system shall be fully 
tropicalized and able to operate in the 
temperature up to +60°C and in a dusty and 
humid condition without reducing maximum 
operating limits. 


3 CHASSIS 


a) 


n) 


The chassis may be 4m x 2m, right hand 
driven, indigenously manufactured, full 
forward control, diesel engine driven, having 
approximately 4 855 mm wheel base. 


The engine may be compression ignition six 
cylinder direct injection 4 stroke water 
cooled engine developing minimum 150 H.P. 
and torque of 48 kg. The engine shall be 
naturally aspirated/turbo charged. The fuel 
tank capacity shall not be less than 160 litre. 


The clutch may be single plate, diaphragm 
type, hydraulically/mechanically operated. 


The gear box may be synchromesh type having 
5/6 forward gears and one reverse gear. 


The rear axle may be forged ‘I’ section type. 


The rear axle may be fully floating type having 
capacity of 10 200 kg. 


The chassis frame may be ‘C’ construction 
with sufficient numbers of cross members. 


The front and rear suspension may be semi- 
elliptical multi-leaf spring, preferably with 
anti-roll bar. 


The steering system may be integral power 
steering. 


The tyre size on the front and rear axle may 
be of designation 9.00 x 20 or 10.00 x 20. 


The braking system may be dual circuit full 
air brake with pneumatically operated hand 
brake. 


The electrical system may be 12/24 V, negative 
earth. 


IS 16109 : 2013 


p) A suitable power take off (P.T.O.) (side P.T.O. 
or full torque P.T.O.) shall be provided 
depending upon the power requirements for 
hydraulic pump. 

q) The chassis shall have factory built, 
aerodynamically, full trimmed cabin. 


4 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 


The appliance shall confirm to the following 
requirements: 


a) Safe working load in the cage on hard level 
ground with dry monitor of 270 kg minimum. 


b) Safe working load in the cage with monitor 
delivering full output of 180 kg approximately. 
c) Loading capacity of lifting eye 4 000 kg at an 
elevation of 65°. 
The above weight requirement shall be exclusive of 
weight of any equipment permanently fitted in the cage 
or on the ladder. 


5 DIMENSIONS OF APPLIANCE 


The appliance shall confirm to the following 
dimensions: 


a) In operating position: 
1) Height from the ground — 30 m. 
2) Maximum out reach to the front of the 
cage with full jack width — 26 m 
approximately. 


3) Maximum width of vehicle when 
outriggers (jacks) are fully extended — 
4.5 m. 


b) In travelling position: 
1) Overall length — 10 m Max. 
2) Overall width — 2.5 m Max. 
3) Overall height — 3.5 m Max. 


6 CONSTRUCTION 


The appliance shall be constructed of robust material, 
carefully selected for lightness and durability. Use of 
timber shall be restricted and use of rubber be avoided 
as far as possible. Ferrous metal parts shall be treated 
for anti-corrosion by a method other than electroplating. 


7 JACKING SYSTEM 


a) The jacking system shall consist of four 
stabilizing jacks situated at each end of the 
main frame to enable effective levelling even 
on rough ground. The jacking system shall be 
powerful and quick acting hydraulically 
operated. 

b) The jack shall be of rectangular steel box 
section, designed to protect the operating 


cylinder against mechanical damage. Large 
swivelling end plates shall be provided. 

c) The jacking system shall be horizontal, 
vertical ‘H’ type jacking system with 
hydraulic axle locking mechanism on rear 
axle. All the jack movements shall be 
infinitely variable within a maximum jacking 
width of 4.5 m. 

d) The jacking system shall allow operating each 
jack individually and the infinite jack 
projection shall be recognized on board by 
the controlling system and the maximum 
outreach shall be automatically calculated as 
per the jack width. 


e) The jacks shall be controlled individually or 
in pair with lever/joystick and the control 
panel shall be situated in such a position that, 
the operator shall have a clear look to the right 
and left hand side while extending the jack. 
The control panel shall be preferably at the 
rear of the vehicle. 

f) Yellow flashing warning lights shall be 
provided at the outer most point of the jacks 
to identify the position of the jacks during the 
night operation. 

g) Four wooden spreader plates shall be provided 
for the use when the appliance is required to 
be operated on soft ground. 


8 LADDER SET 


a) The turntable ladder shall be designed to 
perform the following functions/operations: 


1) Elevation; 

2) Depression; 

3) Extension; 

4) Housing; and 

5) Rotation of 360° continuously in either 
direction. 


b) All the operations shall be power operated 
with the help of hydraulic cylinders, wire 
ropes and cables, etc. This system shall be 
purpose built to provide smooth take-off, 
variable speed range and smooth slow down. 


c) The ladder shall consist of four sections 
having a height of 30 m (Upper ladder rung 
or cage floor) made of high grade, corrosion 
resistant steel and has a minimum wind 
catching area. The ladder section shall be 
extended and retracted telescopically and 
simultaneously. 

d) The lower ladder section (Base ladder) shall 
be bolted on to a turret. The sliding sections 
of ladder shall be extended and retracted with 


e) 


8) 


h) 


D 


k) 


m) 


n) 


the help of double acting hydraulic cylinders 
or via Wire ropes or the combination of both. 
The movement of the ladder shall be 
simultaneous. 


The extension and retraction cylinders or wire 
rope shall be so laid, that it shall not cause 
any hindrance for climbing to a fireman. The 
ladder rungs shall be anti-skid design to avoid 
slipping of a person while climbing up or 
down the ladder. The extension/retraction 
ropes shall have tension adjustment- 
mechanism. 

A visual indication lamp shall be provided on 
main control consol and cage control consol 
for ‘Rung in alignment at a convenient 
position’. 

The ladder shall be possible to elevate from 
15° to +75°. The rotation movement shall be 
continuous through 360° at all angles of 
elevation except for the cabin protection area. 
In driving condition the ladder set shall be 
placed on the ladder head rest. The ladder 
shall be possible to level with the ground in 
8.5° in either direction when used on inclined 
ground. 

All the sliding section shall have a 
maintenance free nylon/steel rollers for 
sliding movement and means shall be 
provided for the lubrication of these rollers 
at an easily accessible position. 

Hook on type additional ladder shall be 
provided for the access to main ladder 
assembly from the ground. A lifting eye shall 
be provided at the head of the ladder section 
with a load capacity of 4 000 kg. 

An attachment system shall be provided at the 
top of the ladder or in rescue cage for fixing a 
monitor. The monitor attachment shall be 
quick connect type without the use of bolts 
and nuts. The monitor may either be 
permanently mounted on ladder top or may 
be kept at some other suitable place. 


All main ladder movements such as elevation, 
depression, extension and retractions and 
rotation to the left and to the right shall be 
possible simultaneously. Each movement 
shall also be possible individually. The 
plumbing movement shall perform 
automatically. 

All the ladder movements except rotation, just 
before reaching the limit position, shall be 
slowed down automatically until rest. In 
addition to this, the ladder lowering rate shall 
proportionally decrease with increasing 
ladder length in order to avoid excessive 


p) 


IS 16109 : 2013 


swinging on the ladder tip when ladder 
movement stops. 

The functional, ergonomically designed main 
operating control consol shall be provided on 
the left/right hand side of the turntable 
preferably the operator seats back rest and arm 
rest should be tilt-able backward up to 30° 
according to the angle of elevation of the 
ladder. The following controls shall be 
provided on main control: 

1) Lever/Joystick for rotation and elevation 
and depression. 

2) Lever/Joystick for extension and retraction. 

3) Foot pedal for oil pressure ON/OFF 
(‘dead man’ switch) 

4) Button for engine start/stop (engine 
should be automatically set to operating 
speed. 

5) Button for plumbing adjustment control 
on/off. 

6) Button for rungs in alignment during 
ladder movement. 

7) Button for one man/two man/three man 
cage operation. 

8) Button for control consol lighting on/off. 

9) Button/Knob for emergency stop. 

10) Volume control for main control stand and 
top of ladder speaker. 

11) Microphone for intercom system. 

12) Button for search light for illumination 
at top of ladder. 

13) Lever for emergency operation of jacks 
and ladder assembly. 

14) Graduated arc with pendulum. 

15) Display monitor for actual ladder 
operation range. 


9 CAGE 


a) 


A cage shall be made of light alloy material 
and it shall be foldable. There shall be 
sufficient working space for three persons and 
safe working load shall be not less than 270 kg 
excluding the equipment permanently fitted 
in the cage. The cage levelling (Up right 
position) shall be controlled automatically by 
an electro-hydraulic power unit which shall 
also be used for folding up and down the 
rescue cage. The controls for folding over and 
in working position shall be integrated into 
the control panels for the jacking system. The 
entrance to cage shall be provided via a drop 
down platform, which may also be used for 
closing the cage. 


IS 16109 : 2013 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


8) 


h) 


D 


The cage shall be quick removable type, 
whenever needed. 

An emergency cage operation shall be 
provided in case of primary system failure by 
means of secondary-independent electronic/ 
hydraulic system. 

An acoustic signal shall be provided, if cage 
fails to come in operating position while the 
vehicle is being jacked. 


The cage control allows all ladder movements 
to be performed infinitely variable. During 
cage operation, the movement shall be 
automatically controlled by the safety system. 
When the ladder is operated from the cage, 
the speeds of movements shall be the same as 
it is operated from the main control consol. 
The location of control unit shall be on 
left/right and side of the cage towards the 
front. The joystick/levers operation in the cage 
shall be identical with that of the main consol. 
The cage control panel is always visible and 
accessible, even when additional equipment 
is used such as water monitor. 
The cage control shall have operating 
joysticks/levers, a display monitor of actual 
ladder operating range as well as press 
buttons/knobs for selection of various 
operational areas. The following control shall 
be provided: 
1) Control lever/joystick for extension and 
retraction. 


2) Control lever/joystick for rotation and 
elevation/depression 

3) Foot pedal for oil pressure ON/OFF 
(‘dead man’ switch) 

4) Button for engine start/stop (engine shall 
be automatically set to operating speed. 

5) Button for rungs in alignment during 
ladder movement. 


6) Button for control consol lighting ON/OFF. 

7) Button/Knob for emergency stop. 

8) Button for search light ON/OFF. 

9) Display monitor for actual ladder 
operation range. 

Two wide angle flood lights shall be provided 

in front of the cage for illumination of area of 

operation during night time. 


The cage shall be provided with collision 
safety device to protect the cage against 
damage due to impact while in operation. All 
ladder movements shall stop automatically 
when cage collision system is activated. 


10 HYDRAULIC SYSTEM 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


8) 


h) 


D 


A positive displacement pump shall be 
provided to provide the necessary hydraulic 
power for the jacking and all boom operations. 
The pump shall be driven via a power take 
off through universal propeller shaft. 

A sufficient capacity hydraulic oil tank shall 
be provided with an in-built oil filters. 

All the ladder movement shall be possible 
simultaneously without mutual interference 
and any reduction in the present speed. 

The extension and retraction of the ladder 
shall be carried out by means of extension and 
retraction of hydraulic cylinders. 


Two hydraulic cylinders shall be provided to 
elevate and depress the ladder assembly. 
The rotation movement shall be achieved by 
means of a hydraulic motor with suitable gear 
mechanism and braking system. 

All the control valves shall be proportional 
control valves, permitting precise and 
infinitely variable speed control. The oil 
pressure shall be switched ON/OFF by means 
of a foot pedal (‘Dead man’ switch). 

In case of electrical failure, emergency 
hydraulic operation shall be possible and in 
case of vehicle engine failure, operation may 
be possible by means of a separate manual 
hydraulic pump operated via levers mounted 
at the side of the body work to ensure safe 
operation from the ground. 


11 SAFETY SYSTEMS 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


There shall be an interlock to prevent ladder 
operation until the axle lock is engaged and 
all four jacks have sufficient ground pressure. 
There shall be a control light for the axle 
locking system, which shall be mounted on 
the dash board. These lights shall remain ‘ON’ 
when the power take off is switched ‘OFF’ 
but the axle lock is not yet disengaged and/or 
the cage is still in operating position, 
preferably with warning buzzer. 

There shall be two independent drive elements 
to secure the ladder set of which each is 
capable of keeping the ladder in its present 
position, during the ladder movements that is 
elevating or depressing as well as extending 
or retracting. 

A ‘Dead man’ switch shall be provided at the 
main and cage control consol, to immediately 
stop all ladder movement. 


e) 


8) 


h) 


D 


k) 


m) 


n) 


p) 


There shall be an interlock which only permits 
the ladder set to be lifted from the head rest 
and there after other movements are possible. 
There shall be a load measuring system for 
stability of security of the ladder parts. The 
ladder movements shall stop automatically 
due to projection and/or additional load such 
as rescued persons, in conjunction with the 
jacking widths and the actual remaining load. 
An operating range display shall continuously 
show the total working range and the present 
load situation. The position of the ladders and 
the load limit in conjunction with jacking 
width shall be displayed simultaneously. 


It is a basic requirement for stability that the 
speed of all the movement slows down 
smoothly and automatically before reaching 
the final position and automatically stops all 
movements in the defined final position. 
Due to tactical requirements during operation, 
there shall be a device provided which allows 
the ladder to reach operational limit beyond 
the free standing limit when the ladder head 
is supported against wall. 

When ladder reaches its operational limits, 
there shall be an automatic final stopping of 
all ladder movements except for retraction and 
rotation. 

There shall be a driver’s cabin protection 
mechanism which shall stop respective ladder 
movement to avoid collision of ladder with 
cabin. 


There shall be an impact cut which shall stop 
all ladder movements. 

The automatic hydraulically controlled 
levelling system (plumbing) shall be active 
at all elevation and inclination angles. It shall 
guarantee that the rounds are always 
horizontal up to angle of 8.5°. The plumbing 
mechanism may be switched off from main 
control consol. 


12 EMERGENCY SYSTEM 


a) 


b) 


The hydraulic power of all necessary ladder 
movements shall be provided manually via a 
separate hydraulic pump. The hydraulic pump 
shall be provided at suitable place for safe and 
easy operation. 

In case of failure of main control system, 
mechanical emergency operation of all ladder 
movements shall be possible. All the ladder 
movements that is extension/ retraction/ 
elevation/depression and rotation to the left 
and right shall be safely controlled with 


c) 


IS 16109 : 2013 


hydraulic system from the main control 
consol. 

An emergency system with independent pump 
shall also be provided for manual levelling of 
cage. 


13 OPERATING RANGE DISPLAY 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


An operating range display shall be provided 
at main control consol and cage control consol 
which shall provide useful information to the 
operator. The various signals coming from 
control system shall be processed and visually 
represented in the form of text or symbols on 
the display. 

A scaled down representation of the actual 
available range of operations shall be 
displayed showing exactly the ladder position, 
projection, ladder length, height and angle of 
elevation. 

A microprocessor shall monitor all ladder 
movements and safety systems. If the safe 
operating limits are reached, the ladder 
movements shall be blocked automatically 
and a corresponding message/indicator shall 
be shown on display screen. 

The display shall show test message of 
operational faults including its consequences. 
The range display shall be illuminated 
suitably for easy reading during night 
operation. 


14 MONITOR 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


The manually operated monitor may either 
be attached to ladder head or in the rescue 
cage and shall be provided with standard 
63 mm male coupling. 

The output of the monitor shall not be less 
than 1 200 litre/min at 1.0 MPa and throw 
range should be approximately 40 m. 

The monitor may be moved vertically upward 
and downward up to —15? to + 60°. The 
horizontal movement shall be up to 30° left 
side/right side when fitted in the cage. 

The monitor shall be provided with water 
supply via a pressure pipe of light alloy laid 
along the ladder assembly. 


15 INTER COMMUNICATION SYSTEM 


a) 


An inter communication system shall be 
provided between the cage and the turntable 
controls. The system shall be talk-balk 
amplifier transistorized type with 
microphone and speaker at main control and 
cage control. 


IS 16109 : 2013 


b) 


c) 


The system shall be powered by the vehicle 
electrical system. It shall be rugged 
construction to withstand weather conditions. 
Any connection cables shall have an efficient 
and automatic take-up to prevent a stack or 
twisting in all the cable when the ladder 
sections operated. 


16 BODY WORK 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


8) 


The body work shall be designed to allow 
maximum accessibility to all areas to be 
serviced and inspected. Provision shall be 
made for all the major components to be 
removed easily. Accordingly lifting eyes shall 
be provided, wherever feasible to ensure 
removal and replacements do not entail 
unacceptable downtime. 


The super structure of the deck shall be made 
from light weight steel sections and fasten on 
the vehicle frame. The structural frame shall 
be adequately protected from corrosion 

The panels shall be made of corrosion proof 
light alloy plates, the exterior of which are 
anodized for extra protection. The working 
deck shall be covered with light alloy 
chequered plate of 3 mm thickness. 

An access ladder, integrated on the left hand 
side of the superstructure gives access to the 
working deck. It shall be with light alloy step 
protection. Hand grips, where necessary shall 
be provided. 


Sufficient number of lockers shall be provided 
for keeping hoses, branches and other 
accessories. The lay out of the lockers shall 
be made with proper load distribution. The 
exact location and size of the locker shall 
shown in the drawings. All the lockers shall 
be provided with dual-skinned design dust and 
water proof light alloy rolling shutters. An 
automatic switch shall ensure immediate 
illumination of the respective locker. The 
shutters submitted along with the tenders. be 
lockable. 

Mudguard made from corrosion proof 
material with rubber flaps shall be provided. 
A crew seat shall be provided immediately 
behind the driver cabin over the deck suitable 
to accommodate four firemen. Seats shall be 
upholstered properly. 


17 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 


a) 


All the lockers shall be illuminated from 
inside. Light shall be activated automatically 
as soon as locker shutter is open. 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


8) 


Two working area search lights of 70 W/24 V 
with protected grill shall be provided in the 
cage with swivel joint cable and mounting 
pins. 

A two tone horn shall be provided for traffic 
warning system. 

Two each red and blue halogen rotating 
beacons shall be provided and mounted on 
driver's cabin roof. 


A battery main switch shall be provided for 
cutting all power from the battery. The location 
of main switch shall be easily accessible to 
driver and preferably inside the driver's cabin. 
All the other lighting of the motor vehicle be 
according to Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 and 
Rules framed thereunder. 

A 12/24 V, d.c. siren capable of producing 
Wail, Yelp and Hi/Lo sounds motor vehicle 
be provided, with a switch at officer side. 


18 LUBRICATION 


a) 


b) 


c) 


The components of the ladder motor vehicle 
be lubricated and sealed for life. For the 
remainder, where possible an efficient means 
of lubrication motor vehicle be provided. Also 
a simple means for checking the oil level 
motor vehicle be provided. 

Means for draining the oil motor vehicle be 
provided by a single plug which shall be easily 
accessible and so positions so as to drain the 
reservoir completely. 

All the greasing points shall be provided with 
grease nipple which shall be easily accessible. 


19 PAINT FINISH 


a) 


b) 


8) 


h) 


All metal parts which are exposed to 
atmosphere and comes in contact with water 
shall be provided with corrosion resistant 
paints. 

The chassis and wheels shall be painted with 
high glossy black colour aluminium parts 
natural colour. 

The body work, cabin, turntable shall be 
painted with fire red colour. 


Mudguard and the bumpers engine be painted 
with glossy white. 

Lockers and roller shutters engine be anodized 
aluminium. 

The boom assembly shall be painted in glossy 
white. 

All the steps surfaces and trade plates shall 
be in self colour. 

The words ‘FIRE SERVICE’ and the 


‘EMBLEM’ shall be painted on either side of 
the body of the vehicle in white paint. 


20 ADDITIONAL ACCESSORIES 


a) Following additional accessories shall be 
provided along with the vehicle in addition to 
standard accessories: 


1) Wooden outrigger plates — 04 No. 


2) Fog/Branch pipe suitable for cage 
operation — 01 No. 


3) Set of special tools and equipment 
required for repairs and maintenance of 
ladder — 01 Set. 


4) Suction hose, 3 m length, with couplings 
— 04 No. 

5) Suction strainer, light alloy — 01 No. 

6) Wire mesh basket — 01 No. 

7) Coupling spanner — 02 No. 

8) Delivery hose with coupling, 15 m x 63 
mm — 10 No. 

9) Select flow nozzle — 02 No. 


10) Collecting breeching, made of light alloy 
— 02 No. 


11) Multipurpose saw — 01 No. 

12) Blade for metal cutting, 300 mm diameter 
— 03 No. 

13) Blade for stone cutting, 300 mm diameter 
— 03 No. 


IS 16109 : 2013 


14) Electronic searchlight complete with 
rechargeable batteries — 02 No. 

15) Mounting bracket for Searchlight, 
12/24 V — 02 No. 

16) Manual powered combi-rescue tool for 
cutting and spreading — 01 No. 


17) Fire blanket, 160x200 cm — 02 No. 


18) Protective gloves, five finger, made of 
chromed leather — 03 pairs. 


19) Protective helmet — 03 No. 
20) First aid kit, Industrial type — 01 No. 


21 STABILITY 


The stability of the appliance (in travelling position) 
when fully equipped and loaded (excluding crew 
members) with ladder resting in the resting stand and 
without extending stabilizing jacks or axle locks shall 
be such that it remain stable and shall not overturn, if 
the surface on which the appliance stands is tilted to 
either side at an angle of 30° from the horizontal. 


22 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 
INSTRUCTIONS 


Two sets of complete operation and maintenance manuals 
for the unit (Including all systems) with itemized 
illustrated spare parts list shall be supplied along with 
the vehicle. The entire instruction manual shall be in 
English language. All the electrical circuit diagrams shall 
be provided along with fault diagnosis notes. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (7617). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


