UDC

001.4

: 627.748

: 621.879

IS : 12133

- 1987

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

.
1. Scope 2. General 2.1 Dredger

GLOSSARY DEFINITIONS

OF TERMS AND FOR DREDGERS
relating to dredging fleet.

Specifies the terms and definitions Concepts
Dredge -

Pertaining

to Dredgers

A vessel or water craft for dredging. the dimensions of basins by extracting ensuring or shifting extracting, the soil in the and

2.2 Drcdg/ng - Changing in:erests of navigation. 2.3 Dredging Caravan storage of the soil. 2.4 Dredging 2.5 Dredging 2.6 Gantry 2.7 Ladder dredgers.
Facility Fleet -

A dredge and its service vessels A facility for loosening, of dredgers, separating

transportation and lifting

from the bottom

the soil.

A totality

dredging

means and their service vessels. of the ladder elevator. dredgers and multibucket ladder and

A rigid structure A structure

for accomodating the dredging the

the elements facility position

carrying

of suction of the

2.8 Ladder Elevator - A device for changing fixing it in a determined position. 2.9 Non-Self-Propelled
2.10 Pile Facility Dredger

dredging

facility

A facility
Dredger Facility

comprising
A

work pile and mechanisms having propelling

for their moving

and fixing.

2.11 Self- Propelled movement. 2.12
Soil Discharging

dredger

devices
soil.

for

an independent

A facility facility
-

for discharging system

the extracted

2.13 Swell Compensator -- A waves at a section of dredging. 2.14 Technological Equipment lishment of dredging. 3. Basic Parameters

and

ensuring

a dredger's

operation

with certain

A complex

of devices and systems of a dredger for the accomp-

of Dredgers conditions of operation stipulated in

3.1 Contract Output - The output of dredger under certain the contract between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 3.2 Dipper Dredger Bucket Sweep *- The maximum distance axis of rotation of the platform with the dredging facility. 3,3 Dipp'er Dredger
3.4 Dredger Output; Bucket Sweep Output from Side

from the bucket cutting

edge to the

The
-

amount

of

soil

in a natural

bed state extracted of a multi-bucket

in a time dredger

unit. 3.5 Frequency in a time unit.
of Bucket Emptying

The number of buckets emptying the

3.6 Grab Sweep - The maximum distance from rotation of the platform with the dredging facility. 3.7 Grab Sweep
3.8 Hopper from Side The amount

axis cf the grab suspension

to the axis of

Capacity

of :oil

in tke hold of a barge

or hopper dredger at a normal

filling

level.
Pipeline

3.9 Length of Floating

Adopted

3 June

1987 I BUREAU MANAK OF BHAVAN,

@ March

1988,

BIS I STANDARDS SHAH ZAFAR MARG

Gr 3

INDIAN 9 BAHADUR

NEW DELHI

110002

IS : 12133 3.10

- 1987

Length of Pressure Pipeline

3.11 Maximum Depth of Dredging 3.12 Maximum //eight of Soil Raising - The maximum soil ( hydraulic mixture ) above the water level. 3.13 Minimum Depth of Dredging 3.14 Nominal Depth of Dredging - The depth of dredging serving as a base at a bucket arrangement calculation end ensuring the work of a dradger with a design output. 3.15 Range of Soil - The distance from the place of raising the soil to the place of storage at the given position of the dredger. Note - The term is inapplicable with a discharge of soil by barges and with hopper dredgers. 4. Bucket Arrangement A working member designed An arrangement to cut and raise the soil. for raising the soil and transporting in the bucket filled it to the place of edges of the elevation of the point Of raising Of the

4.1 Bucket -

4.2 Bucket Arrangement discharge of bucket(s). ;$ktyket Capacity -

The total volume

of liquid

up to cutting

4.4 Bucket Chain -

A chain consisting

of buckets and connecting chain at the the centres

parts. lower bucket drum where the

4.5 Bucket Chain Loop - A portion of the sagging buckets participate in the cutting of the soil. 4.6 Bucket Chain Pitch adjacent buckets. The distance between

of identical length

mounting of the

holes of sagging

4.7 Bucket Chain Tightening Device portion of the bucket chain. 4.8 Bucket Drive bucket drum. 4.9 Bucket Motor 4.10 Bucket Roller The complex

A device with a drive to alter the

of the bucket motor and the power transmission the rotation of the upper bucket drum.

to the upper

The motor ensuring A roller supporting structure

the bucket chain on the frame or on the upper frame. for accommodation of bucket elements and the soil

4.11 Bucket Tower - A metal discharge facility of a dredger. 4.12 Lower Tumbler -

The drum designed

to support and guide the bucket chain. between the upper bucket drum and the

4.13 Monkey Frame - An additional frame installed axis of suspension of the dredging facility frame. 4.14 Top Tumbler The drum designed to support

and drive the bucket chain.

5. Controls

and Monitoring,

and Measuring

Instruments automated control and the auxiliary operations, which have passed the the lower edge of of the

5.1 Automated Control System of Dredging - Instruments of the monitoring for the dredger's orientation, soil extraction and monitoring aggregated into a control computer. 5.2 Bucket Counter - An instrument indicating the number upper bucket drum of a multi-bucket dredger in a time unit. 5.3 Dredging Depth Indicator - An instrument the dredging member to the water surface. 5.4 Orientation System - A complex location of a dredger and its orientation 5.5 Output Indicator 5.6 Rope Meter 5.7 Soil Meter An instrument indicating of- buckets

the

distance from the

of technical means ensuring on the dredged section. indicating

determination

the output and the amount of the dredged soil.

An instrument An instrument

indicating indicating

the length of the work rope heaved or paid out. the soil content 2 in the hydraulic mixture.

IS : 12133 6. Dredging Pump Unit and the Loosening for loosening Mixture agitator Facilities

- 1987

6.1 Agitator - A device designed it with a dredger. 6.2 Concentration hydraulic mixture. of Hydraulic

the soil from its natural bed state before extracting of the volume of soil versus the member. volume of

Ratio

6.3 Cutter Agitator 6.4 Dredging Pump -

A mechanical

having a cutter for cutting the hydraulic mixture.

The pump to transport An agitator
-

6.5 Hydraulic Agitator 6.6
Hydrsu/ic Mixture;

using the energy of water jets. of soil with water or with water and air. of the pressure of the suction pipeline pipeline cutting located located member. of the pipeline. moves from the pump. in the form pipe of buckets designed for behind the dredging inside the hull of the

Pulp

A mixture

6.7 In-Hull Pressure Pipeline - A portion pump inside the hull of the dredger. 6.8 /n-Hull dredger. 6.9 6.10 6.11 Suction Pipeline A portion

Mechanical Agitator Pipeline Swivel Joint Pressure Pipeline -

An agitator

having a mechanical

A hinged or flexible through agitator

joint of separate elements the hydraulic a cutting mixture

The pipeline

which having

6.12 Rotor Agitator fixed rigidly on a rotor.

A mechanical

member

6.13 Soil Receiver; Suction End suction of the dredged soil. 6.14 Submersible Dredging below the water level. 6.15 Suction Pipe -

A removeable A dredging

end portion pump located

of the suction outside the

Pump -

hull of the vessel,

The movable

portion

of the suction which

pipeline. the hydraulic mixture approaches the

6.16 Suction Pipeline dredging pump. 7. Methods

The pipeline

through

and Facilities

for Operative

Movements operative vessel movements are performed for placing and by pulling to the

7.1 Anchor Dredger - A dredger whose work anchors by means of winches. 7.2 Anchor Handling the work anchors. 7.3 Anchor anchors. Handling A self-propelled Derrick -

designed

basically placing

and repositioning the work

A derrick on a dredger for for moving

repositioning

7.4 Bow Positioning Winch dredging facility forward.

A winch

a dredger along A method

the dredged section with the movement when a

7.5 Longitudinal Method of Operative Movements dredger moves along the section being dredged. 7.6 Operative Movements The movements

of operative

of a dredger in the operational

area.

7.7 Operative Movements by Means of Propellers 7.8 Pile and Anchor Dredger of piles and work anchors. 7.9 Pile Dredger A dredger whose operative movements are performed are performed by means

A dredger whose operative Winch A winch

movements

by means of piles only. the dredged if section with when a

7.10 Stern Positioning the dredging facility aft.

for moving

a dredger along

7.11 Transverse Method of Operative Movements - A method of operative dredger or dredging facility moves across the section being dredged. 7.12 Traveling Winch; Side Winch A winch for moving 3

mdvements

a dredger acrnss the dredged section.

IS : 12133 - 1987 7.13 7.14 Work Anchor Work Pile An anchor used for operative movement of a dredger. of a dredger.

A pile used for operative

movements of Soil the soil

and fixation

8. Methods

and Facilities

for the Removal Ports for

8.1 Bottom Discharge Opening closed with a door or a valve. 8.2 Chute -

discharge

through

the soil

hold

bottom

A tray for the disposal

of the soil by gravity. facility of a

8.3 Direct Discharge of SoilA disposal of the soil by means of the dredging dredge ( without special means of removal ) or by means of the flow in the basin. 8.4 Discharge Pipeline 8.5 Disposal The pipline through which the pulp is transported of the soil, extracted in dredging,

of Soil by Barges -

Transportation Transportation

by barges. through a

8.6 Disposal of Soil by Chutes chute ( s ) to the place of storage.

of the soil, extracted of the soil,

in dredging, in dredging, doors

8.7 Disposal of Soil with Conveyors - Transportation soil removal conveyor( s ) to the place of storage. 8.8 Door-Lifting discharge ports. 8.9 Floating 8.10 8,ll 8.12 Device A device for lifting,

extracted the

with the bottom

lowering

and fixing

closing

Discharge

Pipeline

Ground Pipeline Hopper Hopper Barge A vessel for the transportation A self-propelled An overhanging of the soil extracted the soil in the in dredging. hold(s) to the place

8.13 Hopper Dredger of storage. 8.14 Pendant Pipeline 8.15 Soil-Discharging 8.16 8.17

dredger carrying

part of the pressure pipeline.

Nozzle -

A tapered nozzle located at the end of the pressure pipeline. A conveyor for the disposal of the soil extracted in dredging.

Soil Removal Conveyor Soil Valve -

A device for altering

the direction

of soil movement from the soil well. dredger for storage

8.18 Sump - A well inside the bucket of the extracted soil. 9. Type of Dredgers
9.1 Depending

tower or in the hull of a multi-bucket
Power Unit

on the

Diesel Dredger

-

A dredger having -

a diesel engine

for the main one. transmission power power from the main from and

9.2 Diesel-Electric engine. 9.3 Diesel-Hydraulic the ma n engine.

Dredger

A dredger having A diesel dredger

an electric power having a hydraulic producing

Dredger

transmission for dredging

9.4 Dredger Main Engine; discharging of the soil.
Note -

Main Engine -

The engine

the

The main engine may also supply power to other users.

9.5 Electric Dredger engine. 9.6 Electric-Hyo'raulic the main engine.

-

A dredger Dredger -

having an electric

motor fed from

the shore main, for the main power transmission from

An electric dredger having a hydraulic

9 7 Gas Turbine Dredger 9.8 Steam one. Dredger -

A dredge having a gas turbine

for the main engine. or a steam piston engine for the main

A dredger having a steam turbine

4

IS : 12133 10. Types of Dredgers 10.1 Air-Lift Dredger Depending on the Methods of Soil Extraction or Treatment

- 1987

A dredger extracting A water

the soil with an air-lift dredging

or gas lift. the soil with water

10.2 Bed Wash-Out Dredger jets. 10.3 Bucket Dre6'ger 10.4 10.5 10.6 Grab Dredger Jet Dredger Rock-Crushing -

craft ensuring

by loosening

A dredger extracting

the soil with

buckets forming

a bucket chain.

A dredger extracting A dredger extracting Dredger -

the soil with

a grab.

the soil with a jet pump.

A water craft for crushing

rocks under the water.
as a

dredger with a chisel 10.7 Rock-Crushing Dredger with a Forced Motion - A rock-crushing an operating unit loosening the soil through a forced motion actuated by a power source. 10.8 Rock-Crushing Dredger with a Freely Falling Chisel - A rock-crushing chisel as an operating unit, falling on loosened rock under gravity only. 10.9 10.10 10.11 Rock-Drilling Single-Bucket Dredger Dipper A water craft for drilling Dredger rocky soil under water. the soil with a bucket on a boom. dredger with

A dredger extracting

Suction Dredger

A dredger extracting

the soil by suction with an impeller dredging

pump.

EXPLANATORY
The basic aim of this standard is to give clear enough understood by all. The application of those synonymous Certain not included in the standard shall be prohibited. provided with their abridged versions which may be used their misinterpretation. If the essential features definition is not stated. of a notion are contained

NOTE
definitions for every term to be equally of the standardized terms, which are standardized terms in the standard are in the cases eliminating a possibility of in the literal meaning of the term, its

Combinations of the terms stated in the standard are allowed for application. The terms may contain additional elements reflecting the field of application and the purpose of the vessels of dredging fleet. 5
Printed at Printograph, New Delhi, India

