NAT HIAF IS 17163 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


-raea hi Lact ANTS Ata Bike 


A 


Raar Aaga — Adyt 


Site Specific Investigation and 
Stability Analysis of Landslides — 
Guidelines 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2020 Price Group 4 


Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hill Area 
Development Engineering Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Landslides of different types occur at specific locations under certain topographic and geologic conditions. 
Therefore, it is important to carry out detailed investigations to study the failure mechanism of landslides to 
conduct slope stability analyses, to design a scheme of instrumentation for their deformation monitoring and 
finally to design appropriate control measures. 


Prior to any site specific investigation of landslides, it is important to collect the existing information pertaining to 
the particular landslide in the form of literature, maps, history and data. This prior knowledge, if exists, will form 
a basis for drafting a detailed investigation plan to be carried out for the landslide. 


This standard has, therefore, been formulated to provide general guidelines for site specific investigations and 
stability analysis of existing and potential landslide slopes in hilly terrain, and consequent large scale mapping of 
hill slope. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rule for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17163 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


SITE SPECIFIC INVESTIGATION AND 
STABILITY ANALYSIS OF LANDSLIDES — 
GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers general guidelines for site specific 
investigations and stability analysis of existing and 
potential landslide slopes in hilly terrain. In this context, 
site specific study refers to the large scale mapping and 
investigations of a hill slope. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 SITE 
INVESTIGATION 


SPECIFIC LANDSLIDE 


With a preliminary knowledge on the landslide based 
on the existing information and a reconnaissance 
survey of the landslide area, a site specific detailed 
investigation plan can be developed and executed to 
delineate the aerial extent and a general direction of 
movement of the landslide zone, to assess the geology 
and geologic structure and to decipher the cause of 
sliding. The investigation should not include just the 
actual landslide area, but also include surrounding 
peripheral areas of the landslide boundary. 


The site specific detailed landslide investigation 
encompasses surface, sub-surface and laboratory 
investigations as described in 3.1 to 3.3. 


3.1 Surface Investigation 


The surface investigation of a landslide includes 
topographic and geological investigations based on 
field survey and collection of samples for geotechnical 
characterization through laboratory testing. Also, a 
high resolution remote sensing data (up to 5 m spatial 
resolution) may be used for facilitating the surface 
investigation and may be useful in delineating the 
landslide features with a synoptic view. 


3.1.1 Topographic Investigation 


The topographic survey of the landslide should be 
carried out on 1 : 500 to 1 : 1 000 scale using total station 


survey instrument to prepare the elevation contour map 
with 1 m contour interval. The contouring should not 
only be done for the actual landslide body, but also 
include the surrounding area beyond the landslide 
boundary on uphill side at least up to 50 m or up to the 
ridge top of the hill slope and on downhill side up to the 
valley. The topographic/contour map will serve as the 
base map for all the investigations. 


The boundary of the landslide from crown to toe 
along with all the landslide features, such as the main 
scarp, minor scarps, transverse/longitudinal/radial 
cracks observed, slope breaks, zone of initiation, 
zone of transportation and zone of accumulation, etc, 
should be mapped on the contour map. The surface 
drainages/streams should be mapped on the contour 
map. The slope angle, slope aspect, break in slope and 
slope morphology (convex/concave/straight) shall be 
assessed from the contour map and field survey. 


At least three profile sections along the central portion, 
left flank and right flank of the landslide area shall 
be drawn using the contour map. The profile sections 
should be located so as to provide information that will 
be needed for planning sub-surface investigations and 
stability analyses. All the topographic features of the 
landslide should be marked on the profile sections. 
These profile sections should be augmented with 
geological and other information from time to time 
with the progress of investigation. 


3.1.2 Geological Investigation 


Local geologic and tectonic information provides a 
useful basis for an understanding of the general nature 
of the site geology. The rock types, surficial deposits 
and structural features of the landslide area should 
be mapped through field survey and portrayed on the 
base contour map. The geologic map should provide 
reasonably detailed information on surficial deposits, 
including landslide deposits. The depth of the surficial 
deposits may be estimated from the cut slopes on road 
side of the landslide site. The structural discontinuities, 
such as bedding/foliation planes and joints are to be 
mapped in detail in the field for in-situ rock exposures 
at the landslide site. The dip slope relationship of the 
landslide area should be established with the stereo 
plots of slope, bedding/foliation and other structural 
discontinuities data. This will help in assessing the 
mode of failure of rock slides. Rock slopes should be 


IS 17163 : 2020 


classified based on Slope Mass Rating (SMR) as per 
IS 13365 (Part 3). Other important aspects of the site 
to document include the distribution and thickness of 
colluviums and depth of bedrock weathering. 


Based on the collected information of the landslide area, 
an engineering geological map of the landslide should 
be prepared on the base contour map. The engineering 
geological map of the landslide area should include 
all the landslide features, surface drainages/streams, 
surficial deposits, bedrock exposures and structural 
discontinuities. The purpose of the on-site engineering 
geologic mapping is to document surface conditions, 
which, in turn, provides a basis for projecting subsurface 
conditions that may be relevant to the stability of the 
site. 


The profile sections of the landslide should be 
updated with the surface geological information and 
interpretations. Based on the detailed engineering 
geological mapping, the mode of failure of the landslide 
slope, such as circular mode of debris slide, translational 
mode of debris slide on the bed rock, planar/wedge/ 
toppling failure modes of rock slide should be assessed. 


Hence, an interpretive result of engineering geological 
mapping will be the classification of slopes in the 
landslide area in terms of stability. 


3.1.3 Collection of Samples 


Soil and rock samples from the surface of the landslide 
area should be collected judiciously. The samples may 
be collected from different contour levels along or in 
the near vicinity of the profile sections selected for 
stability analyses. These samples are taken primarily 
for laboratory testing for the measurement of in-situ 
material properties. Samples of the weathered and/or 
colluvial soil, the existing landslide rupture materials 
and the weakest components of the in-situ rock 
units should be taken for laboratory measurement of 
engineering properties. Special care should be taken to 
obtain oriented samples of existing and exposed zones 
of weakness or rupture surface. It is the responsibility of 
the field supervising geologist or engineer to accurately 
label and locate the collected samples. 


Soil samples that may be obtained from surface or 
from test pits belong to one of the two basic categories 
such as disturbed and undisturbed samples. Disturbed 
samples are collected primarily for soil classification 
tests where the preservation of the soil structure is 
not essential or for remoulding in the laboratory and 
subsequent strength tests. Undisturbed samples do 
not entirely represent truly undisturbed soil or rock 
conditions because the process of sampling and 
transporting inevitably introduces some disturbance 
into the soil or rock structure. 


3.2 Sub-surface Investigation 


Sub-surface investigation by the engineering geologist 
and civil engineer should be conducted at locations 


considered most likely to reveal any sub-surface 
conditions which may indicate the potential for landslide 
failures. Such investigation should locate and define 
geometry of the bedding/foliation and fracture surfaces, 
geological contacts, faults and other discontinuities as 
well as actual landslide rupture surfaces. 


Sub-surface investigation/exploration methods can be 
classified as direct and indirect methods. Direct methods, 
such as test borings/drilling and the excavation of test 
pits or trenches, allow the examination of the earth 
materials, usually with the collection of samples from 
different depths. Indirect method, such as geophysical 
surveys, provides an assessment of material type 
across depth. It would be recommended to follow 
direct investigations after reviewing results of indirect 
investigations. 


3.2.1 Geophysical Investigation 


Geophysical survey techniques, such as seismic and 
electrical surveys of the landslide area may provide 
an alternative method for sub-surface investigation to 
understand the approximate conditions of the landslide 
and surrounding area. These techniques measure the 
vertical and lateral variation of physical properties 
of the ground. They can be particularly useful in 
areas where direct methods, such as drilling and test 
pits are restricted. Geophysical methods are also 
generally used to support more traditional techniques 
(that is drilling and test pits) and should be correlated 
with the interpretation of intrusive investigation to 
improve confidence in results. Standard data collection 
techniques for geophysical survey should be used. 


3.2.2 Investigation through Drilling 


The locations and depths of bore holes for sub-surface 
investigation should be judiciously decided based on 
the interpretation of surface engineering geological 
investigations and geophysical scan line survey to 
reveal any sub-surface condition related to landslide 
failures. The drilling locations may preferably be along 
the profile sections or in the near vicinity of the profile 
sections. The depth to which drilling should extend 
can be difficult to define in advance. However, profile 
cross-sections from the surface engineering geological 
investigation can be helpful in planning the depths of 
bore holes required in investigation. In general, drilling 
should extend deep enough to identify materials that 
have not been subjected to movements in the past but 
might be involved in future movements and to clearly 
identify and extend beyond the underlying stable 
materials or bedrocks. 


The drill holes should be properly logged (as per 
IS 4464) to extract as many information as possible. The 
bore hole logs should include the detailed information 
as: geologic and soil description, colour, hardness, 
lithologic description, degree of weathering, alterations 
and fractures, strike and dip of bedding/foliation and 
other joints/discontinuities, core recovery, RQD (Rock 


Quality Designation) and ground water levels. In 
addition, during drilling the information on drilling 
rate, water loss, return water colour and collection of 
water washed samples should be undertaken. 


Using the drilling logs, the surface of rupture or slide 
plane should be assessed. Accordingly, the engineering 
profile sections of the landslide area should be improved 
and updated with the incorporation of sub-surface data 


3.2.3 Collection of Samples 


During the intrusive technique of sub-surface 
investigation through bore holes, all the materials 
(soil/debris/weathered rock/fresh rock) extracted from 
the sub-surface should be preserved in core boxes 
with proper label along the depths. These core boxes 
may be transported to the geotechnical laboratory for 
characterization of different materials across the depths 
of the landslide area. 


3.3 Laboratory and Field Testing 


In order to conduct slope stability analyses and to 
design appropriate control measures for landslides, 
physical as well as engineering properties of the soil 
and rock materials should be determined through field 
and laboratory investigations. 


3.3.1 For characterizing the debris and soil the following 
tests should be done as per the Indian standards given 
below: 


a) Classification and identification of soils as per 
IS 1498. 

b) Penetration test for soils as per IS 2131. 

c) Thin walled tube sampling of soils as per 
IS 2132. 


d) Preparation of dry soil samples for various tests 
as per IS 2720 (Part 1). 

e) Determination of water content as per IS 2720 
(Part 2). 

f) Determination of specific gravity as per IS 2720 
(Part 3). 

g) Determination of unconfined 
strength as per IS 2720 (Part 10). 

h) Determination of shear strength parameters of 
soil from consolidated undrained _ triaxial 
compression test with measurement of pore water 
pressure as per IS 2720 (Part 12). 

j) Direct shear test for soils containing gravel as per 
IS 2720 (Part 39/Sec 1). 


k) In-situ vane shear test for soils as per IS 4434. 


compressive 


3.3.2 For characterizing the rock mass the following 
tests should be done as per the Indian standards given 
below: 


a) Uniaxial jacking test for deformation modulus of 
rock as per IS 7317. 


IS 17163 : 2020 


b) In-situ shear test on rock as per IS 7746. 


c) Quantitative description of discontinuities in 
rock mass for Drill core study as per IS 11315 
(Part 12). 


d) Hardness of rock as per IS 12608. 


e) Direct shear strength of rock joints as per 
IS 12634. 

f) In-situ determination of rock mass deformability 
using a flexible dilatometer for Radial 
displacement as per IS 12955 (Part 2). 

g) Predicting of engineering properties (RMR) as per 
IS 13365 (Part 1). 

h) Determination of slope mass rating (SMR) as per 
IS 13365 (Part 3). 


j) Geological Strength 
IS 13365 (Part 4). 


Index (GSI) as per 


3.3.3 For characterizing of the intact rock specimens or 
on lumped rock samples following tests should be done 
as per the Indian standards given below: 


a) Point load strength index of rocks as per IS 8764. 


b) Unconfined compressive strength of rock materials 
as per IS 9143. 


c) Preparation of rock specimen for laboratory 
testing as per IS 9179 


d) Determination of modulus of elasticity and 
Poisson’s ratio of rock materials in uniaxial 
compression as per IS 9221. 


e) Determination of slake durability index of rocks 
as per IS 10050. 


f) Determination of tensile strength by indirect 
tests on rock specimens as per IS 10082. 


g) Determination of water content, porosity, density 
and related properties of rock material as per 
IS 13030. 


h) Determination of strength of rock materials in 
triaxial compression as per IS 13047. 


4 LANDSLIDE STABILITY ANALYSIS 


The evaluation of stability of the hill slopes becomes 
very essential for the safe design, especially when the 
slopes are situated close to residential areas or when 
infrastructures are built on these slopes. A hill slope 
can fail due to one or the combination of the four 
mechanisms like circular sliding, plane sliding, wedge 
sliding and toppling. Circular failure occurs in rock 
mass if it can be justified as homogeneous medium. 
When the instability is dictated by the presence of 
pre-existing geological features like joints, bedding 
planes or faults then the failure will be in the form of 
plane sliding, wedge sliding or toppling (see Table 1 of 
IS 14680). To assess the stability of a hill slope in 


jointed rock masses, all these possible failure modes 


shall be checked. 


IS 17163 : 2020 


Avast range of methods for the stability analysis of rock 
and mixed rock-soil slopes have been developed. These 
methods range from simple infinite slope and planar 
failure limit equilibrium techniques to sophisticated 
coupled finite/distinct element codes. Collection of 
field data and then implementation of the same is the 
portion where uttermost care should be taken. In the 
section below kinematic analysis is discussed in very 
brief followed by some detailed discussion to arrive 
at different input parameters required for hill slope 
stability analysis. Two different modelling techniques 
are discussed. In one case, the slope is represented 
as a continuum in which the effect of discontinuities 
may be considered by reducing the properties and 
strength of intact rock to those of rock mass. In another 
case, a combined continuum-interface numerical 
method may be adopted where the discontinuities are 
represented as interface elements in between the rock 
walls. In each case of numerical modelling of landslide 
slope, both static and dynamic (including earthquake 
parameters) analysis as well as analysis under dry and 
water saturated conditions shall be carried out. The 
loading conditions on the landslide slope such as dead 
loads (due to buildings and other infrastructures) and 
imposed loads (due to traffic, etc) shall be considered 
during numerical modelling. 


4.1 Kinematic Method 


Stereographic projection are used for the visualization 
and determination of the kinematic feasibility of rock 
slopes using friction cones, daylight and toppling 
envelopes, in addition to graphical and statistical 
analysis of the discontinuity properties. It is essential 
to note that such approaches recognize potential sliding 
failures involving single discontinuities or discontinuity 
intersections. 


The planar wedge slide occurs under gravity alone where 
rock mass rests on an inclined geological discontinuity, 
such as bedding/weakness plane that day-light into the 
free slope. A caution should be exercised that a rock 
slope may fail by toppling if dip of cross joint is more 
than 90° - w, + ø, where w,is the slope angle and ø, is 
the sliding angle of friction along joint plane. 


The failure of rock wedge (three-dimensional) occurs 
when two discontinuities strike obliquely across the 
slope face and their line of intersection daylights 
in the slope face. The rock wedge resting on these 
discontinuities may slide down along the line of 
intersection, provided that the inclination of this line is 
significantly greater than the sliding angle of friction. 
Alternatively, the wedge may slide on any plane of 
discontinuity. Further, the wedge may fail by floating 
due to high seepage pressures on the joints. 


Discontinuity data for different joint sets are used to 
assess the factor of safety against sliding. All limiting 
equilibrium techniques share a common approach 
based on a comparison of resisting forces/moments 


mobilized and the disturbing forces/moments. Methods 
vary, however, in the assumptions adopted in order to 
achieve a determinate solution. 


4.2 Numerical Method 


It is very crucial to choose the proper numerical 
modelling for rock slope stability analysis. Continuum 
modelling is best suited for the analysis of slopes that 
are comprised of weak rocks, and soil-like or heavily 
fractured rock masses. Limit equilibrium method, limit 
analysis method commercially available numerical 
code are useful in characterizing rock slope failure 
mechanisms. It is the responsibility of the engineer to 
verify whether they are representative of the rock mass 
under consideration. In case of a rock slope comprising 
multiple joint sets, which control the mechanism of 
failure, a discontinuum modelling approach may be 
considered as more appropriate. 


4.2.1 Continuum Analysis 


Rock slopes having weak rocks and soil-like or heavily 
fractured rock masses may be modelled as a continuum 
using a two dimensional, plane strain approach. The 
slope is represented as continuum in which the effect 
of discontinuities may be considered by reducing 
the properties and strength of intact rock to those of 
rock mass. Material properties are the most important 
input parameters for any numerical analysis. Hence, 
uttermost care has been taken to decide over the material 
properties. Most of the numerical codes consider the 
strength of rock mass as linear and generally require 
Mohr-Coulomb parameters, c (cohesion) and g, angle 
of internal friction, of slope material as strength 
parameters. 


Laboratory tests on small specimens cannot predict the 
shear strength properties of rock masses, in-situ tests 
which provide direct information on shear strength 
properties and deformability is necessary. However, 
in-situ tests are expensive and time consuming. 


Value of cohesion, friction and tensile strength may be 
obtained by fitting straight line over the generalised 
Hoek-Brown (GHB) failure envelope. The fitting process 
involves balancing the areas above and below the Mohr- 
Coulomb plot. Required input parameters are uniaxial 
compressive strength (UCS), geological strength index 
(GSI), Hoek-Brown constant (m,), Disturbance factor 
(D) and Elastic modulus of intact rock (£). The shear 
strength parameters obtained from the above method is 
the peak shear strength of the rock mass. 


The main motive behind this generalised Hoek-Brown 
(GHB) empirical failure criterion was to develop a 
dimensionless equation that could be scaled in relation 
to geological information, 


(1) 


a 
O; 
oO; =0,; +O; Nee 


ci 


nena ee tenis ol 
ORRE Geta a 


-GSI -20 
aspale" -e7 | 


The constants m,, s and a may be obtained from GSI. 
A parameter D is introduced to deal with blast damage. 


For GSI, see IS 13365 (Part 4). 


The value of equivalent cohesion and friction angle 
depends on the value of maximum minor principal 
stress (O; aax): O3 may can be calculated from the following 
relation for the slopes: 


-0.91 
O73 max n 0.72 Oe imax 
oO yH 


iG) 
The equivalent angle of friction and cohesion for 
the rock mass may be obtained by fitting a linear 
relationship to the curve generated by solving the 
generalised Hoek-Brown (GHB) criteria for a range 
of minor principal stress (o,) values defined by 
6,<6,<6,,,., where o, is the tensile strength of the 
jointed rock mass. Zero or a very nominal value of 
tensile strength for the rock mass may be considered. 


Strength reduction technique is generally implemented 
to determine the factor of safety using finite element 
method satisfying Mohr-Coulomb’s yield criterion. 


The factor of safety of a slope defined in the strength 
reduction technique is the factor by which the original 
shear strength parameter is divided in order to bring 
the slope to the verge of failure. For Mohr-Coulomb 
material model the factored shear strength parameters 
c, and @¢, are calculated as: 


c 
Ce = SRF a (4) 
ġ = tan” (=) 
SRF . (5) 


where SRF is the ‘Strength Reduction Factor’. 


To find the true factor of safety, a systematic search is 
to be performed that will just cause the slope to fail. 
The final value of SRF obtained in the process will be 
the Factor of Safety (FOS). 


In order to obtain a FOS of high precision with less 
calculation and a proper distribution of plastic zones 
in the critical equilibrium state, the Poisson’s ratio, 
v should be adjusted according to the principle that 
sing 2 (1-2v) always holds as reducing the strength 
parameters c and ¢. In most of the finite element analysis, 
the value of v is kept invariant; if the sing = (1-2v) 
is not satisfied then plastic zones are always over 
estimated. This phenomenon leads to an underestimated 
FOS. In order to avoid the above spurious failure 


IS 17163 : 2020 


mechanism, one can select a large enough Poisson’s 
ratio, v so that sing > (1—2v) is always satisfied as the 
shear strength parameters are reduced. But one should 
be careful while choosing a high Poisson’s ratio, if the 
value of the Poisson’s ratio is closer to 0.5 as it is prone 
to leading to numerical ill-condition. 


4.2.2 Combined Continuum-Interface Analysis 


In case of a rock slope comprising of multiple joint 
sets, which control the mechanism of failure, a dis- 
continuum approach may be considered as more 
appropriate. 


Combined continuum-interface numerical method 
focuses on the explicit simulation of interfaces through 
joint elements. In this method of analysis, discontinuity 
is represented as joint element which provides relaxed 
connectivity between two adjacent rock walls in contact. 
The degree of proportionality between force and 
displacement in these joint element is captured through 
the normal, k and tangential, x, stiffness coefficients. 


If the rock between the joints is intact rock, then the 
intact rock properties should be used. Rock between 
the joint sets may be assumed to be intact rock if all 
the joint sets are incorporated in the numerical model. 
In this combined method of continuum-interface 
analysis input parameters for joints are the most vital. 
Joint normal stiffness, k, may be calculated using the 
deformation modulus of intact rock material and rock 
mass. 


1 1 
Ratio of — generally ranges between T and ai for 


slope stability problems; where low normal stresses 


; k 
are generally encountered. Assuming the value of = 


s 


shear stiffness, k may be obtained. 


Since, laboratory tests on small specimens cannot 
predict the deformability of rock masses, in-situ tests 
which provide direct information on deformability are 
necessary. Empirical relations may be use to relate the 
rock mass deformation modulus to the deformation 
modulus of intact rock using GSI. 


Detailed field and laboratory investigation need to be 
carried out to determine the strength and deformation 
properties of the existing joints. The following 
information may be collected from field observations. 
Details of joint roughness, orientation, frequency, 
infilling, joint aperture, continuity, joint wall compressive 
strength, characteristics of bedding and foliations. 


The spacing of discontinuities in the numerical model 
may be an average value of the minimum and maximum 
spacing of individual joint in the field. The spacing of 
joints should be chosen very carefully, because with 
the decrease in the spacing, the chance of numerical 
instability increases and the numerical models with 
very closely spaced joints are computationally very 
expensive. So a balance between the joint spacing and 
computation time should be achieved. 


IS 17163 : 2020 


IS No. 
1498 : 1970 
2131: 1981 
2132 : 1986 
2720 
(Part 1) : 1983 
(Part 2) : 1973 


(Part 3) : 1980 


(Part 4) : 1985 


(Part 10) : 1991 


(Part 12) : 1981 


(Part 39/Sec 1) 
: 1977 


4434 : 1978 


4464 : 1985 


7317 : 1993 


7746 : 1991 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Classification and identification 
of soils for general engineering 
purposes (first revision) 

Method of standard penetration 
test for soils (first revision) 


Code of practice for thin walled 
tube sampling of soils (second 
revision) 

Methods of test for soils 
Preparation of dry soil samples for 
various tests (second revision) 
Determination of water content 
(second revision) 

Determination of specific gravity, 
Section 1 Fine grained soils 
(first revision) 


Section 2 Fine, medium and coarse 
grained soils (first revision) 


Grain size analysis (second 
revision) 

Determination of unconfined 
compressive strength (second 
revision) 

Determination of shear 
strength parameters of soil 
from consolidated undrained 
triaxial compression test with 
measurement of pore water 
pressure (first revision) 

Direct shear test for 
soils containing gravel, 


Section 1 Laboratory test 


Code of practice for in-situ vane 
shear test for soils (first revision) 


Code of practice for presentation 
of drilling information and 
core description in foundation 
investigation 


Code of practice for uniaxial 
jacking test for deformation 
modulus of rock (first revision) 


Code of practice for in-situ shear 
test on rock (first revision) 


IS No. 
8764 : 1998 


9143 : 1979 


9179 : 1979 


9221 : 1979 


10050 : 1981 


10082 : 1981 


11315 (Part 12) 
: 1992 


12608 : 1989 
12634 : 1989 


12955 (Part 2) 
: 1990 


13030 : 1991 


13047 :1991 


13365 
(Part 1) : 1998 
(Part 3) : 1997 


(Part 4) : 2014 
14680 : 1999 


Title 


Method of determination of point 
load strength index of rocks (first 
revision) 

Method for the determination of 
unconfined compressive strength 
of rock materials 


Method for the preparation of rock 
specimen for laboratory testing 


Method for the determination of 
modulus ofelasticity and Poisson’s 
ratio of rock materials in uniaxial 
compression 


Method for determination of slake 
durability index of rocks 


Method oftest forthe determination 
of tensile strength by indirect tests 
on rock specimens 


Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities in 
rock mass: Part 12 Drill core study 


Methods of test for hardness of 
rock 


Method of determination for direct 
shear strength of rock joints 


Code of practice for in-situ 
determination of rock mass 
deformability using a flexible 
dilatometer: Part 2 Radial 
displacement 


Method of test for laboratory 
determination of water content, 
porosity, density and related 
properties of rock material 


Method for determination of 
strength of rock materials in 
triaxial compression 


Quantitative classification system 
of rock mass — Guidelines 


RMR for predicting of engineering 
properties 


Determination of 
rating (SMR) 


Geological Strength Index (GSI) 


Landslide control — Guidelines 


slope mass 


IS 17163 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 


Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (H No-FFA, Block - G Priya 
Sudarsana Apts, Melur Road, Srirangam 
Tiruchirappalli, Tami Nadu) 


AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 
Border Roads Organization, New Delhi 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, Shillong 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, 
Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Defence Terrain Research Laboratory/(DRDO), 
Delhi 


Department of Science & Technology, Ministry of 
Science & Technology, New Delhi 


G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment 
Development, Almora 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Himalayan Environmental Studies & Conservation 
Organization, Dehradun 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Indian Army Corps of Engineers, YOL CANTT 


Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Konkan Railway Corporation, Navi Mumbai 


Maccaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, 
Gurugram 


Representative(s) 


Dr R. ANBALAGAN (Chairman) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
SHRI AMAN KHULLAR (Alternate) 


BRIG A. K. DAs 
Lt Cor ParRIKsHIT MenRa (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KUMAR AGARWAL 


SHRI SHEO PRASAD SINGH 
SHRI PREM CHAND Martuvr (Alternate) 


Dr MANISH GUPTA 
Suri Hart Das (Alternate) 


Director HCD (Nw&S) 
DIRECTOR (SARDAR SAROVAR) (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
SHRI AJAI CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Dr R. K. GoEL 
Suri ANIL Swarup (Alternate) 


Dr KISHOR KUMAR 
Dr Pankaj Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr L. K. SINHA 
SHRI BHOOP SINGH 


SHRI KIREET KUMAR 
SHRI SOUKHIN TARAFDAR (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. BODAS 
Dr T. B. Gosnat (Alternate) 


Dr ANIL JosHI 
CHAIRMAN & MANAGING DIRECTOR 


BRIG VIRENDER SINGH KATTARYA 


Dr P. K. CuaAmpati Ray 
Dr Ajanta Goswami (Alternate) 


Dr M. N. VILADKAR 
Dr MAHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJESH AGARWAL 


SHRIMATI MINIMOL KORULLA 
Dr H. S. Manpat (Alternate) 


IS 17163 : 2020 


Organization 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of Defence, 
(Army), New Delhi 


National Centre for Seismology, New Delhi 
National Highway Authority of India, New Delhi 
National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, 


Hepali 


National Institute of Disaster Management, New Delhi 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Rail Vikas Nigam Limited, New Delhi 
SJVN Limited, Shimla 


Snow Avalanche Study and Establishment, 
Chandigarh 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRIMATI Rtvoo MAHENDRU 
Suri S. K. Misura (Alternate) 


Dr O. P. MISHRA 
Dr H. S. Manpat (Alternate) 


Dr RAM KUMAR 
Suri R. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MURUGAPPAN 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI R. D. SINGH 
Dr SUDHIR Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI A. K. CHADHA 


CoL P. MATHUR 


Suri T. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI AJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. BARTARYA 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Dr Manos Kumar RAJAK 
Scientist ‘D’ (CrviL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 56 (12161). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


