IS 13946 m&T rn%

( Part 1 ) : IS84

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard

DETERMINATIONOFROCKSTRESSCODEOFPRACTICE
PART 1 USING THE HYDRAULIC FRACTURING TECHNIQUE

UDC 624121.5

Q BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG . Price Group 4

February 1994

Rock

Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,

CED 48

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Division Council. by the Bureau of Indian Standards, Committee had been approved by the fashion than horizontal after the draft Civrl Engineering because the

Vertical stress on a rock mass varies in a more predictable former is primarily affected by the weight of overburden.

stress

When an opening is introduced in the rockmass, the natural state of stress is disturbed locally as the rock mass attains a new state of equilibrium. The stress around an opening resulting from various man-made activities is termed <induced stress' as opposed to virgin stress or absolute stress which describes the original, undisturbed state of stress. The natural state of stress is often termed as in-situ stress. Underground in-situ stress is sometimes sufficiently high ( relative to the rock mass strength ) to cause rock bursting spalling, buckling, heaving, or other ground control problems. In such cases, knowledge of the state of in-situ stress is of critical importance to the design and construction of engineering structures in a rock mass. Even in cases where the effects of stress are less dramatic, the optimum shape, orientation and layout of underground structures, as well as the effectiveness and ultimate cost of rock support systems, can be significantly influenced by the in-situ stress. Factors affecting the magnitudes and orientation of in-situ stress include the weight of overlying and materials, geologic structures ( on local and regional scales ), tectonic forces within the earth's crust, residual stress and the thermal stress. The complexity of the relations between these factors and the stress cannot be measured in-situ stress usually prohibits reliable estimation of rock stress. 111addition, directly, and therefore, rock stress determination techniques rely on the measurement of some response ( e.g. displacement, strain, deformation ) that is induced by a disturbance of the rock mass. Th s measured response of rock in a stress-disturbed zone ( e.g. the wall of a tunnel ) is extrapolated, from the opening outwards, through a numerical model or analytical techniques; or measurements must be made via a drillhole that extends into an undisturbed region of the rock mass. Several methods have been tried to arrive at a reliable means of measuring in-situ stress. different advantages and disadvantages with respect to a particular applicable. Different methods for measurement got wide acceptance: Part 1 Using the hydraulic Part 2 Using Part 3 Using Part 4 Using of rock fracturing stress have been technique deformation gauge cell with 9 or 12 strain gauges covered in following four parts Each which offers have

a USBM type drillhole CSIR- or CSIRO-type flatjack technique

Hydraulic fracturing technique is the only rock stress determination technique that has been successfully found application in in-situ characterization applied to deep drillhole. This technique has, therefore, investigations via vertical drillholes from the surface. Hydrofracturing may also be done across pre_ existing joint holes in the drillhole and values of in-situ stresses to be obtained. The committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A.

IS 13946( Part 1 ) : 1994

Indian Standard

DETERMINATIONOFROCKSTRESSCODBOFPRACTICE
PART 1 USING THE HYDRAULIC FRACTURING TECHNIQUE

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) covers the method of determination of the state of in-situ stress underground through a drill hole using hydraulic fracturing technique. The test provides, in general, the magnitudes and direction of the maximum and minimum stresses in the plane perpendicular to the drill hole. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 11315 Title Method for the quantitative description of discontinuities in rock mass: Orientation Aperture Glossary of terms and symbols applicable to rock mechanics are' necessary

4 SYMBOLS For the purpose of this standard, symbols shall apply:
H Pb V = = =

the following

pcl Pf = P, = Ps = Pr =
C'II dmin = omsx = =

( Part 1 ) : 1987 ( Part 6 ) : 1987 11358 :1987

T

depth at test zone below ground level; static pressure head of fracture fluid; mass density of rock; initial pore water pressure; fracture initiation pressure; pumping pressure; instantaneous shut-in pressure; fracture reopening pressure; vertical stress; minimum horizontal stress; maximum horizontal stress; and drillhole rupture strength of the rock.

5 APPARATUS 5.1 Drilling Equipment 5.1.1 Any drilling equipment capable of producing a stable hole to the required test depth may be used. The hole diameter should suit the available packer equipment or vice versa.
5.1.2 The

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 11358 : 1987 shall apply, in addition to the following. 3.1 Fracture Initiation Pressure

During pressurization as the pressure is increased both tangential and vertical stresses may become tensile. Fracture will occur if the induced tensile stress reaches the drill hole rupture strength. The drill hole fluid pressure at the moment of drillhole rupture is termed as fracture initiation pressure or breakdown pressure. 3.2 Shut-in-Pressure After injecting a sufficient volume to propagate fracture length equal to about three times the drillhole diameter, injection is stopped and hydraulic system is sealed or shut-in yielding the instantaneous shut-in-pressure. 1

drilling equipment should also be capable of obtaining core samples in the vicinity of the test sections in order to evaluate drillhole rupture strength and to examine discontinuity orientations and characteristics. 5.2 Packer Equipment ( see Fig. 1 ) Packer equipment shall comprise the following: a) A system to isolate a test section of drillhole. Inflatable packers, through which a water flow pipe runs, shall be used to seal the holes enabling a test section to be pressurized. Double packer system, which isolate a part of the hole, shall generally be used, bur a single packer, which isolates the base of a hole, may also be considered. For setting the packers and seal the test interval hydraulic or gas expansion shall be used. The

IS 13946 ( Part 1 ) : 1994

TO PUMP PRESSURE

FLOWMETER TRANSDUCERS

to

PUMP

HIGH

PRESSURE ROD-, IRE

ii./

,PRESSURE TRANSDUCER HOUSING

C OMPASS

IMPRESSION PACKER-

4

S
m

/

PACKER

DRILLHOLE\ DRILLHOLE

/

/-

a) Hydrofracturing

Tool

b) Impression

Packer

FIG. 1 SCHBMATIC REPRESBNTATION 2

IS 13946 ( Part 1 ) : 1994

initial packer setting pressure depends on the packer type. If the internal pressure approaches the packer pressure, the packer pressure should be increased to a level sufficient to prevent leakage past the packers. b) For separating the packers spacers shall be used. The length of the test section shall be chosen from the observation of core and/or drillhole wall conditions by means of methods described in 5.5. A minimum length of five times the drillhole diameter is commonly recommended. The packers should provide. 5.3 Fluid Injection Equipment Fluid injection following: equipment shall comprise the

5.5 Measuring

Eqaipments

Following

measuring equipments

shall be used:

a) Pressure transducers for measurement of fluid pressure at the surface or immediately above the packer. b) A pressure gauge or transducer to measure packer inflation pressure with a compatible level of accuracy to the interval pressure gauge. c) lnstrument 6 PROCEDURE
6.1 Drilling 6.1.1 and Inspection

to record fluid flow with time.

a) A high pressure pumping system capable

of maintaining a constant flow over the range of pressure expected durmg the test. The pumping system should have sufficient capacity to overcome the friction-losses to initiate in the supply rods and hydrofractures.

Hole diameter and size of downhole hydraulic fracturing equipment shall be selected based on the equipment available. After determination of the test location and depth, a drillhole should be sunk beneath that depth to provide the test intervals. Final choice of the test zone length and depth shall be made based upon the fracture characteristic of recovered cores or on inspection of the drillhole wall by an optical or acoustic loging tool.
6.1.2 Rock cutting and/or cores shall be examined if detail to determine rock characteristics at the test horizons. The choice of packers and inflation pressure may be affected by rock hardness and roughness of the drillhole wall.

b)

Sufficient supply rods, tubing or hose usually used to lower the packer into the drillhole.
Equipment

5.4 Inspection

Any of the following equipments may be used to find the direction of hydrofractures:

4 Drillhole periscope

or television camera for visual inspection. A video recording of a pretesting observation is advantageous for comparison purposes.

6.1.3 To clear the passage for the packer assembly hole may be flushed to removed debris and/or the drill bit may be lowered to the test depth to clear the passage for the packer assembly. 6.1.4 The orientation and apertures of geological discontinuities with the test section shall be estimated and recorded in accordance with IS 11315 (Part 1): 1987 and IS 11315 (Part 6) : 1987 respectively. This also serves as a pre-test run of the fracture orientation measurement. 6.1.5 A drillhole caliper log in order to avoid placing packers in oversizes sections of the hole is recommended. 6.1.6 The packer assembly shall be inserted to the predetermined depth, the depth shall be recorded, and the packers are inflated to a pressure sufficient to seal against the applied fluid pressure. 6.1.7 When filling the injection tubing, care shall be taken to eliminate air from the system. Trapped air greatly increases the compressibility of the system and has an adverse effect on the rate of pressure build-up during test interval pressurization.
3

b) Acoustic televiewer.
Drillhole c> caliper which is helpful to ensure that the designated test section is of suitable diameter for satisfactory seating of packers. tool to measure alignment and straightness in case of any indication of excessive deviation.

4 Orientation
Magnetic e>

compass used to orient cameras or televiewers for impression packers. Alternate means of orientation shall be used in the minerology of the rock which is likely to affect the compass reading. Magnetic rich rock ( that is iron formations or basic igneous rocks ) may be suspect. Gyroscopic compasses, which maintain the orientation of the inspection device from the hole collar, may be used.

IS 13946 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 7 TESTING 7.1 Pressure shall be monitored either at the ground surface or within the test location. When the pressure is monitored at the ground surface, the pressure in the test interval shall be increased slowlv to ensure minimal pressure losses in the tubing. When pressure is monitored within the test section, pressure losses are unimportant. No standard for pressurization rate or flow rate exists; however a common range of pressurization rate of 0. I-2.0 MPa/sec may be followed. The pressurization rate shall be controlled by the constant flow rate selehted. The appropriate flow rate to achieve the desired pressurization rate shall vary depending on the overall compressibility of test system, which largely reflects the elasticity of the tubing, the length of the tubing, the compressibility of the fluid and the volume of fluid in the test system. In general, deep tests with large diameter tubing shall require higher flow rates than short-hole tests with smaller diameter tubing.

7.6 The hole inspection shall be carried out to observe and record hydrofracture positions and orientation. 7.7 The drillhole rupture strength of the rock may be estimated from laboratory tests on core samples or may be obtained in-situ by comparing the fracture initiation pressure with subsequent reopening pressure. 8 CALCULATIONS
8.1 Where the

pumping pressure is measured directly at the test zone, Pr, P, and P, may be obtained directly from the time versus pressure plot ( see Fig. 2 ). Figure 2 presents an idealized hydraulic fracturing pressure record. The general form of the pressure record depends on the relative magnitudes of the principal stresses.

7.2 The packer pressure should be initially set well below the anticipated breakdown pressure; the packer pressure should be increased at the same rate as the injection pressure. The procedure reduces the possibility of fracture initiation caused by the packer pressure. However, after the rough range of hydrofracturing pressure, at a particular site is known, the subsequent packers can be inflated to the desired/required pressure in single stage. The test interval pressure shall be recorded against time. As pressure increases, both tangential and vertical effective stresses can become tensile. Evidence of failure shall be obtained from pressure time curve and fracture initiation pressure shall be noted. 7.3 After injecting a volume sufficient to propalength equal to about three gate a fracture times the drillhole diameter, injection shall be stopped and the hydraulic system shall be sealed or shut in yielding the instantaneous shutting pressure (PS). Additional pressurization cycles shall be used to determine the fracture reopening pressure (P,) and additional measurements of the shut-in pressure (PS). 7.4 Subsequent repressurization cycle should be conducted at similar, constant flow rates, higher or lower flow rate cycles may be added at the discretion of the operator. Use of higher or lower flows rate cycles in the stress calculation should be specified and explained in the report of results. 7.5 After the test is completed, the packers shall be deflated and the equipment shall be recovered from the drillhole. Care should be taken that the packers are fully deflated before attempting to move them.
4

When the plane of hydrofracturing is nearly parallel to the drillhole axis, the following expressions may be used to obtain the principal stresses:
Omln D P8

urnax a

T -

3 P, P, -

Pi -

P,

( for initial pressurization
@mar =

cycle )

3P, -

P,

(for subsequent repressurization

cycle )

The drillhole rupture strength (T) is determined from laboratory tests, which model the hydraulic fracturing process ( preferable) or the tensile strength obtained from direct tension, or Brazilian tests. Appropriate corrections for the effects of sample size and test configuration may need to be made. The vertical stress is usually assumed to be the stress generated by the depth and density of overlying rock. The direction of (T,,, is in the fracture plane and orthogonal to urnIn. 9 REPORTING
OF RESULTS

9.1 General Information

The report should include the following information: a) A description

general

of the test site location.

b) A geotechnical log of the test section giving all available information and including the recorded geological discontinuity characteristics and drillhole wall conditions. A geological c> description of rock tested, including rock type and availability of core.

I� 13946 ( Part 1 ) :1994

Pf = FRACTURE INITIATION PRESSURE P,=SHUT IN PRESSURE P[ FRACTURE REOPENING PRESSURE

P,=SHUT

IN PRESSURE

PO= FORMATION PORE PRESSURE

.-

_I

TIMEFIG. 2 IDEALIZED HYDRAULICFRACTURINGPRESSURE RECORD d) The test depth, length and drillhole size. of the test zone c) Representations of fracture tracers, constructed from impression packers, on photographs and/or acoustic televiewer logs of test intervals. d) A description of the method used for calculating CT,,,. In case the drillhole strength is determined rupture by laboratory tests, the laboratory test results and the method of data reduction, including equations used, should be reported in sufficient detail. Test results showing substantial discrepancies with other data and giving possible or probable explanations of the causes.

la, DETAILED INFORMATION The report should include the following detailed information for each measurement location:

a) Graphs

showing pumping or flow rate, injection pressure versus time for each test and a description' of the method(s) used to selection Pf, Ps and P,, if distinct pressures are not obvious.
H, Pr, PO, Pr, P,, P,

b) Tabulated values of

and minimum maximum stresses and stress directions.

horizontal

IS 13946 ( Part 1 ) : 1994

ANNEX

A

( Foreword )
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Rock Mechanics
Chairnm DR BEAWANI SIN~R Members SHRI P. K. JAIN ( Alternate to Dr Bhawani Singh ) ASSISTANT RESEARCH OFFICEI~ DR R. L. CHAUEAN CHIEF ENGINEER ( R & D ) DIRECTOR ( ENQQ ) ( Altem~le )

Sectional Committee,
University

CED 48

Reprcsentin,o of Roorkee, Roorkee

Irrigation Himachal Irrigation

Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh Pradesh State Electricity Board, Shimla Departmpnt, Haryana

Asia Foundations & Constructions Ltd, Bombay SHRI DADESHWAR GAN~ADEAR DHAYAQUDE S~nr PEAKASH MADRUKAR JOSE: ( Altcmatc! ' Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Roorkre DR A. K. DUBE SHRI A. K. SONI ( Alternate ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee SHRI A. GEOSH DR G. S. MEEROTRA ( Alternate ) .Geological Survey of India DR S. GANQOPADHYAY SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEB ! Altercate )

DR M. R. GOYAL
SHRI KARWIR

Irrigation Central

& Power Department,

Chandigarh Station.

( Alternate

)

Srtnr B. M. RAYA GOWDA DIRECTOI~ ( Alternate )
DR UDAY V. K~LKARNI DR R. P. KULKARNI MEYBEK SECRETARY D.IRECTOR (C) ( Alternate ) Dr M. V. NAQENDRA SRRI D. N. NARESE ( Alternate ) SHRI M. D. NAIR PROF T. S. NAGARAJ ( Alternate ) SHRI D. M. PANCR~LI DR U. D. DAY-IR ( Alternate) DR Y. V. RAMANA

Water & Power Research

Pune

Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bornhay Irrigation Department, Maharashtra Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi National Associated Irrigation Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi New Delhi

Instrument Department,

Mfrs (I) Pvt Ltd, Government

of Gujarat

P~OF T. RAZUA~~URTHY DR G. V. RAO ( Alternate ) SHRI C. B. LAK~HNANA RAO SHKI A. K. RAYAKRISENA ( Alternate DR V. M. SHARMA SERI A. K. DHAWAN ( Alternatr )
MAJ

National Geophysical Research Indain Institute of Technology, Karnataka Engineering Research

Institute, Hyderabad New Delhi Station, Station, Karoataka New Delhi

)

Central

Soil & Materials

Research

S. K. SHASWA CAPT S. P. S. KOHLI ( Ahnate SHRI D. S. TOLIA SHRI P. J. RAO ( Altcrnatc)

Engineer-in-Chief's Central Director

Branch,

New Delhi New Delhi

)

Road Research General,

Institute,

SHRI J. VENKATRAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

BIS ( ,%WJJC~OA4etn8cr )

Secretaries SJXRI J. K. PRASA~ Joint Director

( Civ Engg ), BlS ( Civ Engg ), BIS

SYT NEETA SHARMA Deputy Director

6

IS 13946 ( Part 1) : 1994
( Continued from page6 )

Field Testing of Rock Mass and Rock Mass Classification
SHRI U. S. RAJVANSBI Members PROP K. B. A~ARWAL CHIEF ENOINEER/R-CUM DIRECTOR RESEARCH OFFICIEIL ( Alternate ) DR A. K. DUBE PROF A. K. GHOSE PROF V. D. CHOUR~Y ( Alternate) SHRI B. M. RANE GOWD~: SHRI V. K. MERROTR.~ SARI G. S. MEIIROTRA SHRI U. N. SINHA ( Alternote ) SHRI D. M. PAN~HOLI
SHRI U. D. DATIR ( Altcrnatc ) DR G. V. RAO DR K. K. GUPTA ( Ahmate ) RESEARCH OFFICER ( SR & P DIVISION ) SHRI B. K. SHA~MA DR V. M. SHAHHA DR R. B. SINOH ( Alternate ) SHRI VITTAL RAM

Subcommittee,
Institute, Roorkee

CED 48 : 1

Representing U. P. Irrigation Research

University of Roorkee, Roorkee Department of Irrigation and Power, Government Central Minining Research Station ( CSIR Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad

of Punjab

), Dhanbad

Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune U. P. Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ). Roorkee Irrigation Department, Gandhinagar Central Designs Organization,

Indian Institute of Technology Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nasik National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi Department of Irrigation, Government of Haryana

7

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade of implementing the standard, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or and `Standards Monthly Additions'. edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No. CED 48 ( 5129 ).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affec,ted

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160036 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 { 37 84 99, 37 85 61 1 37 86 26, 37 86 62 53 38 43, { 53 23 84 53 16 40

235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 I 632 92 95, 632 78 58 632 78 91, 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches
: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CCIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja. India

