IS 15666 (Part 4): 2006 1s0 3977-4:2002

TT4$tFntF/wlhwJl

Indian Standard GAS TURBINES -- PROCUREMENT

PART 4 FUELS AND ENVIRONMENT

ICS 27.040

.,

@ BIS 2006

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9 NEW

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002 P-rice Group 7

BHAVAN,

Apr// 2006

Rotating

Machinery

Sectional

Committee,

ET 15

NATIGNAL FGREWGRD This Indian. Standard (Part 4) which is identical with ISG 3977-4:2002 `Gas turbines -- Procurement -- Part 4: Fuels and environment' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted.by theTlureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. The text of the ISG Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

b)

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

the current practice

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their respective places are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical ,,, , do

ISO 3977-1 :1996 Gas turbines -- Procurement -- Part 1 : General introduction and definitions ISO 3977-3 :"2004 Gas turbines -- Procurement -- Part 3 : Design requirements ISG 11086:1996 Vocabulary Gas turbines --

IS 15666 (Part 1) : 2006 Gas turbines -- Procurement: Part 1 General introduction and definitions IS 15666 (Part 3) : 2006 Gas turbines -- Procurement: Part 3 Design requirements IS 15665:2006 Vocabulary Gas turbines --

do

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this sta-ndard: /nternationa/ Standard Title Petroleum products -- Fuels (class F) -- Specifications fuels for industrial and marine applications of gas turbines

ISG 4261:1993

ISG 6190:1988

Acoustics -- Measurement of sound pressure levels of gas turbine installations for evaluating environmental noise -- Survey method Gas turbines and gas turbine sets -- Measurement noise -- Engineering/survey method of emitted airborne

1s0 10494:1993

ISG 11042-1:1996 ISG 11042-2:1996

Gas turbines -- Exhaust gas emission -- Part 1: Measurement Gas turbines monitoring -- Exhaust gas emission

and evaluation `emission

-- Part 2 : Automated

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 15666 (Part 1s0 3977-4:2002

4): 2006

Indian Standard GAS TURBINES -- PROCUREMENT

PART 4 FUELS AND ENVIRONMENT

1

Scope

This part of ISO 3977 provides guidelines for procurement of gas tutilnes with consideration of the fuel quality and of the environmental performance. Guidance is given to both the packager and purchaser on what information should be provided with regard to the fuel used by a gas turbine, and with regard to the type of information necessary to quantify the expected environmental impact. Fuel specifications are referenced but not provided.

2

Normative references
reference in this text, constitute provisions of to, or revisions of, any of these publications ISO 3977 are encouraged to investigate the documents indicated below. For undated applies. Members of ISO and IEC maintain

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through this part of 1S0 3977. For dated references, subsequent amendments do not apply. However, parties to agreements based on this part of possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to registers of currently valid International Standards. ISO 3977-1:1997, ISO 3977-3:2002, Gas turbines -- Procurement Gas turbines -- Procurement products

-- Part 1: Genera/ introduction -- Part 3: Design requirements

and definitions

ISO 4261:1993, Petroleum marine applications

-- Fue/s (c/ass F) -- Specificatiorm

of gas turbine fuels for industrial

and

ISO 6190:1988, ACOUStiCS -- Measurement environmental noise -- Survey method ISO 10494:1993, Engineeringkwvey ISO 11042-1:1996, ISO 11042-2:1996, ISO 11086:1996, Gas turbines method and gas

of sound pressure

levels of gas turbine installations

for evacuating

turbine

sets

--

Measurement

of

emitted

airborne

noise

-

Gas turbines -- Exhaust gas emission -- Part f: Measurement Gas turbirres -- Exhaust gas emission -- Part 2: Automated Gas turbines -- Vocabu/a~

and evaluation

emission monitoring

1

IS 15666 (Part 4): 1s0 39774:2002

2006

3

Terms and definitions
given in ISO 3977-1, ISO 3977-3, ISO 11086

For the purposes of this part of ISO 3977, the terms and definitions and the fcdlowing apply. 3.1 density P
p. Pref

R . Tref where the reference temperature is typically selected as 15 `C and the' reference pressure is 101,325 kPa

3.2 integrated gasification combined cycle IGCC process where a low quality fuel is gasified to produce a high quality fuel that meets the fuel specificatiorrs turbine 3.3 fuel-bound nitrogen FBN nitrogen component within the fuel which contributes to NOX formation NOTE This does not include nitrogen as gaseous N2.

for a gas

3.4 net specific energy NSE heating value determined with the combustion generated water in the vapour phase NOTE 1 It is also known as the lower heating value. See also ISO 2314, ISO 4261 and ISO 6976.

,,, ,

3.5 relative density specific gravity (gaseous fuels) ratio of the density of the fuel gas to the density of air
~ = Pfuel Pair

NOTE 1 NOTE 2

For gases, temperature and pressures for both gases need to be specified. For liquid fuels, it is the density of the liquid fuel relative to water. The temperature of both fluids should be specified.

3.6 grm+s.specific energy GSE heating value determined with the combustion generated water condensed, NOTE It is also known as the higher heating value.

thus including the heat of vaporization.

3.7 sound power level Lw ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of a given sound power to the reference sound power

2

IS 15666 (Part 4): 2006 1s0 39774:2002
NOTE 1 NOTE 2 NOTE 3 > 3.8 sound -pressure l&l Lp ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the square of the sound pressure to the square of the reference sound pressure NOTE 1 NOTE 2 NOTE 3 The reference sound pressure is 20 pPa (=2 x 10-5 Pa). Sound pressure level is expressed in decibels. Based on ISO 10494. The reference sound power is 1 pW (= 10'12 W), Sound power level is expressed in decibels. Based on }S0 10494.

3.9 selective catalytic reduction SCR post-combustion catalyst system for reduction of NOX emissions 3.10 volatile organic compounds Voc hydrocarbons such as propane and butane, which can interact with NOX to form ground level ozone NOTE VOCS are sometimes measured and reported as unburned hydrocarbons (UHC).

3.11 Wobbe index WI heating value of the fuel divided by the square root of the specific gravity (relative to air)

,., ,

NOTE Because the specific gravity of a gas is dependent upon both temperature and pressure, theconditions where@ density is determined for the both the fuel and air should be specified. See annex A for examples of calculations of the Wobbe index. 3.12 normal cubic metre m3 (normalized) cubic metre of gas, usually dry, referenced to 1 atmosphere NOTE

(101,325 kPa) and O "C

Although the unit Nm3 is used in industry, this should not be used in International Standards,

4

Symbols (and abbreviated terms)

The following terms and symbols are used in this part of ISO 3977. P P T CEM PEM density of fluid or gas pressure, m kPa temperature, in K or "C

continuous emissions monitoring predictive emissions monitoring

IS 15666 (Part 4): 2006 1s0 39774:2002 5 5.1 Purchasers' General
be

andpackagers'

requirements

for fuels

Proper use and operation of a gas turbine requires that accurate information on fuel types and fuel requirements obtained. Both the purchaser and the packager play critical roles in this process. If there are no International Standards available, national standards as shown in annex C of ISO 3977-3:2002 be used as guidelines with the mutual agreement of the purchaser.and pack-ager. 5.2

may

Purchaser's obligations
has the responsibility to identify all fuels to be considered for the gas turbine project of interest. project. As a general outline, the

The purchaser

The purchaser shall provide relevant, accurate data, consistent with the-proposed purchaser shall be knowledgeable about the following: a) site ambient conditions (i.e. temperature, these variables and altitude); pressure, relative humidity,

and mean and extreme

conditions

of

b)

expected fuel classification for the project (i.e. raw natural gas, pipeline natural gas, coke oven gas, landfill gas, IGC"C medium and low energy gases, refinery gases, etc.); performance/load range of the gas turbine augmentation, etc.); applicable (i.e. hours of operation, time at specific load, use of power

c)

d)

local or regional regulatory authority requirements. levels, including limits

The purchaser shall be able to report detailed fuel properties and contaminant (chemical and physical characterization), to the packager for review.

d wHiMy

5.3

Packager's obligations

The packager shall define the fuel types and ranges of fuel qualities acceptable for the gas turbine application. These may include liquid and gaseous fuels; fuel emulsions may also be considered. Note that the packager may specify a unique reference temperature .(0 "C or 15 `C, for example). 5.4 5.4.1

Gaseous fuels
General

This subclause applies to all fuels that are in the gaseous state at the gas turbine interface. In ceftain cases, the fuel as delivered to the site may not be in the gaseous state. If multiple fuels are available, or required over the gas turbine operating envelope, complete information shall be provided for each. Based on the fuels expected to be used on a specific project, the purchaser shall provide the range of expected properties for each of the requirements listed in 5.4.2. It shall be the responsibility of the purchaser to control the chemical and physical properties, and the contaminant levels, for the fuel gas supplied, to be within the previously agreed upon limits at all times, and to protect the gas turbine from being fueled at any time with fuel not within the agreed upon limits. 5.4.2 Chemical-properties

Fuel specifications shall comply with relevant national standards. The packager shall identify general fuel propedies appropriate for the purchaser's application. The information required shall include normal chemical characteristics, and normal safety and handling properties. The purchaser shall provide the packager with the following information:

4

IS 15666 (Part 4) :2006 1s0 39774:2002

a) b)

the full chemical composition

of the proposed fuel gas(es); # and mass basis); this may be determined analytically, or

specific energy (net and gross, both volumetric calculated from the chemical analysis; Wobbe index at fuel supply temperature variations; the presence of contaminants/components cause potential coking or fouling problems; the presence of higher combustors; the minimum temperature hydrocarbons,

c)

and pressure

and the range of .Wobbe index expected

for fuel

d)

such as dust, rust, tar, naphthalenes,

waxes or water, that may

e)

-up to C14, if the gas turbine is to be equipped with lean-premix

type

f)

necessary to mevent condensation

at the fuel injection pressures.

Specific fuel components (or fuel additives) that may be corrosive or induce air emissions, including toxic emissions, shall be identified by the purchaser and reported to the packager for comment. The packager shall comment on the general acceptability of this fuel. The packager shall review the fuel property data, and comment on its appropriateness for the proposed gas turbine application. The packager's analysis shall be the basis for comments to the purchaser. The purchaser shall provide site emission constraints for each fuel. 5.4.3 Physical properties

For gaseous fuels, the packager shall provide technical data on pressure and temperature requirements for all fuels and fuel system components. These requirements shall include a review of the complete fuel analysis for the purchaser's application. Information furnished by the packager shall include: a) b) supply pressure and temperature requirements (upper and lower limits); necessary to prevent condensation ,, at fuel injection

dew point at given pressure and minimum pressures; minimum pressure requirementsto minimum pressure requirements the temperature

temperature

c) d) e) f) 9) h)

start the gasturbine; to run the gas turbine;

range permissible for continuous operation;

filtration and liquids separation requirements; allowable condensed liquids within the fuel supply to the gas turbine; implications temperature on gas fuel supply pressure range; from full speed no load to full load across the entire air ambient

i) j)

design Wobbe index range of the fuel for the gas turbine; allowable gas fuel pressure variations (both short and long term). such as

In addition, the packager shall report on the compatibility of the fuel with specific combustion equipment, lean premix combustors, or other means of emissions suppression, such as water or steam injection". 5.4.4 Fuel treatment

To comply with packager and ISO 4261 fuel requirements, fuel treatment may be required. Based upon the physical and chemical properties of the fuel, the purchaser is responsible for providing fuel gas conditioned to the required specifications.

IS 15666 (Part 4): Eo 39774:2002
5.4.5 Emissions

Fuel properties will impact combustion generated pollutants. The packager is responsible for identi~lng the exhaust emissions for particular fuel types. The purchaser shall provide detailed fuel analyses (or fuel samples) to make an accurate emission projection. Properties of interest include: a) b) chemical analysis (carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, chlorine); gas compositional chromatography); analysis (reporting to concentrations that are below detection limits using gas

c) d)

specific energy (net and gross); the presence of reactive gases such as alkynes (e.g. acetylene). shall correspond to standardized procedures such as those specified in International

All tests of fuel properties Standards.

The purchaser shall provide site emissions constraints for each proposed fuel. 5.4.6 Startup and shutdown

In some cases, the base fuel may not be available or acceptable for gas turbine ignition, startup and shutdown. The packager shall specify the amount and quality of the startup and shutdown fuel (liquid or gas) required, as well as its minimum pressure and temperature requirements. 5.4.7 5.4.7.1 Safety and handling aspects Non-traditional fuels

.,

Fuel gases can come from non-traditional sources. Unusual fuel compositions can present specific safety and handling problems. Some hazards are associated with combustion properties of the fuel (such as hydrogen or acetylene) while other hazards are associated with the toxicity. The purchaser shall alert the packager to the presence of unusual components in the fuel. The packager shall review all the fuel components of concern and comment, where appropriate, on safety and handling aspects. For equipment beyond. the packager's scope of supply, -the purchaser is responsible to inform vendors of potential safety issues. A brief list of non-traditional fuel sources includes: a) b) c) d) e) f) refinery gases that may be high in hydrogen; coke oven gases that may be high in carbon monoxide; raw natural gases that may have high hydrogen su!fide levels; syngas (or synthetic gas) derived from a low quality fuel gasification landfill and digester gas; fuel gases that are heavier than air, and hence may collector pool in recessed areas, process, such as an IGCC;

Examples of key fuel hazards are described in 5.4.7.2 and 5.4.7.3. 5.4.7.2 Hydrogen content

Due to its wide flammability limits and low density, the presence and concentration of hydrogen in the fuel shall be carefully evaluated. Appropriate ventilation, gas detection and explos"mn proofing shall be provided by the packager. (This is applicable to the gas turbine enclosure and fuel gas compartment enclosures only.)

6

IS 15666 (Part 4) :2006 1s0 39774:2002

5.4.7.3

Explosion

proofing/leak

detection

>

In addition to the emphasis system and its surroundings. occur. Applicable codes and upon between the purchaser subject. The packager shall required. 5.5 5.5.1 Liquid General -fuels

on hydrogen, all gaseous fuels shall be properly considered in the design of the fuel Fuels heavier than air shall not be allowed to collect in low points where ignition might standards for hazardous classification and equipment design shall `be mutually agreed and packager. The purchaser shall inform the packager of any local regulation on the define the locations of vents or purge lines to which the purchaser's connections are

This subclause applies to all fuels which are in a liquid state at the gas turbine enclosure limits. If multiple fuels are available or required over the gas turbine operating enveiope, the -purchaser/operator shall provide the range of expected properties for each grade of fuel considered. It shall be the responsibility of the purchaser/operator to control chemical and physical properties, and the contaminant levels for the specified fuels, to within previously agreed limiting values at all times, and to protect the gas turbine from receiving fuel not within the-agreed limits. The purchaser (or subsequent owner of the equipment) shall inform the packager properties or fuel quality which allow the fuel to fall outside of the initial requirements. of any changes in the fuel

The packager shall provide general fuel requirements for the operation of the gas turbine, including acceptable grades according to ISO 4261. The packager shall also provide information on the compatibility of specific combustion equipment designs, such as pre-mixed combustors with specific grades (or properties) of fuels. 5.5.2 Chemical properties

Fuel specifications shall comply with ISO 4261 or equivalent national standards. The packager shall identify generaI fuel properties appropriate for the purchaser's application, These include physical properties, corribtistion properties, aromatic contents, safety and handling properties and trace components. A comprehensive fuel analysis shall be submitted to the packager describing all critical fuel properties (see also ISO 4261). Where the proposed liquid fuels being considered are not of Class Al or A2 distillate quality, the pu[chaser shall provide the packager with a sample of approximately 4 Iitres for evaluation. Combustion-generated The purchaser shall combustion-generated a) b) c) d) e) f) g) fuel-bound fuel sulfur; asphaltene content (heavy oils); aromatic content; carbon residue (heavy oils); carbon/hydrogen ratio; emissions depend upon liquid fuel properties and quality. assume responsibility for providing emissions. These include: information on specific fuel properties relevant to

nitrogen (FBN);

net specific energy (NSE) and gross specific energy (GSE),

The fuel properties outlined in the agreement between the packager and purchaser determines some of the equipment selection and operating conditions of the gas turbine system. If at a later date the purchaser desires to

7

IS 15666 (Part 4): 2006 1s0 39774:2002

use a fuel outside the original agreed-upon limits, the purchaser shall inform the packager accordingly, and shall supply a complete analysis or sample for evaluation and requalification in the same manner as outlined above. 5.5.3 Physical properties requirements for the gas turbine. These' shall

The packager shall identify general fuel handling and processing include, as a minimum, the following: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) i) j) k) fuel viscosity (at two temperatures); vapour pressure; sediments; ash; water; additives (either present or required) and the concentration flash point; boiling point; end point; cold filter plugging point (ISO 4261); density.

or addition rate;

,,, , requirements for the gas turbine. These shall

The packager shall identify general fuel handling and processing include, as a minimum, the following: a) b) c) d) e) general property requirements for acceptable fuel grades;

viscosity Requirements (both start-up and normal operations); fuel heating or insulation requirements; removal or control of corrosive agents; allowable additives for control of combustion and corrosion problems. equipment, such as

In addition, the packager shall report on the compatibility of the fuel with specific combustion lean premix combustors, or post-combustion equipment such as a duct burner or SCR. 5.5.4 5.5.4.1 Fuel -treatment General

Fuel treatment consists of those operations which modify the condition of the fuel in the storage tahk to meet specific requirements at the gas turbine. The objective is to bring the fuel to conditions required by the packager. This can include fuel washing, settling, or inclusion of additives to neutralize undesirable agents which cannot be removed from the fuel. The packager shall define the maximum permissible levels of all relevant components from all sources (i.e. fuel, air, wash liquids, water, steam, etc.). Some liquid fuels may contain agents corrosive to the gas turbine hot gas path components: sodium (Na), potassium (K), vanadium (V), lead (Pb), etc. The purchaser is responsible for qualitative

8

IS 1S666 (Part 4): 2006 1s0 3977-4:2002
and quantitative fuel monitoring to assure compliance with the packager specification. Also, the packager make recommendations on the methods used to quantify the presence of these components. may

Ash-forming liquid fuels may require fuel treatment (e.g. extraction of alkaline metals or the inhibition of the fuel bound vanadium). Ash-forming fuels are often characterized by their density or source of feedstock. These fuels include: heavy oil, residual oil, crude oil. Specifying the requirements for fuel treatment and fuel supply based on fuel quality is the responsibility of the -packager ensuring that the -agreed limits are not exceeded remains the responsibility of the purchaser. 5.5.4.2 Washing

For fuels that may require washing, the packager shall comment on the washing requirements after considering the fuel quality and the application. Fuel oil washing is accomplished by continuous addition of demineralized water and a demulsifying detergent to the fuel oil. The water is then separated from the oil by centrifugal or electrostatic forces. Although water and oil are immiscible liquids, the density difference between heavy oil and salty water must not lie below the limitation given by the treatment plant supplier to ensure the complete separation of water from the fuel oil. 5.5.4.3 Inhibition

If heavy fuels containing vanadium are specified by the purchaser, the packager shall give requirements for additives for vanadium inhibition. The packager's fuel specification shall include allowable and recommended fuel grades. Also, the packager shall give the maximum permissible turbine entry temperature based on the presence of fuel contaminants or fuel additives. 5.5.5 Emissions

Fuel properties will impact combustion generated pollutants. The packager is responsible for identifying the exhaust emissions for particular fuel types. The purchaser shall provide detailed fuel analyses (or fuel -samples) to make an accurate emission projection. Properties of interest include those referenced in 5.5.2 and 5.5.3. ,,., All tests of fuel properties shall correspond to standardized procedures.

The purchaser shall provide site emissions constraints for each proposed fuel. 5.5.6 Start-up and shutdown fuel is needed and define the requisite fuel qualities or

The packager shall specify if an auxiliary start-up/shutdown properties and the amount required. 5.5.7 5.5.7.1 Safety and handling General requirements shall be reviewed

Safety and handling purchaser. 5.5.7.2 Storage

by the packager

based on information

supplied

by the

Adequate fuel storage and handling practices shall be employed to minimize water and other contaminants in the fuel. These include settling the fuel oil prior to use, floating suction provisions, and periodic removal of water from the bottom of the tank. In applications where adequate settling periods cannot be accommodated, rapid purification equipment such as centrifuges or electrostatic separators may be required. The overall fuel system design shall avoid sludges or water, and any clean-up system shall have the capability to remove sludges. Fuel storage vessels shall be enclosed within a beamed area that meets local or regional regulatory authority requirements.

9

IS 15666 (Part 4) :2006 1s0 39774:2002

5.5.7.3

Vapour pressure the purchaser shall provide the vapour pressure of the fuel at a

For volatile fuels (such as light oils or naphthas), specific reference temperature. 5.5.7.4 Explosion proofing/leak detection

Leak detection and explosion hazards relevant to volatile hydrocarbon fuels shall be considered in the design. Applicable codes and standards for hazardous classification and equipment design shall be mutually agreed upon between the purchaser and packager. The purchaser shall inform the packager of any local regulation on the subject. The packager shall define the locations of vents or purge lines to which the purchaser's connections are required. 5.5.7.5 Viscosity/lubricity

The packager shall identify acceptable ranges of fuel viscosity for each application. Fuel analyses (including fuel lubricity, particularly for light fuel oils) or samples shall be provided for determination of flow properties. In' the case of heavy fuel oiis, the packager shall provide information on fuel heating requirements. These include: a) b) maximum fuel temperature minimum fuel temperature permitted; required.

For low lubricity liquid fuels, the purchaser shall inform the packager of the intent to use or operate on fuels of such quality.

6 6.1

Environmental
General

requirements
,,,

Environmental issues include primarily emissions during start-up, shutdown and general operation. Emissions 01 interest are noise (acoustic), combustion-generated emissions, and possibly thermal emissions, These topics are described in the following subclauses.

6.2
6.2.1

Noise

emissions

Responsibilities

The packager shall be responsible for providing estimates of sound emission levels from equipment within the packager's scope of supply. The purchaser shall inform the packager of the presence of other sound producing or absorbing structures, the absorbing effect of the ground and the barrier effect of other buildings. The purchaser shall also provide specific site details that include a general site description, topography, meteorological data, and physical arrangements. In the absence of such information, idealized site characteristics of flat, unobstructed terrain, with non-absorbing ground surface, and an absence of reflective or barrier surfaces shall be assumed. The purchaser shall identify the location of noise-sensitive areas, and any applicable statutory noise requirements. 6.2.2 Expression ef results shall be reported as follows:

Sound measurements a)

sound pressure level (ref. 2 x 10's N/mZ), sound intensity level ref. 10'12 W/m2) emitted by each source at a specified position; sound power level (ref. 10-12 W), calculated according to sound pressure or sound intensity level. frequency weighting, typically "A or "C", shall be specified.

b)

The relevant instrumentation

IS 15666 (Part 4) :2006 1s0 39774:2002
fjm2m3 Reference The measurement a) methods

for sound/noise

measurements

of sound pressure level shall be carried out according to position is far enough from the

ISO 6190 in the far field, either within the plant boundaries if the measurement noise sources of the plant or outside the piant boundaries, or

b)

tSO 10494 in the near field (1 m from the major surfaces of the source). The guaranteed result shall be the average sound levels measured from the perimeter of the unit(s) and the auxiliary equipment. of sound power levels shall be -performed according to ISO 10494.

The calculation 6.2.4

Reporting values emissions from the equipment supplied. Reporting

The packager shall provide technical data on noise/acoustical standards shall be based on the requirements of ISO 10494. 6.2.5 Sound level within gas turbine enclosure

The packager shall report estimated sound levels inside the enclosure for the p-urpose of occupant safety only. If the enclosure is not accessible, this requirement shall be waived. 6.2.6 Sound level outside of the gas turbine enclosure (near and far field) beyond the turbine enclosure.

Sound emissions shall be considered a) b)

In the near field (1 m from the source and 1,5 m above the ground): the relevant standard is ISO 10494. In the far field: it is preferable that the distance form the source envelope (smallest rectangle enclosing all relevant equipment) be at least 50 m, or 1,5 times the largest dimension of the source envelope, but not more than 200 m. The relevant standard is ISO 6190. -Sounds produced from different sources near the gas turbine

6.2.7

The turbine packager shall make responsible efforts to quantify the sound level emission from the turbine, taking into considertilon the background noise levels provided by"the purchaser. The packager shall define specific sound sources from the turbine, exclusive of sources installed by packagers beyond the scope of the turbine packager's control. Sound power levels and spectral distribution in octave bands shall be reported. 6.3 6.3.1 -Exhaust General emissions

Emissions from gas turbines come in the form of solids, liquids, gases and vapours. For natural gas operation, gases and vapours are the components of primary concern. Particulate/smoke emissions are very low and difficult to measure when using gaseous fuels. In the case of liquid fuels, particulate (solid and condensibles) can be adequately measured and quatilfied. 6.3.2 -Responsibilities

Exhaust emissions for the specified fuels shall be known and provided by the packager. Technical information on the emission response shall be based on customer needs and regulatory requirements. "Emissions will normally be coupled .to specific "fuel properties, site conditions, and the operating profile of the turbine. The purchaser shall inform the packager in a commonly spoken/written language about relevant environmental regulations and restrictions existing or being developed.

11

IS 15666 (Part 4): !s0 39774:2002

2006

6.3.3

Reporting

values

.

Emissions values provided by the packager shall be reported in a consistent manner. All emission values shall be reported using a standardized measurement system. When emissions are reported normalized to the fuel specific energy, the use of net or gross specific energy shall be explicitly stated. Examples of emission reporting methods are as follows: a) gas/vapour oxygen); emission concentrations reported on a dry basis (the common reporting basis is corrected to 1-5 YO

b)

gas/vapour emission oxygen level; emissions emissions

concentrations

reported

on a dry basis, but with a correction

to a specific

reference

c) d) e) f)

reported on a mass flow basis; reported on a mass per unit energy basis; reported on an "as methane" or "as propane" basis; corrected to a specific oxygen

VOC (UHC) emissions emissions content];

reported on a density concentration

basis [e.g. mg/m3 (normalized)

g)

filter stain and plume opacity methods reported to quantify smoke or particulate emissions. and pressure shall-be clearly defined.

When reporting emissions on a density basis, the reference temperature For solid particulate emissions, the following formats are appropriate: a) b) c) 6.3.4 emissions emissions emissions reported on a density basis [mg/m3 (normalized), reported on a mass flow basis; reported on mass per unit energy basis.

mass of particulate per volume of exhaust gas];

Gaseous emissions

The packager shall be able ro provide information at required engine loads for the following emissions: a) b) c) d) e) f) NOX (gas), both NO and N02 may be required in some cases; CO (gas); unburned hydrocarbons (gas); (VOC) (gas);

volatile organic compounds opacity or visibility;

so*.

The definition of VOC shall be according to ISO 11042-1 (unburned hydrocarbons, excluding CH4 and C2H6). Clarification on the definition of V-OCS may be required. Additionally, the composition of the permanent gases (C02, H20, 02, N2, argon) shall be known (both on a volumetric and mass basis) since this information may be required for any post-combustion equipment. For gaseous emissions, information from the packager shall be available in any of the following formats as requested by the purchaser a) concentration basis (wet or dry basis, depending upon purchaser's requirements);

12

IS 15666 (Part 4): 3977-4:2002

2006

1s0

b) c)

mass rate basis, usually on an hourly rate basis; normalized to engine heat input.

The methods used for the measurement and evaluation shall be in acmrdance with ISO 11042-1 or ISO 11042-2, or applicable local or regional regulatory authority requirements or standards. 6.3.5 6.3.5.1 Particulate General

Particulate emissions are produced with most fuels, but are of concern only with liquid fuels. Particulate emissions with gaseous fuels are not zero, but are often below detection limits of most measurement equipment. In the case of gas fuels, providing particulate emissions is not recommended. 6.3.5.2 Particulate and smoke emissions with liquid fuels

Particulate emissions include solid and liquid components. These contribute to a visible smoke plume and formation of haze. The packager shall be able to provide reasonable estimates of particulate emissions based on knowledge of fuels compatible with the turbine fuel specification. Emissions shall be sufficiently understood to identify a) b) c) solid particulate produced in combustion, process for emission abatement, and

sulfates formed in the post-combustion particulate

released by the ash in the fuel.

6.3.5.3 6.3.5.3.1

Smoke/opacity General

Smoke is a visual indicator of particulate emissions. However, particulate are not the only exhaust species which can impact plume visibility. The purchaser shall be aware that the presence of N02 in the exhaust can also `contribute to a visible plume. 6.3.5.3.2 Smoke

Smoke is an emission property that is highly correlated to turbine particulate emissions and fuel quality. High particulate "loadings can produce a visible smoke plume. Smoke emitted from gas turbines is normally evaluated in two ways: visible plume opacity and the filter stain method. The purchaser shall be aware that there are no effective techniques defining the relationship between visible smoke emissions and total particulate loading. The purchaser shall also be aware that the smoke/particulate emissions provided by the packager are valid only at specific exhaust temperature, pressure and humidity conditions; and assume zero loading from local ambient air. The purchaser shall be aware that the presence of control technologies at the exhaust can affect these same emissions. Supplementary equipment, such as a duct burner, heat recovery steam generator (HRSG), oxidation catalyst, can all affect the exhaust smoke/opacity. The purchaser has the responsibility to obtain information from vendors on the impact of any equipment in the exhaust flow path, Opacity/smoke a) b) c) emissions may be reported in the following manner as measured by a transmissomete~

optical opacity/density,

by the filter stain method; by visual inspection.

13

IS 15666 (Part 4): 2006 1s0 3977-4:2002"
6.3.5.3.3 Opacity

The packager shall quote opacity levels based on optical absorption (percent absorption). When required, Bacharach Numbers (see ISO 5063) may be used. This information shall consider stack dimensions (height, diameter) and atmospheric conditions. Visual opacity shall be based on emissions from a single exhaust stack. The purchaser assumes the responsibility for incorporating these emissions into total plant. 6.3.5.4 `Water or steam injection and quantity

If water or steam injection is used for NOX control, the packager shall define the water quality requirements. The impact on power output and thermal efficiency shall be provided. 6.3.5.5 Evaporative cooler applications

In evaporative cooler applications, the packager shall define the water quality and quantity specify the compatibility of various evaporative systems, their location and limitations, if any. 6.3.5.6 Post-combustion controls

requirements,

and

The impact of post-combustion controls on all emissions is important. However, this is not the principal responsibility of the packager. For example, oxidation catalysts will oxidize fuel sulfur to S03, and may potentially increase the total particulate emission. Selective catalyst reducers (SCR) can further increase particulate emissions via the formation of ammonium sulfates and ammonia slip. The purchaser shall be aware of the interaction between any proposed post-combustion controls technology and gas turbine emission levels. His the responsibility of the purchaser to evaluate the impact of all post-combustion control technologies on the exhaust emission signature. 6.3.5.7 Emission monitoring ,,, ,

The purchaser and packager shall define responsibility for providing continuous emissions monitoring (CEM) and/or predictive emissions monitoring (PEM) if required to meet local or regional regulatory authority requirements. Species normally capable of direct monitoring include NOX, CO, 02, UHC, S02 and opacity. Particulate cannot normally be monitored on a continuous basis. The purchaser is also responsible for selecting equipment, and the installation and warranty of emission monitoring equipment. All maintenance requirements of CEM shall be the purchaser's responsibility. The purchaser is responsible for defining the reporting, data collection, storage, data processing and quality assurance/quality control (QAQC). These are normally established by the local or regional regulatory authorities. -6.3.5.8 Verification of emissions

The gas turbine is often part of a more complex facility that may include an HRSG, duct burner, SCR, etc. The purchaser shall be aware of the extreme difficulty of verifying the emission performance of each component. The purchaser shall inform the packager of the integrated plant design. Where required, the purchaser, packager and other vendors shall develop a plan to evaluate emission performance of plant components. 6.3.5.9 Background conditions

In some cases, it is possible to encounter emission requirements more stringent than the pre-existing ambient air quality. The purchaser shall be aware that the packager's equipment is not designed to function as an air cleaning system. The packager assumes all exhaust emissions are net emissions, above those pre-existing in the ambient air.

14

IS 15666 (Part 4): 2006 1s0 39774:2002
6.3.6 6.3.6.1 Other emissions General include thermal emissions and water discharge.

Other relevant emissions which shall-be considered 6.3.6.2 Plant thermal emissions

Plant thermal emissions are released into the air, and can be released into the water during operation. The packager shall, if available and if requested, provide technical information to allow the purchaser to estimate relevant plant thermal emissions. These can include stack thermal loss or discharges of water from the gas turbine. Local regulations may dictate the allowable thermal emission limits from a turbine or plant. The purchaser shall be aware of relevant local, regional, national or international regulations in this area. 6.3.6.3 Water discharges

Water releases by a gas turbine include rainwater runoff, cooling water, compressor wash-water, turbine washwater, evaporative cooler blowdown, and water or steam for NOX control or power augmentation. The packager shall provide information on the expected quantities, rates and presence of contaminants from discharges associated with gas turbine functions. 6.3.6.4 Construction issues

The purchaser is responsible for issues relevant to the construction, fabrication and installation of the gas turbine and its suppofl equipment. Relevant issues at this phase include, but are not limited to, noise generated during construction, rainwater run-off, possible water contamination, waste generation, and emissions from construction equipment or fires 6.3.6.5 Fuel gas (venting)

Under some circumstances, fuel gases can be released into the environment during the course of plant operation. The purchaser is responsible for ensuring that these emissions are controlled, and is responsible for logging and report such releases to appropriate agencies. 6.3.6.6 Lube oil demister

Lube systems can release oil vapours into the environment through the demister. The purchaser is responsible for properly specifying and maintaining this equipment to minimize the loss of lube oil through this system. Some environmental agencies may also require that such releases be reported. It is the responsibility of the purchaser to provide this information on a timely basis.

15

IS 15666 (Part 4): 2006 1s0 3977-4:2002

Annex A
(informative)

Calculation of Wobbe index

Packagers may use different approaches for calculating the Wobbe index. This is particularly critical for low heating value gases, or in applications where the fuel gas is heated or cooled prior to combustion. NSE Pgas (I% `)/Pair where
~gas (Pref, `ref )

Wl=

is the density of the gas; -is the density of the ai~ is the fuel pressure (kPa); is the fuel temperature ("C);

Pair

P T
Pref

is the air reference pressure (101,325 kPa); is the air reference temperature (O "C);

Tref NSE

.,

is the net specific energy of the fuel [kJ/m3 (normalized)]. -and pressure are at a specific location unique to the packager's design

In this example, the fuel temperature requirements.

Another Wobbe index method used by some packagers includes a separate qualifier for the fuel gas temperature:

`"E
where d
`gas

is the gas specific gravity, with quantities referenced to 15 "C and 101,325 kPa; is the absolute temperature of the fuel gas;

NSE

is the net specific energy of the fuel [kJ/m3 (normalized)]. where the

Because the reference temperatures are sometimes established at different values, the temperatures gas density and gas heating value are evaluated should be stated explicitly.

16

Bureau

of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed Review of Indian Standards publications maybe reproduced in any not preclude the free use, in the course as symbols and sizes, type or grade to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if.the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed Amendments Amend No. from DOC : ET 15 (5693). Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131, 23233375, 23239402 Website : www.bis.org.in Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg Telephones 23237617 [ 23233841 23378499,23378561 [ 23378626,23379120 2603843 ( 2609285 2254 [ 2254 1216, 2254 2519,2254 1442 2315

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 11 OOO2 : 1/14 C. 1. T. Scheme KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336,

Eastern Northern Southern Western

Vll M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi 160022 600113

Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

: C. 1. T. Campus,

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri MUMBAI 400093

(East)

28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches:

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. .BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. RAJK.OT. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR, PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

