IS :3016-1962 Reaffirmed 2006 1990 ) (( Reaffirmed )

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FIRE PRECAUTIONS IN WELDING AND CUTTING OPERATIONS

( First Revision )
First Reprint AUGUST 1993

UDC

621'791'555'624'014'2

: 006'76

0 Copyrlghr 1982
BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

Gr 5

December 1982

18:3016-1982

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FIRE PRECAUTIONS IN WELDING AND CUTTING OPERATIONS

( First Revision )
Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDC 14
ChoirmM
&tar A. K. BEATTAOUYYA

Refmsenting

Ministry of Railways

MCdNS
CHEXIBT & METALLUECWT-II, RDSO, LIJCKNOW ( Alternate I Shri A. K. Bhattacharyya ) PBODUWION ENOINEER. ICF. MADRAS ( A&rmttc II'to _ Shri A. K. Bhattacharyya ) SEBI J. K. AIILUWALIA SHBI T. K. BA~U ( Altsrnafc ) SH~I S. BALABUBRAHPANYAX SHBI K. BALMANOHAE SEXI R. V. KALE ( Altemat~ ) SHBI S. K. BAAU SHRI R. BANERJEE ( Alf~r~te) SEBI S. N. BASU to

Stewarts

& Lloyds

of India

Ltd, Calcutta

Binny Ltd, Madras Hindustan Shipyard Indian Oxygen

Ltd, Vishakhapatnam

Ltd, Calcutta

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay SHEI S. BHATIA .Peico . SHIU E. K. VENKATABA~ANI ( A&mate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHBI J. N. BHATTAOHARYYA Sam K. L. BA~UI ( Altrmalc ) M. N. Dastur & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SEEI S. K. BURMAN SHRI D. B. GHO~FI ( Alternate I ) SHRI: B. B. SAHA ( Aitarnutc II ) Central Boilers Board, New Delhi SHRI S. C. DEY AssogeFtin of Indian Engineering Industry, SHEI C. 6. GIROTRA S-I R. S. AQQARWAL (Alternate]

c _Q

( dontinwd on porr 2 )

cqyright 1982

BURFALJ OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Coprignt Act ( XIV of 195? ) and reproduction in whole or in pa ,t by any means except with written permirion of the publisher shall ba deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

ISr'3016- 1982
( Continuedfrom page1 ) Members
SHBI V. G~JRAL

Representing Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd ( SAIL ), Burnpur D & H Secheron Electrodes Ltd, Indore

SEBI D. S. HONAVAR SHBI S. R. JANA ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI R. KBISHNAMURTJIY SHRI N. K. SETHI ( Alternate I ) SHBI K. POORANOHAN~RARAO ( Alternnfe II ) Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, SIIRI A. V. MULAY Jamshedpur SHRI P. S. Josrr~ ( Alfernate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI N. MUM MOORTI~Y SHRI M. K. TADANI ( Alternate ) Walchandnagar Industries Ltd, Walchandnagar SHRI K. M. POLII: &RI G. D. APTE ( Akewr?zte ) Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI H. L. PIGABIIAKAR SHRI J. K. NANDA ( Alternate ) Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI J. R. PI~ASIII~;R Indian Hume Pipes Co Ltd, Bombay SEBI B. RAMASWAMY SHBI S. A. VIJAY KEERTEI ( Alternate ) Research and Development Centre for Iron and DR V. RAMASWAMY Steel ( SAIL ), Ranchi DR S. K, CHOIJDHURY ( &fern& ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI P. B. RAO SRRI A. L. LAL~ ( Alternate ) Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay SHRI V. S. G. RAO SHBI L. M. TOLANI ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, VishakhaSARI A. P. SANYAL patnam SHRI R. D. PENNAT~UR ( Allernate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI R. SABANOABAJAN New Delhi SERI S. .K. BIIATIA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Employment and Training, SHRI G. S. SETHI New Delhi Bokaro Steel Plant ( SAIL ), Bokaro SHBI P. P. SHBIVASTAVA SHBI ANIL PANDYA ( Alternate ) Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. G. N. SWAMY SHRI R. K. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) Indian Register of Shipping, Calcutta SHBI II. K. TANEJA SHRI S. C~AND~A ( Alternate ) Apar Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHIU J. R. UPAD~YAY SH~I PATWARD~AN ( Alternate ) i;dvani-Oerlikon Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. S. VISVANATH Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&o Member ) SHRI C. R. RAXA RAO, Director ( Strut & Met ) Secretor) SIIRI P. DAXSIIINA MURTY Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI ( Confinuedon pllge 19

)

2

IS:3016-

1982

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FIRE PRECAUTIONS IN WELDING CUTTING OPERATIONS AND

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 1 June 1982, after the draft finalized by the Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1965. In this revision the concept of' hot work ' permit system has been introduced with a view to establishing some control over welding and cutting operations using naked flame The provisions relating to general precautions have or producing sparks. been amplified. 1. SCOPE 1.1 tion use and This standardcovers the recommendations for the practices for prevenof loss of life and/or property by fire or expIosions arising out of the of gas and electrical-equipments for the purposes of welding, cutting similar operations.

1.2 General precautions recommended cover the normal work area designated for the fabrication and maintenance activities using welding, cutting and allied processes and also special situations having potential tire hazards. 1.3 Special precautions recommended cover the situations or locations which are susceptible to fire or explosion hazards arising out of the presence of naked flame or sparks, capable of igniting the combustible materials present in the area. 2. GENERAL PRECAUTIONS that the management 2.1 Hot Work Policy - It is recommended industrial establishments should consider the necessity of preparation 3 of of a

IS 13m.6 -

1992

The purpose policy statement for introducing ( hot work' permit system. of introducing the c hot work ' permit system is to establish some control over welding and cutting operations using naked flame or producing sparks, capable of igniting combustible materials in areas outside the normal specified ones for carrying out such activities regularly. 2.1.1 The type and extent in view the following: a) The size and facility b) The complexity c) The degree of hazards areas. 2.2 Bol Wan+& Pwdt of such a system should be prepared of the plant, and present at the work site and in surrounding keeping

of the operations,

System

2.2.1 fdentijcation of Hazardous Areas - In introducing the hot work policy and the permit system, it should be ensured that the specific areas throughout the plant considered as hazardous by the Competent Authority, for any type of hot work, should be identified and prominently marked as ` hazardous area ' in consultation with the various departmental heads. 2.2.2 Ajplication for Hot Work Permit - For conducting hot work of any type, inside the designated hazardous areas, or in close proximity to the hazardous areas, or near that area for prolonged period or in any new locations, the departmental head or this authorised person should put up application for ` Hot Work Permit ' filling in a suitable Hot Work Permit form. 2.2.2.X Hot work #errnit form - A suitable form should be developed specifically for the purpose of considering the plants operations, and degree of hazards present. It should incorporate specifically the type and nature of precautions that should be taken in performing the hot work at the particular location and time. It should also mention the Competent Authorities through whom, the application should be corroborated before seeking permission from the person incharge of the plant, by designation, such as Plant Manager, Works Manager, Site Incharge, etc. In Appendix A, an example of Hot Work Permit form has been included for reference. 2.2.3 Accordance of Permission - The person incharge of the plant shall make a thorough inspection of the place, if possible, accompanied by a fire officer, before cutting or welding operations are commenced, particularly in ( a ) any new place where hot work is proposed for the first time, and ( b ) where the work is to be extensive in proximity to the marked hazardous area. He shall then either accord his sanction with or without conditions or insist upon the adoption of alternative methods of carrying out the work, should he find the conditions unsafe for hot work operations.

4

IS t 3016 - 1962
2.2.4 Su)ervision of the System - The Competent Authority should supervise the working of the system'by issuing clear instructions regarding the precautions required to be taken at different hazardous areas marked, periodically checking the hazardous areas, notice boards, equipments for fire fighting and extinguishing and training of personnel for handling small fires and alarm systems. 2.3 General Precautions Before Welding and Cutting 2.3.1 Cutting and Welding Equipment - All cutting and welding apparatus shall conform to relevant Indian Standards where available and also fulfil the requirements laid down in IS : 818-1968*. 2.3.1.1 Installation of cutting and welding aiflaratus - The installation of all cutting and welding apparatus shall fulfil the requirements laid down in IS : 818-1968* and in respective Indian Standards. 2.3.2 OpGrators of Cutting and Welding Equi$ment - Only responsible operators, fully trained in the care and use of cutting and welding equipment, shall be permitted to carry out cutting and welding operations in or near hazardous locations. 2.3.2.1 Cutting or welding operators shall not work alone in or near any hazardous location, but shall be provided with an assistant trained in safety precautions. Implements necessary for ensuring safety and for carrying out rescue operations should be provided wherever necessary. 2.3.3 Protective Clothings and Seat for Operators

2.3.3.1 Protective clothings - Wherever necessary, the operators of welding and cutting equipments should wear protective clothings, such as gloves, aprons, foot guards, goggles, helmets, etc. The clothings of operators should be free from oil or grease and from open pockets, trouser flaps, cuffs, etc. 2.3.3.2 Seat - The usage of empty thinner or oil drums as a seat for operator or as a support for job shall be avoided to avoid fire and explosion risk. 2.3.4 Protection of Flooring 2.3.4.1 WoodenJlooring - Where any cutting or welding is to be done over a wooden flooring it shall be swept clean and protected by such means as ( a ) thoroughly wetting with water, ( b ) covering with damp sand, and ( c ) sheet metal, asbestos or similar heat resistant materials at Provision shall be made to points where sparks or hot metal shall fall.
*Code of practice and cutting operations for safety and health (first revision ). requirements in electric and gas welding

5

IS I 3016- 1982
protect the welders and operators from the hazards the floors are wet or covered with metallic sheets. of electric shock when

2.3.4.2 Protection of floors covered with oil, grease dirts, etc - Some, installations of machineries, for example rolling mills, oil reservoir and burner installations in melting shops, floors are very often covered with grease, oil, dirts, etc. During cutting or welding operations for maintenance purposes, adequate precautions shall be taken to ensure that the oil, grease, dirts may not catch fire from sparks, flame or hot metal droplets or hot metal pieces, The floor shall be swept clean before starting any welding or cutting. 2.3.5 Protection of Rope and Cordage - During cutting or welding operations, rope and cordage shall be protected from the heat of cutting or Partiwelding blowpipes and from sparks, slags, and hot metal particles. cular care shall be exercised in the case of ropes supporting loads, guy ropes and ropes securing scaffolding. 2.3.6 Protective Guards - In ail protective guards for covering or other combustible materials, only non-flammable, fire-resistant should be employed for shielding sparks, hot metals, etc. the floor' materials

2.3.6.1 All protective guards shall be sufficiently large and fit tightly enough not to permit any sparks, slags or hot metal droplets to roll underCurtains shall be weighted d,um neath or bounce through any openings. against the floor or ground with such things as angle iron, pipe, bricks ti sand so that sparks cannot possibly get underneath. 2.3.6.2 Wherever there are floor openings or holes in walls opening doorways, or open or broken window which cannot be closed or covered readily, precautions shall be taken to ensure that no sparks or hot metal droplets pass through such openings to the adjacent locations or the floor below which may cause fire or explosions. 2.3.6.3 When welding or cutting very close to a wooden construction, it shall be protected from direct heat. Wooden beams, partitions, floorings or scaffoldings shall be protected always from the direct heat or the welding flame by sheet metal or asbestos curtain guards. 2.3.7 Disposal of OJbCuts and Electrode Ends - Before any cutting operation is commenced, arrangements shall be made to prevent the cut-off pieces from dropping into a place where there is any possibility of starting This shall be done by: a fire. a) welding b) securing a rod or bar to the piece to be cut off, the piece to be cut off with wire or chain, to hold the piece or catch or it in a suitable

c) having a helper receptacle.

6

IS t 3016 - 1982 2.3.8 Fire extinguishing equipments suitable to fight the type of hazards shall be kept ready within easy reach of the welding and cutting operators and their assistants. Such equipments may consist of pails of water, sand filled buckets, portable extinguisher P, etc, depending upon the nature and quantity of the combustible materials exposed to fire hazards. 2.3.8.1 Special of fire as follows: provisions shall be made to deal with any outbreak

4

Cutting and welding operators, and every other person concerned, shall be instructed to watch for and be ready immediately to extinguish any fire that may occur and know how to transmit a call to the nearest fire station;

of extinguisher provided is suitable for the kind of fire which may be anticipated any particular location. 2.4

Ample supply of dry sand in suitable containers shall be provided; Suitable extinguishers conforming to IS : 1648-1961* shall be available for immediate use; I Hoses connected to an effective water supply, or where such d) supply is not available an ample supply of water in suitable containers shall be available; and All persons concerned should be instructed and trained where e) necessary in using efficiently all the equipment and devices listed in 2.3.8.1(a) to 2.3.8.1 (d). NOTE - Appropriate fire authorities should be consulted to ensure that the type

b) 4

in

General

Precautions

During

Welding

and Cutting

of explosions most fires 2.4.1 Detection of Fire - With the exception start as small ones. At the beginning extinction of small fires seldom presents much ofia problem, but once a fire begins to gain headway it may develop into a conflagration of disastrous proportions. Therefore, prompt detection of fire;during welding and cutting is of prime importance. 2.4.2 Signalling of Fire Alarm - The first impulse on discovering a fire is only to try to extinguish it. led to long delays in sending the alarm. of many individuals This has frequently /

2.4.3 The welding and cutting operators and their helpers shall be instructed and practically trained to sound the alarm as soon as the fire is discovered, and to handle fire extinguishers of different types. 2.4.4 Somebody, other than the welding or cutting operator, shall always be put on the watch for sparks or hot metals which may cause small fires beyond the protective guards and give immediate alarm if small fires break up.
*Code of practice and its maintenance. for fire safety of buildings ( general ) : Fire fighting equipment

7

IS : 3016= 1982 2.4.5 Oxygen gas from gas cylinder or vented out near any naked flame. should not be used as cooling agent

2.4.6 In operating oxyfuel gas cutting apparatus, the oxygen pressure An oxygen pressure greater than necessary shall be set appropriately. increases the amount of sparks and slag flow over and above the cost. 2.4.7 The detection of fire, signalling promptly an alarm and acting immediately to try to extinguish the fire require training to the workers and their assistants to act effectively under such circumstances, Where the welders and their assistants are not trained in handling small fires, they should have means to call the attention of other people trained in fire fighting. 2.4.8 pipe, Backjre and Flashback

2.4.8.1 Backfire is caused by the return of the flame into the blowthe flame being either extinguished or reignited at the nozzle.

2.4.8.2 Flashback is much more severe and potentially more hazardous. In this, flame returns through the blowpipe into the hose and even regulators. It may also reach the fuel gas cylinder, causing heating and decomposition of the contents. 2.4.8.3 The main reason is the feeding of high pressure gas into the low pressure line forming a highly combustible gas mixture through This can happen which the flame can propagate at a very high speed. due to a number of reasons, for example nozzle becoming partially blocked, the control valves not being fully closed or leaking, incorrect pressure settings and overheating of the blowpipe. 2.4.8.4 The welding or cutting operator should check before commencement of work that there is adequate supply of gas, pressure settings are correct and there is no leakage in the equipment that is regulators and blowpipes and all the gas connections. Damaged or defective nozzles should not be used. When working on heavily scaled material, the surface should be cleaned prior to welding and/or cutting to prevent scales flying The use of properly designed hose check off and blocking the tip nozzle. valves can minimise the risk of flame travelling into the hoses. 2.4.8.5 Where gases are drawn from pipelines, must be used at the outlets of acetylene pipelines. flashback arrestora

2.4.8.6 In spite of precautions mentioned at 2.4.8.4 and 2.4.g.5 The operator shall be alert and sometimes backfire or flashback occurs. take the following actions promptly as necessary in the sequence given below: a) The oxygen control followed by closing valve on the blowpipe shall be closed quickly of the other control valve;

8

ISr3616-1982 b) In case of flashback travelling towards regulators, the pressure adjusting screw of the oxygen regulators shall be lossened quickly followed by loosening the pressure adjusting screw of the other regulator; c) The oxygen cylinder valve shall be closed quickly followed closing the other cylinder valve; d) If there is a suspicion that the fire has reached both the regulators shall be taken out; by

the regulators,

e) After backfire or flashback is over and if it is not severe enough to damage the equipment, the blowpipe should be cooled by immersing in a bucket of water with a trickle of oxygen flow through the nozzle; and f) It shall be ensured that flashback or backfire has been quenched properly before relighting the blowpipe. 2.5 General Precautions After Welding and Cutting

2.51 Watch Against Smouldering Fires -When cutting and welding operations are carried out in such locations where sparks, molten slag or hot metal pieces may start smouldering fires in slow burning inflammable material such as cotton waste soaked with lubricating oil or grease, wood chips, paper bags or rags, etc, it is necessary that a watchman be deputed The at the scene of the work at least one hour after the job is through. watchman shall look carefully for smoke or fire before leaving the site, 2.5.1.1 When a watchman is deputed, a 60 minute per hour watch on the spot where the job was done is needed and not just a casual tour of the plant. This .is considered to be the most dependable method of precaution against smouldering fires, particularly in smaller workshops or other premises. 2.5.1.2 The more dangerous the surroundings is, the greater shall be the frequency and longer the period during which the surrounding should be checked for suspicious heat, smoke or glowing spots. According to the rules in force in some countries, the possibility of a smouldering fire shall be guarded against for at least eight hours at the scene of the work, 2.5.2 Fire Detection Device - When it is desirable to instal in big plants, storehouses, etc, a fire detection device which automatically actuates the alarm, one of the following two most familiar types may be selected: P) The fixed temperature type, designed to operate when the temperature in the vicinity of the alarm reach a predetermined level. Such an alarm can be set to operate when the temperature reach 135"C, 150�C or 200�C; and 9

IS x 3016 - 1982 b) The rate of rise type, designed rise of temperature. to operate when there is a rapid

2.5.2.1 The decision as to which type to use for a certain location should be taken only by competent authorities after careful analysis of needs. Each of these systems has its own advantages for particular installations. 2.5.2.2 requirements When an automatic must be met: alarm system is installed, certain general

A reliable signal must be transmitted; The signal must reach all personnel, including those trained for b) fire protection, no matter where they are located; Cl The signal must be of such a nature that it will be instantly recognised; and The signal must be used for no other purpose than to sound the 4 alarm for fire.

4

3. SPECIAL

PRECAUTIONS shall be taken in conducting any cutting and

3.1 Special precautions welding operations:

a) In hazardous locations; b) In close proximity to hazardous locations; c) Near hazardous locations for prolonged locations.

and period,

and

any

new

3.1.1 As specified in 2.1 and 2.2.2 hot work permit should be obtained before conducting any hot work in hazardous locations. 3.1.2 In the hot work permit, taken before, during and after indicated clearly. the special the cutting precautions required to be and welding work shall be

3.1.3 The persons entrusted in doing the hot work at the particular location shall ensure implementation of the special precuationary measures indicated in the permit with meticulous care and sincerity. 3.2 Welding and cutting operations using naked flames of any kind or red hot glowing objects of any kind, such as sparks, hot molten metal globules, etc, should not be carried out for purpose of repair, additions or alterations of any kind, in the hazardous locations, if the proposed work can be carried out by suitable alternative methods. 10

IS t3016-1982
3.2.1 If the work pieces have to be welded or cut in the hazardous locations, endeavour should be made, either, to: a) remove the movable work pieces to a designated safe location where there will be no possibility of any fire hazards, or b) remove all the movable hazardous materials in the vicinity of the work pieces to safe location for a temporary period where there will be no possibility of fire hazards. 3.2.2 The safe distance between flammable material and the working place should be as decided by the Competent Authority having regard to the flammability of such materials, approach of the source of ignition and the confinement of the space. It is recommended that the safe distance should, generally, be not less than 15 metres. 3.2.3 If the work piece to be welded or cut cannot be moved and if all the fire hazards cannot be removed, then guards .must be used to confine the flame, heat, sparks and slag, and to protect the immovable material adequately ensuring safety from explosion and fire hazards ( see also 2.3 ). 3.2.4 In conducting welding and cutting operations in close proximity to hazardous locations, it should be considered unsafe, unless there is absolutely no chance of the source of ignition getting into the hazardous location, or flammable vapour or gas,. liquid or dust coming in contact with the source of ignition from the adjacent hazardous location. Adequate protective measures sho.uld be taken using effective guards to ensure safety, under such situations. 3.2.5 Before starting welding or cutting in any new locations, it is always necessary to collect information from the nearest Shop Superintendems or Foremen, on the flammable, combustible or explosive materials that might be existing and might lead to a fire or explosion in the presence of a source of ignition. 3.2.5.1 Only after satisfactory investigation carried out by a Competent Authority, hot work permit should be endorsed with or without conditions for the special precautions that should be observed to ensure safety from fire hazards. 3.2.6 Special situations having potential fire hazards should be considered in detail and special precautions that should be taken to .ensure safety, should be worked out. Prescribed Special precautions for special situations should be informed to all concerned and if deemed fit, exhibited on notice boards. The persons concerned should strictly follow the prescribed special precautions and periodic checks should be carried out by the Competent Authority. 11

tS g 3016.1982 3.3 Recommended Precautions, for Special Situations

3.3.1 Location Having Combustible Material or Dust - Welding and cutting operations shall not be carried out in or near hazardous location having combustible material or dust, for example any ventilation or other duct system. Welding and cutting operations may be carried out only after any accumulated combustible material or dust has been completely removed from the place. Where practicable, a section of the duct in which such work is to be done should be isolated from the remainder of the system, the fans should be shut dowrrso that they cannot be started again till the work is complete and declared safe to start the fan. 3.3.1.1 Where it is impracticable to clear up the combustible dust from the location as in case of a dusty room or tunnel, any inert dust, such as limestone, gypsum, etc, may be used for general dusting around the It is necessary operational area before commencement of the operation. to ensure that more than 80 percent of the inert dust i is in suspension depending on the nature of the combustible dust, to assure reasonable safety from the explosion hazards. 3.3.2 Drums, Barrels, etc - Cutting or welding shall not be done on any drum, barrel, tank, or other container until it has been cleaned so thoroughly as to make absolutely certain that no flammable materials or substances such as acids which, under the action of heat, may produce flammable gases or vapoms are present in them, 3.3.2.1 Where steam is available this may be used to remove materials Washing with strong soda solution will remove which are easily volatile. heavier oils, After thorough cleaning, the container should, wherever possible, be filled with water before any cutting or welding operation is performed. 3.3.2.2 In practically every case it will be found possible the container in such a position that it may be filled with water a few centimetres of the point where cutting or welding is to be doing this, however, care shall be taken to make sure that there or opening to provide for the release of heated air from container. to place to within In done. is a vent inside the

3.3.2.3 Where it is not practicable to fill the container with water, a protective gas such as carbon dioxide or nitrogen can be used, feeding in a continuous stream at low pressure, at the commencement of the work. Care should be taken in using carbon dioxide. If carbon dioxide flows with great speed from the container into the space to be washed, there is a possibility of it being loaded with static electricity and sparks may easily be given off. The carbon dioxide should, therefore, be gradually introduced so that no dimness or frost is observed at the outlet of the gas container. Further, the protective gas ( carbon dioxide or nitrogen ) should 12

IS t 3016 - 1982 not be introduced into the tanks or the vessel at the.commencement of the work but there should be a constant stream of the gas introduced during the work so as to prevent inlet of unsuspected dangerous gases from outside and to rinse out any possible dangerous mixture that might be formed on the inside of the tank. The use of carbon tetrachloride for this purpose is not recommended, as it gives off poisonous vapour when heated. If possible, periodic examination of the air contents of the vessel should be made wherever possible by means of a detector of combustible gases, where such an instrument is available. 3.3.2.4 While purging a container with carbon dioxide or steam, care should be taken to purge for sufficient length of time to ensure complete removal of volatile liquid or vapour. Purging gas should not be used at high velocity which may generate static electricity and cause concern for fire hazards.
or cutting has been carried out should be allowed to cool down sufficiently to obviate the risk of ignition or explosion when the flammable material

3.3.3

Any plant, drum, barrel,-tank or other container on which welding

is let inside the container.

3.3.4 Cutting During Rescue Operations - Before resorting to cutting during rescue operations, a check shall be made to determine whether explosive or flammable liquids, gases, or vapourq are present, and no cutting shall be done until these are absorbed or expelled. 3.3.5 Cutting or Welding in Conjined Spaces - When cutting or welding is being carried out in any confined space, suitable precautions shall be taken to prevent the ignition of any timber or other flammable material that may be present. .Fur!hermore, sufficient ventilation shall be provided. No oxygen shall be blown in. The escape path shall be kept at safe location with means of easy reach, such as, ladder. 3.3.6 Gas Mains and Apparatus - No cutting shall be carried out on any gas main pipe or apparatus unless such main, pipe, or apparatus is totally isolated from live gas plant and completely purged of gas and relieved of pressure. 3.3.7 Coal Bunkers - Where practicable, no cutting or welding shall be carried out in or near coal bunkers or other fuel storages, without the removal of the fuel; however, where this is not practicable, special precautions shall be taken to prevent ignition of the fuel itself or any gases given off by the fuel. 3.3.0 S'rinklcr Installations - Sprinkler installations if provided shall be checked before commencing any welding or cutting operations to ensure that it is in working order and shall be maintained in good working condition even during extensive repairs or alterations of the building while 13

19: 3016.1982 cutting and welding operations are in progress and at least half an hour after such operation ceases. If the sprinkler system must be shut down for certain period of time, this shall be done when welding and cutting operations are not in progress. 3.3.8.1 Where cutting or welding operations are to be carried out on a sprinkler installation itself, such work shall be done by an approved . sprinkler contractor. All fire-prevention precautions required by these clauses shall be taken, and in addition, in hazardous locations, an officer of the fire station shall, where possible, be in attendance. Where possible the water shall be cut off only from that portion of the installation which is actually under repair. Further, alternate water supply arrangement shall be provided for the period of the water supply system is out of commission. 3.3.9 repair, carried Stores and Depots of InJlummable Liquids and Gases

3.3.9.1 When no other suitable means of carrying out the required addition or alteration is available, cutting and welding may be out in the installations for storage of inflammable liquids and gases.

3.3.9.2 After all necessary investigations and tests, the Site-Incharge or Superintendent of the installation or Officer Incharge of fire precautions shall issue the permit for carrying out the required work at scheduled time. The permit shall be renewed daily when required. 3.3.9.3 Officer Incharge of fire precautions shall ensure that the portion in the circuit of the liquid or gas circulation, for example, the storage tank, pipelines, valves, pumps, etc, where welding and cutting work shall be carried out, is blanked or isolated and purged with steam or inert gas or washed thoroughly so as to make absolutely certain that no inflammable4iquid gas is present in an amount which can catch fire under the action of heat, spark, flame, welding spatter or red hot objects. A combustible gas indicator shall be used to determine ihe cdncentiation of combustible gas in the air, and if this concentration is greater tban O-2 percent, the hot work permit shall not be signed by the Officer Incharge of fire precautions until the concentration is obtained below that limit. 3.3.9.4 Before cutting and welding on any part of the supporting structure for inflammable liquid or gas storage vessels precautionary measures similar to 3.3.9.3 shall be observed. Where necessary, the storage vessels, pipeline, etc, shall be propped up adequately to support the load while the supporting structure is cut or welded for required modification or repair. 3.3.10 On Wharfs and Ships may be, against 3.3.10.1 Master responsible for precautions - Wherever a ship the Master shall be responsible for taking adequate precautions

14

18 x 3016 - 1982
explosion or fire during and after all cutting and welding operations, and no such operation shall be carried out except with the permission of the Master 6r `Officer-Incharge. 3.3.10.2 Provision ofjre-Jghting facilities - During cutting and welding operations ships at wharfs or in docks shall have their hydrant and hose system in good working order and connected to a water supply which shall be adequate and frequently tested. If the ship's pumps cannot be used, arraygements shall be made to obtain supply from shore, preferably by connectmg the ship's hydrant and hose system to an effective shore supply. Pumps shall not be put out of action until the shore supply is assured. Supply t'rom shore shall be tested frequently to make certain that the supply is immediate and of sufficient pressure to enable distribution all over the ship. In addition, fire extinguishers and buckets of water or sand shall be laid out ready in the vicinity.
NATE - Spaces under, over, or adjacent shall be treated as being ` in the vicinity `. to the cutting and welding operations

3.3i10.3 Provision of guards -- When cutting or welding where sparks might lodge in wooden parts or drop through pipes or openings to the space below, sheet metal guards, asbestos or fireproof millboard curtains or similar .non-combustible devices shall be used to keep sparks close to the work being dor,e. The guards shall be large enough and sufficiently tight not to permit sparks to roll underneath flammable material or slide through openings. Curtains shall be weighted to the deck floor, or ground, 30 that sparks do not possibly get underneath. 3.3.10.4 Cutting or welding shall be performed only after consultation between the Master of the vessel and the responsible Official Incharge of the arrangements for securing the goods. The greatest consideration shall be given to the commodity immediately beneath the deck, and the work proceeded with when it ha? been ascertained that there is no risk involved. Welding cleats and ring bol13 to secure heavy goods on weather decks shall be carried out before the ship is loaded. Cutting cleats and ring bolts on weather decks shall be carried out after the `tween deck cargo has been discharged. 3.3.10.5 Cutting or welding in tanks, etc - When cutting and welding operations are being done in a ship's tank or similar locations, an assistant should be stationed at the manhole entrance to the tank to cut off the gas supply to cutting and welding equipment quickly on hearing the slightest backtire explosion. Provision should be made for adequate ventilations of such confined locations. Lifting tackles should be kept ready at hand in case the operator needs to be rescued from inside the confined space against dangerous accumulations of harmful gases or fumes formed during hot work operations. 15

IS t 3016- 1982
In case of an oil tank on board, containing flammable oil, welding and cutting operations shall not be carried out unless the oil tank, and any compartment or space adjacent to the oil tank have been made free of flammable gases by draining out or removing the contents and by thoroughly washing with hot water or by steaming to remove all traces of flammable liquid. Proper tests should be carried out to check the absence of flammable vapours in exblosive before concentrations, commencement of any hot work. 3.3.10.6 Cutting or welding on decks or bulkheads - When cutting through or at edges, suitable receptacles containing a layer of sand should be provided in such a manner as to collect all the molten slag, sparks and hot metal particles generated during the hot work operations. In the vicinity of wooden decks, damp sand may be employed as a fire arrester and to protect the deck. 3.3.10.7 Cutting or welding in engine rooms - When cutting or welding in an engine room, particular care shall be taken to see that the space where the work is carried out is clear of oily waste, and the Officer-Incharge shall make an inspection after the workmen leave, and satisfy himself that there is no fire hazard. 3.3.10.8 Cutting or welding near magazines - Cutting or welding shall not be carried out in close proximity to a magazine, or any other compartment containing explosives. There shall be at least the space of a compartment, or two bulkheads, between the operations and the explosives. This shall refer also to decks above and below a magazine, If necessary, the explosives shall be removed to another compartment in a safe place and carefully guarded. 3.3.10.9 Watch to be kept - Where cutting or welding operations are being done on or about a ship a watch shall be maintained in the vicinity, irrespective of any precaution undertaken by those responsible for such operations. After cutting or welding in the work vicinity of flammable cargo or ship's fittings, when finishing work or knocking off for the day, the ship's watchman shall be instructed to keep a strict watch during the night in the vicinity where the work was carried out. The watchman should report immediately in case any smoulding fire is detected in the vicinity of the area where hot work operations were carried out earlier. 3.3.10,lO Mineral oil on water surfaces - Special care shall be taken to prevent sparks, slag, or hot metal particles coming into contact with mineral oil on water surfaces, particularly in the vicinity of wharfs and ships.
NOTE Cases are on record where thin layers of oil discharged from ships or accidentally from tankers or waterside oil tanks have been ignited during cutting operations, even under severe winter conditions with ice on the surface of the water.

16

16:3016~ 1982

APPENDIX A ( CZuuse2.2.2.1 )
WORK PERMIT
HOT WORK Special Instructions Inside refinery 1. No smoking 2. Safety hat must be worn 3. In case of liquid/gas release. Stop work and immediately advise process supervisor concerned 4. IO case of fire alarm, All welding machines/mobile equipment must be stopped. Gas cylinders closed, everybody leaves the work site. Contractor personnel to go to designated safe areas. PERMISSION NATURE EXACT IS HEREBY GRANTED TO . . . .. . . . . .*. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a...... OF WORK . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LOCATION OF JOB . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ITEMS MUST BE CHECKED ISSUING PERMIT DOnS &ea BEFORE ,Not Required To AM PM Date AND SAFETY PERMIT Permit valid from AM PM Date

THE FOLLOWING Item

1. Personally inspected equipment]work

2. Surrounding area, hot lines checked and covered 3. Equipment properly drained and wedged open 4. Equipment properly steamed and gas freed 5. Equipment water flushed 6. Proper ventilation and lighting provided 7. Gas test made and found gas free/gassy 17

X8:3016-1982
Item 8. Following
release precautions taken of oil or gas in the area against

Done

.Not Required

Equipment Blinded/Disconnected/Isolated 9. Sewer openings
10. Control b) Inside 11. Following vided: Fire/Water covered sparks provided

for welding

a) Outside

the equipment the equipment standby fire equipment pro-

Hose/Extinguisher

12. Following personal protective equipment provided: Safety Hat/Gloves/Goggles/Safety Shoes/ Boiler Suit/Dust Respirator/Face Shield/ Air Mask/Apron 13. Proper means of exit available tagged Nozzles oil/gas behind properly lining

14. Equipment

properly

15. Portable equipment/Hose grounded 16. Checked for trapped in equipment 17. Life line provided 18. Process/Mechanical/Contractor provided 19. Area cleaned 20. Iron sulfide

standby

up; oil, rags removed removed or kept wet

GAS TEST RESULTS
HYDROCARBON CARBON GAS TEST MADE GASES BY Percent Percent OXYGEN HYDROGEN 18 DEFICIENCY SULPHXDE Yes/No % of Lower Explosive Limit

MONOXIDE

18 t 3016 - 1962
( Continusdjiom pog~ 2 )

Subcommittee for Safety Health and Hygiene Aspects of Welding, SMDC 14 : 5
Convener SHBI N. V. KBISHNAN Central Labour Rcprarsnhng Institute, Bombay

Atomic Energy Commission, Bombay SaarS.Ha~a~~xdm Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta SERI A. K. DAS SHBI M. K. SEN ( Altemafs ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHBI A. DORAISWAHY Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay DB. R. C. PANJWANI SHRI S. K. BHATTAOHABYA ( Altcrnatc ) National Environmental Engineering Research Baas V. RAXAN Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur Chief Inspectorate of Explosives, Nagpur REPRESENTAWJE

19

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters; Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Talephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanrtha ( Common to all offices) Regional Ofices: Telephones Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 331 01 31 [ 3311375 NEW DELHI-11 0002 OEaetern : 1 /14 C.I.T. Scheme VI I M, V. 1. P. Road. 36 24 99 Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, 21843 131641 CHANDIGARH 160036 41 24 42 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 412519 ( 41 29 16 twestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 Branch Oflees: `Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 26348 [ 26349 AHMEDABAD 380001 SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 138 49 56 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 66716 BHOPAL 462003 Plot NQ. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 6 36 27 5315, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byslane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 6-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road), 23 1083 HYDERABAD 500001 63471 R14 Yudhlster Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 I 6 98 32 21 68 76 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208006 121 82 92 62305 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 21 04 T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam 1621 17 TRIVANDRUM 695035 lnspecflon Office (With Sale Point) : Pushpenjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
*Sales Offke In Calcutta II at 5 Chowrlnghro Approach, P.O. Prlncrp Street, Calcutta 700072 Wales Offlcr In Bombay Is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, Bombay 400007 SSales Ofke In Bangalore la at Unity Bulldlng, Narrrlmharaja Square Bangalore 560002

261 71 62436 97 66 00
80 65 28 22 88 71

Prlntod lt Slmso Prlntlng Proor. Dolhl. India

