IS 13360 (Part YSec 24) : 1999 IS0 7765-2 : 1994

lndian Standard PLASTICS METHODS OF TESTING

PART 5 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES Section 24 Determination of Impact Resistance by the Free-Failing Dart Method Instrumented PunctureTest

ICS 83.080; 19.060

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 February 1999

Price Group 5

Methods of Test for Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 23

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 7765-2 : 1994 `Plastics - Determination of impact resistance by the free-falling Dart method - Instrumented puncture test' issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Methods of Test for Plastics Sectional Committee and approval of the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. The text of IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma (J has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (,) as the decimal marker. In this adopted standard reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard IS 196 : 1966 Atmospheric conditions for testing ( revised) Degree of Equivalence Technically equivalent with minor deviations -

IS0 291 : 1997 Plastics-Standard atmospheres for conditioning and testing IS0 4593 : 1993 Plastics - Film and sheeting - Determination of thickness by mechanical scanning IS0 6603-2 : 1989 Plastics determination of multiaxial impact behaviour of rigid plastics Part 2 : Instrumented puncture test IS0 7765-l : 1988 Plastics - Determination of impact resistance by the free-falling Dart method Part 1 : Staircase methods

Nil

Nit

-

IS 13360 ( Part YSec 6 ) : 1999 PlasticsMethods of testing : Part 5 Mechanical properties, Section 6 Determination of impact resistance by the free-falling Dart method - Staircase methods

Identical

In the case of IS0 4593 and IS0 6603-2, the Technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed its contents and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. For tropical countries like India, the standard temperature and the relative humidity shall be taken as 27 f 2'C and 65 f 5 percent respectively. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 13360 ( Part 5/Set 24 ) : 1999 IS0 7765-2 : 1994

Indian Standard PLASTICS METHODS OF TESTING

PART 5 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES Section 24 Determination of Impact Resistance by the Free-Falling Dart Method Instrumented PunctureTest

1

Scope

1.1 The impact-penetration test described in the two parts of this International Standard is used for the assessment of plastic films and thin sheets (hereinafter referred to as films) under an impact stress applied at right angles to the plane of the film.

1.4 The test results are comparable only if the conditions for preparation of specimens, their thickness and surfaces, and the test conditions are identical. Comprehensive evaluation of the reaction to impact stress requires that the determinations are made as functions of deformation rate and temperature for different material variables, such as crystallinity and moisture content.

1.2 Part 1 of this International Standard can be used if it is sufficient to characterize the impact behaviour of the film by an impact-failure energy. Part 2 is used if a force-deformation or a force-time diagram, recorded at practically constant velocity of the striker, is necessary for characterization of the impact behaviour. This applies if:
measured quantities derivable gram are required or only from this dia-

2

Normative

references

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions

-

only a small number of test specimens able.

are avail-

of this part of IS0 7765. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part of IS0 7765 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 291 :1977, Plastics Standard atmospheres for

The test method is applicable to films of up to 1 mm thickness and makes it possible to compare impact-penetration forces, biaxial deformabilities and energy-absorption capacities of films. Furthermore, if required, the transition region between brittle and tough behaviour of the film under the conditions of testing can be determined by varying the temperature or the penetration velocity or the relative humidity (see also annex B). NOTE 1 For thicknesses
greater than 1 mm, IS0 66032

1.3

conditioning

and testing.

IS0 4593: 1993, Plastics - Film and sheeting - Determination of thickness by mechanical scanning.

IS0 6603-2:1989, Plastics - Determination of multiaxial impact behaviour of rigid plastics - Part 2: Instrumented puncture test.
IS0 77651:1966, Plastics film and sheeting - Determination of impact resistance by the free-falling dirt method - Part 1: Staircase methods. 1

should be used.

IS 13369(PartS/Sec24):1999 IS0 7765.2 : 1994

3

Definitions

FF/d, W,/d

For the purposes of this part of IS0 7765, the following definitions apply.

3.1 peak force, FM: The maximum force exerted by
the striker in the direction (see figures 1 to 3). of impact during the test

and W,/d do not allow a physically exact comparison between film specimens of different materials, the thickness dependence of these normalized values is negligible for similar materials (those with the same amount of crvstallinitv and the same orientation) orovided the thicknesses do not differ by more than a factor of 1,5.

4

Principle

3.2 deformation at poak force, s,,,+ The deformation in the direction of impact at the centre of the test specimen corresponding to the peak force. For materials exhibiting a peak-force plateau, the deformation is taken at the centre of the plateau (see figure 1). 3.3 energy to peak force, WM: The area under the force-deformation curve bounded by the origin, the peak force and the deformation at peak force (see figures 1 to 3). 3.4 total penetration energy, WT: The total energy expended in penetrating the test specimen (see figures 1 to 3). In contrast to the instrumented puncture test applied to test specimens made of brittle plastic (see IS0 6603-21, the force-deformation diagram of this test applied to film and sheeting frequently shows a clear point of first failure (failure point) indicated by a sharp drop in the force. If this is the case, and if the interested parties agree to use this point as a characteristic criterion, the following additional definitions may be used. 3.5 failure force, FF:The force exerted by the striker in the direction of impact, measured at the failure point (see figures 1 and 2).

The test specimen is penetrated normal to its plane by a striker at a nominally uniform velocity. The resulting force-deformation or force-time diagram is electronically recorded. The test specimen is firmly clamped during the test. The forcedeformation diagram obtained in these tests shows several features of the material's bahaviour under impact. For example, the fracture may be "brittle", "ductile", "tough" or characterized by initial damage or by crack initiation and propagation. In addition, dynamic effects may be present, such as load-cell/indenter resonance, specimen resonance and initial contact/inertia peaks (see figures 1 to 3). In all cases care must be exercised in analysing these features because the operative mechanism and the trains of inference are not yet fully established, and are the subject of continuing research.

5

Apparatus

The apparatus consists of a mechanical test device for applying the test force, instruments for measuring the force and the deformation produced, and a thickness gauge.

5.1

Test device

3.6 failure deformation, SF: The deformation

in the direction of impact at the centre of the test specimen, measured at the failure, point (see figures 1 and 2).

3.7 failure energy, WF: The area under the forcedeformation curve bounded by the origin, the failure force and the failure deformation (see figures 1 and

The essential components of the test device are the energy carrier (normally a falling mass, but a pneumatically, hydraulically or spring-driven mass or a pendulum impact-testing device may also be used), the striker, and the clamping device consisting of the test specimen support and the clamping ring (see figures 4 and 5).

NOTES 2 If the force-deformation diagram as measured during the

test is influenced strongly by dynamic resonance effects, a
mean curve may be used to obtain the values of the parameters defined in 3.1 and 3.4. This, however, is seldom the case when plastic film is tested. 3 When comparing films of slightly different thicknesses, it is advisable to relate FM, FF, W, and W, to the thickness d of the specimen. Though the normalized values FM/d, 2

The apparatus shall permit the test specimen to be punctured at the centre at a nominally constant velocity, perpendicular to the specimen surface. The force exerted on the test specimen in the direction of impact and the deformation of the specimen in the direction of impact shall be measurable or derivable (see figure4). Equipment suitable for this are fallingdart machines, pendulums long enough for the penetration path to be regarded as approximately straight, or high-speed tensile-testing machines with suitable attachments.

IS 13360 ( Par! s/Set 24 ) : 1999 IS0 ?765-2 : 1994

SF

Clef ormatlon

Figure 1 -

Force-deformation

diagram for very tough materials (schematic)

8

$ FM
FF

St4

SF

Deformation

Figure 2 -

Force-deformation

diagram for tough materials (schematic)

IS 13360 ( Part S/Set 24 ) : 1999 IS0 7765-2 : 1994

Y

J b

Fn=Ff

SM'SF

Deformation

Figure 3 -

Force-deformation

diagram for brittle materials (schematic)

3

4

5

2
1 2 3 4 5 6 Test specimen Hemispherical striker, diameter D, Load cell (preferred position) Shaft Clamping ring Test-specimen support, inside diameter D,

1

6

Figure 4 -

Test apparatus (schematic)

4

IS 13360 ( Part 5/Set 24 ) : 1999 IS0 7765-2 : 1994

Dimensions in millimetres Clamping ring

Test-specimen support

Figure 5 -

Clamping device

5.1.1

Energy carrier

W

is the total penetration

energy, in joules.

The impact energy (e.g. drop energy) available shall be large in comparison to the penetration energy absorbed WT. This is because the influence of the test velocity (over the range of velocities used in the test) on the viscoeiastic behaviour of plastics is relatively small; a decrease in the velocity of the striker of 20 % is acceptable. This energy chines if requirement is met by fallingdart ma-

The falling-dart system used shall be capable of holding and releasing a weighted striker so that the striker falls constrained by a guide or guide(s). The fall shall be largely without friction or losses through windage. Any friction shall be taken into account in the calculations. NOTES
4

In most cases, a weighted striker with a total mass m of 10 kg is sufficient.

m 2 9wr/& where m g is the falling mass, in kilograms; is the acceleration (9,81 m/s2); due to gravity

5 A velocity-measuring sensor should be placed close to the point of impact to eliminate errors due to friction between the dart and the guides and to air resistance.

With hydraulically driven high-speed tensile-testing machines, any deviation of the velocity during impact shall be proved, e.g. by plotting the deformation-time curves and checking their slope.

Ho

is the height ot fall, in metres; 5

IS 13360 (Part S/Sec24) IS0 7765-2 : 1994

: 1999

5.1.2

Striker striker has a polished, hardened, striking surface with a diameter 0,2 mm. Alternatively, a striking surf 0,l mm diameter may be used. The constructed of steel.

The preferred hemispherical D, = 20 mm f face of 10 mm striker shall be

device shall be required to measure shall be > 5/f,, is the natural frequency of the where f, striker/load-cell assembly. For the bandwidth Br of the amplifier train (directcurrent or carrier-frequency amplifier) with a lower bandwidth limit of 0 Hz, the following applies by analogy:

The load cell on the striker shall be mounted as close as possible to the tip to minimize the effect of extraneous forces. An example is shown in figure4. The head of the striker may be powdered with talcum or lubricated with oil to reduce friction, provided that the interested parties agree on this procedure and use identical material. In some cases, this can reduce the statistical scatter of the results. It should be borne in mind, however, that lubricating the striker may influence the test results considerably. The natural frequency f, of the striker/load-cell assembly shall be higher than the value specified in 5.2. 5.1.3 Clamping device

-: g= I 1
g1,ll; '=l

where B/ is the individual bandwidth stage.

of the jfh amplifier

NOTE 6 An example of such a measurement train is a piezoelectric load cell mounted between the striker and the shaft (see figure41 and connected to a charge amplifier.

5.2.2 Device for measuring deformation

the specimen

The test-specimen clamping device shall have an inside diameter D, of 40 mm f 2 mm. The clamping device shall be constructed in such a way that the circular specimen can be clamped flat and held securely during the test. Moreover, the clamping device shall not cause any radial pre-stretching of the specimen greater than 0,Ol %. Both requirements can be met with manual or hydraulic clamping faces. Furthermore, placing a ring of fine emery paper on the specimen support has been found to be useful. Figure 5 shows a recommended clamping-device design.

The deformation of the specimen in the direction of penetration can be determined directly with an electronic transducer, thus yielding a force-deformation curve. It is also possible to record a force-time curve and calculate the deformation in accordance with 7.4. 5.2.3 Thickness gauge

The instrument for measuring the thickness of the specimen shall fulfill the requirements of IS0 4593. It shall be capable of measuring the thickness d of the specimen to within 1 pm.

for measuring force, specimen deformation and specimen thickness
5.2 Instruments The instruments for measuring force and deformation shall be capable of measuring the force and deformation to within 5 % of their maximum value. EXAMPLE If an electronic device has an accuracy of 0,4 % at full scale (FS) then, for a value of 20 % FS, the accuracy is 2 %. 5.2.1 Load cell

6

Test specimens of test

6.1 Sampling and preparation specimens

Because of the very short duration of the impact, only electronic load cells with a high natural frequency can be used. The shortest time interval AtF,min which the 6

Sampling shall be in accordance with the instructions on the relevant product standard. If no such instructions are given, specimens should preferably be taken from film sheeting or from a piece of the film to be tested. The specimens shall be 80 mm f 2 mm in diameter. The cut edges need not be of any particular quality. They shall be as uniform as possible over the whole of the width and taken at right angles to the machine direction of the film. Non-homogeneous edge strips of film rolls shall not be used. If a fairly large number of specimens is required in order to determine the temperature dependence of the measured values, the specimens for the entire test series shall be mixed before testing.

IS 13300 ( Part 5/Set 24 ) : 1999 IS0 7765-2 : 1994

6.2

Number of test specimens

A minimum of five test specimens shall be tested (in the case of arbitration, 20 specimens are required). If the dependence of the measured values on temperature, relative humidity or other parameters is to be determined, five specimens per measurement point are generally sufficient, even in the case of arbitration. The number of test specimens required is doubled if the test result depends on the side from which the film is penetrated. 6.3

a height of fall Ho of 1 m. During the test, the speed shall not change by more than 20 % of its value on striking the specimen (see the conditions for the falling mass in 5.1 .l). During the test, the force-deformation diagram or force-time curve shall be recorded. The values of the parameters defined in clause 4 shall be taken from the curve or read from the recording instrument, e.g. a transient recorder. If a satisfactory deformation curve cannot be obtained because of resonance effects, then the impact velocity shall be reduced to 1 m/s. NOTE 8 Although the impact velocity of 4.4 m/s for testing of plastic films, even those made of relatively brittle materials, is normally not too high, the velocity may be reduced if the interested parties agree. If there is any reason to believe that the results will depend upon which side of the test specimen faces the striker, both sides shall be tested separately (see also 6.2).

Conditioning of test specimens

The test specimens shall be conditioned as required by the specifications for the material concerned or as agreed upon by the interested parties. Otherwise, select the most appropriate set of conditions from IS0 291.

7
7.1

Procedure Test atmosphere

8
The test shall be carried out in one of the standard atmospheres specified in IS0 291. If measurements are to be made at different temperatures or relative humidities, the test specimens shall be maintained under each set of test conditions until the results show no further change at that particular temperature or humidity. This conditioning time decreases at higher test temperatures. 7.2

Expression of results

For routine characterization purposes, the peak of the force-deformation curve shall be used to determine the test results. If it is clear from the forcedeformation curve and/or other information that crack initiation has occurred in the test specimen, the corresponding point (failure point) on the forcedeformation curve can also be used to determine the test results. If the test measurements are in the form of a forcedeformation curve, the force and deformation at the characterization point can be read directly from the curve. The corresponding energy values are determined (by planimetry or by other suitable methods, e.g. electronic integration) from the area under the curve. Should results be in the form of a force-time curve, the deformation s, in metres, at the peak force or the failure force is given by the approximation (see annex A and IS0 6603-2:1989, annex C) s k: (vc - p/3m) x f where m
VO

Measuring the thickness

Determine the thickness d of each specimen in accordance with IS0 4593 to the nearest 1 pm, taking the average of three measurements at equidistant points on the circumference of a circle of radius 5 mm located at the centre of the specimen. 7.3

Clamping the test specimen

The specimen shall be clamped flat. The stress caused by clamping shall not result in an elongation (pre-stretch) of more than 0,Ol % in the radial direction (see 5.1.3). NOTE 7 The pre-stretch can be determined by means of a measuring microscope. The usual clamping device, however, always fulfills the above condition. 7.4

. . * (1)

is the falling mass, in kilograms; is the impact velocity just before impact, in metres per second; is the time to peak force or the time to failure in seconds; 7

Impact-penetration test

The impact-penetration test is conducted with an impact velocity of 4.4 m/s f 0.2 m/s, corresponding to

t

IS 1336O(Part5/Sec24):1999 IS0 77652:1994

P

is the impulse imparted up to the time of occurrence of the peak force or up to the time of failure, in newton seconds (the area under the force-time diagram), given by the equation p = I>(t)dr . . . (2)

cl the date of measurement;
d) the method of sampling test specimens; and preparation of the

e)

the average value of the measured thickness each test specimen; the test conditions used; and the conditioning

d of

f) NOTE 9 The exact calculation of the deformation s requires double integration: g) s = - (1/rn)/b()(4(dr)2 + v,,r . . . (3) h) The energy to peak force, W, and the energy to failure, W,, are given by the exact equations (4) and (51, respectively. KJI = %PM(l
wF=vOdl

procedure

details of the way in which were clamped;

the test specimens

the diameter D, of the striker and the nature of the striker surface; the number of test specimens used;

i) j) k)

-voPMl4Eo)
-vO&/4h)

. . . (4)
. . .

the agreed point of failure, if used; the arithmetic mean, standard deviation ficient of variation of the peak force FM, in newtons, deformation at peak force SM. in metres, in joules, and coef-

(5)

where
EO

is the energy of the striker before impact, in joules;

pM and pr are calculated from equation (2) with an upper integration limit of tM and 4, respectively. The mean, standard deviation and coefficient of variation of the parameters defined in clause 4 are calculated for each test series. NOTE 10 Instead of a curve, or concomitantly with it, the values of the peak force and the deformation at peak force can be recorded electronically. This also applies to the energy to peak force and the total penetration energy after electronic integration. I)

energy to peak force W,, total penetration the

energy W,, in joules,

and optionally -

failure force FF, in newtons, failure deformation SF, in metres,

failure energy W,, in joules; curve F(s) or force-time

9

Precision

the force-deformation curve F(r);

The precision of this test method is not known because interlaboratory data are not available. When interlaboratory data are obtained, a precision statement will be added with the next revision.

m) the natural frequency f, and total bandwidth the amplifier train; n)

&r of

10

Test report
information: 0) PI

the appearance of the test specimens after the test (possibly with a representative test specimen as an illustrative example); the test velocity vo, if not 4,4 m/s; if a lubricant was used, the lubricant type, grade, quality and manufacturer.

The test report shall include the following

a)
b)

a reference to this part of IS0 7765; the type, identification mark, origin and date of receipt of the material tested, plus any other pertinent data concerning the material;

8

IS 13360 ( Part S/Set 24 ) : 1999 IS0 7765-2 : 1994

Annex A

(informative)
General remarks
In the testing of plastics, tough/brittle transitions are frequently encountered when the test temperature is lowered in stages from high values. At such transitions, the failure energy, for example, rises from a lower to a higher level. These transitions are caused by molecular relaxation processes which become effective only above a certain temperature and which increase the absorption of the impact energy. Penetration time plays a role similar to that of temperature. If the penetration time is shortened, the transition temperature is shifted to higher temperatures. The relationship between time and temperature is determined by the temperature dependence of molecular relaxation times, which is approximated by the Arrhenius equation: t = roexp(E/RT) where T T is the relaxation time or penetration is the thermodynamic temperature ition of the tough/brittle transition temperature scale; is the activation energy. time; or poson the example, such a transition region lies in the temperature range between - 105 "C and - 140 "C, depending on the relative molecular mass and degree of crystallinity. The tough/brittle transition can be recognized in the puncture test by the appearance of the damaged specimens, which reveals whether rupture occurred with or without deformation. The two types of rupture behaviour can also be distinguished by means of the force-deformation diagram. For tough/brittle plastics, the performance and evaluation of impact tests are subject to certain limitations, since the test specimens of a single test series must be assigned to two different parent populations, namely one exhibiting brittle-material behaviour and one exhibiting tough-material behaviour. In such cases, the means and variances are not statistically defined over the entire range of measurements. Nevertheless, it is helpful to employ the mean and standard deviation calculated from the individual measurements to characterize the behaviour of the material. Where there is a sufficient number of measurements for both parent populations, the cl,~racteristic quantities can be calculated separately for the brittle and the tough specimens. If necessary, the choice of assigning measurements to one of the two parent populations should be decided by use of the statistical procedure normally employed for this purpose.

E If the test scatter of rupture of of others

temperature is in a transition region, a wide results is frequently observed because the some specimens is brittle and the rupture is tough. In high-density polyethylene, for

.

IS 13360 ( Part S/Set 24 ) : 1999 IS0 7765-2 : 1994

Annex B
(informative)

Bibliography
[l]
GRIMMINGER, H. A theory of the interaction typical for the instrumented puncture test by a drop mass. Z. Werkstofffechnik, 18 (19871, pp. 218-224.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofIndian Stundurds Acf, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as, symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No, PCD 23 ( 1572 ).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone I 323 76 17 323 3841 3378499,3378561 I 337 86 26, 337 86 62 I 60 38 43 60 20 25 23502 16,2350442 235 15 19,235 23 15 8329295,8327858 I 8327891,8327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW ?ELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 `C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Pnnted at New India Printing Press, Khuja, India

