IS 14793 : 2013 


Wd Wad (Reaffirmed 2018) 

We Safe Beet dem uw ui pm cb sea 

PA гері Фф feni 99 nr чегін, SRI sd 
Tadi — 19 fedi 


Indian Standard 


INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND OBSERVATION 
OF THE INSTRUMENTS FOR VIBRATION STUDIES 
OTHER THAN EARTHQUAKES ON HYDRAULIC 
STRUCTURES AND MACHINES — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 17.160; 93.160 


€ BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


August 2013 Price Group 5 


Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee, WRD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division 
Council. 


Vibration refers to the mechanical oscillations about an equilibrium point. The oscillations may be periodic or 
random. The vibrations may be measured as displacement, velocity or acceleration with the help of displacement 
gauges, velocity pick-ups and accelerometers respectively. Displacement measurements require a stable reference 
structure close to the vibrating structure and it may be many a times impracticable to have one especially for 
hydraulic structures. Velocity pick-ups suffer from poor response to high frequency vibrations and are bulky for 
certain applications. The accelerometers hence are the most preferred. They are proven in respect of versatility, 
ruggedness, accuracy and dynamic response. Accelerometers employ piezoelectric elements, force balance 
techniques or strain gauge based elements. Therefore, the signal conditioners suitable for the particular type of 
accelerometers have to be provided. For the purpose of recording and analysis of data, a computerized signal 
analyzer with sufficient disk storage capacity completely replaces the earlier techniques of recording on multi- 
channel instrumentation tape recorders and analyzing on a tunable band pass filter type frequency analyzers. 
Battery operated signal analyzers are common now-a-days. 


This standard covers requirements of the accelerometers, signal conditioning and signal processing equipment for 
the application of vibration studies. 


This standard was first published in 2000 however, the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 
decided to revise it based on the experience gained since then as well as considering technological development 
in the field. New clause for safety criteria has also been incorporated in this standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14793: 2013 


Indian Standard 


INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND OBSERVATION 
OF THE INSTRUMENTS FOR VIBRATION STUDIES 
OTHER THAN EARTHQUAKES ON HYDRAULIC 
STRUCTURES AND MACHINES — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard recommends instruments essential 
for observation of vibrations arising from hydraulic 
structures and machines. Vibration studies are 
conducted on hydraulic machines namely pumps, 
hydro-turbines, on civil structures namely dams, divide 
walls, bridges, power houses, foundations and on other 
parts namely gates, penstocks, trash-racks, etc. It further 
covers the details on installation of accelerometers and 
procedure for observations of the vibration with the 
help of associated instrumentation containing signal 
conditioner and signal processor. 


1.2 Vibration due to earthquake is beyond the scope of 
this standard. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard is 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
14881 : 2001 Method for blast 
monitoring — Guidelines 


vibration 


3 INSTRUMENTATION 


3.1 Accelerometers 
3.1.1 Selection 


Accelerometers are designed to measure vibration over 
a given frequency range. Once the particular 
frequencies of interest for a machine are known, an 
accelerometer may be selected. Typically, an 
accelerometer for measuring machine vibration shall 
have a frequency range from | or 2 Hz to 8 or 10 kHz. 


3.1.2 Constructional Details 


There are number of technologies on which 
accelerometers are based, however the technology ina 
piezoelectric accelerometer is that an electrical charge 
is developed when subject to dynamic stresses. In a 
piezoelectric accelerometer, a heavy mass (seismic 
mass) pre-loaded by a shift spring, rests on the stack of 
piezoelectric discs. When the assembly is subjected to 
vibration the mass exerts a dynamic force on the disc 
which develops a variable charge proportional to force 
and hence to acceleration. Figure 1 shows 
constructional details of an accelerometer. 


HOUSING 


SPRING 
MASS 


‘PIEZOELECTRIC DISCS 


22222.22222Х4 


-2- OUTPUT TERMINAL - 


BASE 


aa лалы аЛУУ УУУУ ЫБЫЗ, 


PREAMPLIFIER 


| 
| 


SEISMIC MASS 


TPT 2 2 


HOUSING 


PIEZOELECTRIC DISCS 


PTT 


CONNECTORS 


HIGH SENSITIVITY ACCELEROMETER 


Fic. 1 CoNsTRUCTIONAL DETAILS OF 
ACCELERATOMETER 


IS 14793: 2013 


3.1.3 Performance Characteristics 
3.1.3.1 Sensitivity 


A piezoelectric accelerometer is electrically analogous 
to a capacitor shunted by a high resistance and also a 
voltage source or a charge source. The piezoelectric 
accelerometer thus has two sensitivities namely, charge 
sensitivity and voltage sensitivity. The voltage 
sensitivity is expressed as mv/m/s and charge sensitivity 
as pc/m/s. These two are related by, 


Voltage sensitivity = 


Charge sensitivity 


Accelerometer capacitance + Cable capacitance 


The charge output of accelerometer is independent of 
cable length, however the voltage output depends upon 
the cable length. Therefore, the charge output is 
preferred and hence the amplifier associated with 
piezoelectric accelerometer is invariably a charge 
amplifier. Accelerometer sensitivity is generally of the 
order of 10 pc/m/s. 


3.1.3.2 Frequency response 


The frequency response is defined as the variation of 
accelerometer signal with reference to frequency of a 
sinusoidal vibration. The accelerometer signal is fairly 
constant over the desired frequency range. The natural 
resonance frequency of an accelerometer corresponds with 
natural frequency of the seismic mass. Up to a frequency 
of 1/5th of the natural resonance frequency the variation 
in accelerometer signal is generally within 6 percent. 


On the lower end of the frequency spectrum rather than 
accelerometer the charge amplifier’s frequency 
response becomes the limiting factor. The phase 
response is one of the significant characteristics in 
respect of transient and shock performance of the 
accelerometer. The upper frequency limitation should 
be at least 1 000 Hz. 


LOW PASS 
FILTER! 
AMPLIFIER: 


INPUT 


ACCELEROMETER AMPLIFIER 


7722122227) 


HA Ali 
NA PAN 
(Aa 


Й 
n 
D 


NN 


3.1.3.3 Dynamic range 


The dynamic range is the range of magnitudes of 
accelerations over which the accelerometer output is 
directly proportional to the acceleration amplitude 
applied. The lower magnitude is limited by the 
mounting, cable length, environmental conditions and 
amplifier noise level. The higher magnitude for 
continuous accelerations is much higher than the 
accelerations encountered in practice. 


3.1.3.4 Sensitivity of accelerometers to unwanted 
parameters 


The accelerometers are also sensitive to many other 
unwanted physical parameters namely temperature, 
sound, strain at the base surface, magnetism and 
transverse accelerations. These sensitivities cause error 
in measurements. The acceptable sensitivities on these 
accounts are as follows: 


Temperature sensitivity 
Acoustic sensitivity 


: 1рс/°С 

: 0.01 pc at 154 db sound 
pressure level 

Surface strain sensitivity : 0.03 pc/microstrain 

Magnetic sensitivity : 10 pc/Tesla magnetism 

Transverse sensitivity : 4 percent 


3.2 Signal Conditioner 
3.2.1 Configurational Details 


The signal conditioner comprises of electronic circuits 
comprising of the pre-amplifier as charge amplifier, low 
pass-high pass filters runs, integrators and peak detectors, 
etc. These circuits are built around operational amplifiers. 
The frequency response and gains of amplifier, choice 
of acceleration, velocity and displacement are switch 
selectable. Signal conditioner is provided with meter 
indication for RMS, peak values and is powered through 
line supply or built in battery pack. Figure 2 shows 
schematic of a signal conditioner. 


OUTPUT 


INTEGRATOR 
AMPLIFIER 


OUTPUT 
AMPLIFIER 


! 
| 
| 
UPPER | 
C 


| 

| | 

| | 

| | 

olo o 

| YO Lower v TRANSDUCER SENSITIVITY 

19 O FREQUENCY О FREQUENCY 

10 O LIMIT о LIMIT | 

| 95160 6° i | 

M. RR T NIS не == | 

| ооо | 

М Хымат _____________ 4 
A o OUT 


Fic. 2 PIEZOELECTRIC ACCELEROMETER AND SIGNAL CONDITIONER 


2 


3.2.2 Performance Characteristics 
3.2.2.1 Amplification 


The gain of the amplifier is expressed in mv/pc апа 
with 1 mv/pc gain termed as 0 db, amplifier with gain 
variation of the order of 100 db is required. 


3.2.2.2 Frequency response 


The frequency response of the signal conditioner is 
adjusted by means of the low pass and high pass filter 
associated with the amplifier. The low frequency cut- 
off at minimum 0.2 Hz and high frequency cut-off at 
minimum 1 000 Hz or beyond is required for the 
applications. The filter roll off, of the order of minimum 
12 db/octave is required for sufficient rejection of 
unwanted frequencies. 


3.2.2.3 Integration 


The output of pre-amplifier corresponding to acceleration 
is integrated to produce output corresponding to velocity 
which when integrated in turn produces output 
corresponding to displacement. These integrators are, in 
fact, a pair of -20 db/octave cut-off low pass filters so that 
they produce outputs exactly corresponding to velocity 
and displacement. These filters are built around operational 
amplifier as active filter for good accuracies. 


3.2.2.4 Meter indication 


The signal conditioner should be provided with panel 
meter indication of the vibration parameters for on-line 
monitoring and would also be helpful for setting up of 
instruments for experiments involving analyzers. The 
meter indication is both RMS and peak value selectable. 
The crest factor for RMS detector should be less than 3 
and the time constant for the RMS as well as peak 
detector should be in the range of 1 to 10 s. 


3.2.2.5 Dynamic range 


The amplifier gain should be switch selectable, each 
setting corresponding to combination of range and 


ШАН ANALOG 
INPUT PROCESSOR 


DISPLAY 


FRONT PANEL 
CONTROLS & 
KEYBOARDS 


IS 14793: 2013 


sensitivity. The dynamic range would be most affected 
by noise level at the low end for the maximum 
sensitivity. A dynamic range of the order of minimum 
50 dB would be required. 


3.3 Signal Processor 
3.3.1 Evolution 


The aim of vibration measurements should be to assess 
peak or RMS value of the vibration parameters and the 
frequency at which they occur. Since the vibration 
phenomenon would be random in nature to assess, its 
measurement needs to be carried out and measurement 
data analyzed on line. The earlier vibration measuring 
equipment contained an electronic tunable band pass 
filter and frequency spectrum strip chart recorder 
connected to the accelerometer and the signal 
conditioner. The signal conditioner with meter 
indication still prevails owing to suitability for routine 
monitoring applications. However, the electronic band 
bass filter and frequency spectrum recorder have now 
been replaced by computerized signal processor 
equipment. This standard elaborates only the signal 
processor, being relevant today. 


3.3.2 Configurational Details 


The signal processor is an microcomputer based 
equipment. It essentially consists of analog input section, 
CPU, CRT display, floppy drives and output section and 
keys to perform various functions under microprocessor 
control. The microcomputer with the help of stored 
programmes and functional keys controls the operation 
of the equipment besides conducting the signal processing. 
A multi-channel inputs two or four channel versions with 
multiple display is required for the application. Figure 3 
shows schematic of a signal processor. 


The recorder should have a filter for cancellation of 
electrical noise which is common in most power plants 
and at blasting sites. The recorder should have RS-232 
port for data transfer. 


INTERFACE FOR 
PLOTTER PRINTER 
& DISK DRIVES 


Fic. 3 SCHEMATIC OF SIGNAL PROCESSOR 


IS 14793 : 2013 


3.3.3 Performance Characteristics 
3.3.3.1 Analog input characteristics 


A multi-channel (two or four channels), direct coupled 
inputs for simultaneous data acquisition is required. 
The inputs are direct coupled so that the lowest 
frequency in the measured vibrations are not limited. 
The input impedance of the order of mega ohms or 
greater and frequency response beyond 1 000 Hz is 
required for the applications. The input section needs 
to contain an antialiasing filter with facility for selection 
of cut-off frequency with keys. 


3.3.3.2 Analysis functions 


The following analysis functions are often required in 
vibration assessment work: 


a) Amplitudes and peaks in time domain. 


b) Instantaneous and average frequency 
spectrum, cross spectrum, coherence, transfer 
function, power spectral density. 

c) Orbits, nyquist diagrams, probability density 
functions, auto-correlation, cross-correlation, 
time averaging. 

d) Arithmetic and calculus functions. 


3.3.3.3 Other processing facilities 


a) Weighting functions for frequency spectrum. 


b) Transient capture and storage with preset 
delays. 


c) Selection of frequency range and amplitude 
range. 


d) Display formatting with markers, cursors, text 
editing, etc. 


e) Manual control by keyboard and disk data 
processing. 


3.3.3.4 Storage and presentation of results 


The results of processing available on CRT display 
should be stored on floppy diskettes/hard disk and 
should be presented on a plotter or printer. 


4 POINTS OF VIBRATION MEASUREMENTS 


The vibration measurements are not always possible 
on the most pertinent parts namely runner blades or 
wicket gates of a hydro-turbine, bearings in rotating 
parts or flapper of a valve, etc. Therefore, bearing 
housing, valve body, etc, are considered measurement 
points. For measurement of gate vibrations and 
penstock vibrations, the accelerometers are installed 
directly on them for example, on a centrally placed 
girder of the gate. For vibrations measurement on 
bridges, bridge piers, power houses, divide walls, etc, 


the points selected are generally at the centre of the 
walls, centre of girders, unsupported ends, etc, 
regardless of response of the structure to periodic or 
random stimuli. For vibration measurements on gravity 
dams, the points selected generally are along the crest 
of the dam, inside galleries at suitable elevation. 
However, an approximate estimate of the response of 
the structure helps in deciding the points of 
measurement. 


5 INSTALLATION METHODS 
5.1 Mounting Methods for Accelerometers 


The mounting of an accelerometer affects its frequency 
response. The mounted natural frequency is dependent 
directly on the mounting. The higher the stiffness, the 
more the mounted natural frequency approaches its 
maximum. The least stiff mounting accelerometer is 
magnetic mounting and the highest stiffness is using a 
high tensile setscrew tightened to the flat surface. Other 
mounting methods come in between these two 
extremes. Stud mounting, quick fit mounting, adhesive 
mounting, magnetic mounting, mounting with wax are 
commonly used methods of mounting. 


5.1.1 Adhesive Mounting 


The simplest method of accelerometer mounting is by 
sticking it to the object with the help of double sided 
adhesive disk or bees wax. It is important to ensure 
that the site chosen for the accelerometer is ground flat 
for at least an area larger than the base of the slight 
smear of silicone grease which shall ensure a stiff bond 
between accelerometer and structure. Due to softening 
of the adhesive the contact of accelerometer with the 
object may be detached and also the adhesive method 
of mounting needs smooth, clean, oil-free surface of 
the object which may not always be available. 


5.1.2 Mounting Threads 


The secure most mounting is possible by threading the 
accelerometer to the test object. The accelerometer 
manufacturers always provide them with a threaded 
hole at the base and accessories such as mounting studs 
or mounting magnets with matching threaded 
protrusions at the top. For installations on metallic 
object mounting with the help of magnets would suffice. 
The vibrations in two (X, Y) or three directions (X, Y, Z) 
at point are to be measured either with a three 
directional accelerometer or by threading three 
unidirectional accelerometers on a mild steel cube 
welded to the part. For measurements on concrete parts 
a mild steel piece with threaded hole is grouted into 
the concrete with the help of foundation bolts and the 
accelerometers are mounted by means of studs. Figure 
4 shows mounting methods for accelerometers. 


IS 14793: 2013 


SILICON 
GREASE 
STUD MOUNTING 
NN STEEL 


STUD 


SILICON 
GREASE 


ISOLATED STUD MOUNTING 
ISOLATED | 


\ = MI 
STUD NNNM. ЕГЕН 


THIN LAYER | 

ОР BEES WAX MOUNTING WITH WAX 

“DOUBLE SIDED | 

ADHESIVE DISC ҮТ» MOUNTING WITH ADHESIVE 
DISC 


MAGNET MOUNTING 


SEALENT WRONG 


CORRECT CLAMPING ACCELEROMETER 
CABLE TO MINIMISE NOISE 


Fic. 4 METHODS OF ACCELEROMETER INSTALLATION 


IS 14793 : 2013 


5.1.3 Water-Proofing of a Mounting 


In case the point selected is underwater or is likely to 
be subjected to splashes of water, the accelerometer 
mounting needs to be made waterproof with a 
waterproof housing onto it, through which the 
connecting cables are taken out. Figure 5 shows a 
recommended arrangement for the purpose. 


5.2 Equipment Locations and Cable Layouts 


The signal conditioner/amplifier, signal processor, 
plotter/printer should be kept in an enclosed shed 
having mains power connections, from which cables 
should be laid up to the measurement point. The laying 
out cable plays an important part in the accelerometer 
mountings as cable whips contribute to error in 
measurements arising from introduction of unwanted 
electrical inputs into the signal conditioning amplifier. 
The connecting cable should therefore be kept attached 
to the test objects end, and as far as possible not let 
free so that whipping due to wind should be avoided, 
as shown in Fig. 4. 


5.3 Maintenance 


The accelerometer has no moving part subject to normal 
wear. Therefore, the output sensitivity does not require 
periodic adjustments to correct for wear. 


An accelerometer has internal components which can 
be damaged from shock or overheating. When an 
accelerometer is suspect, a simple test of the 
transducer’s bias voltage shall help determine whether 
it should be removed from service. An accelerometer’s 
bias voltage is the d.c. component of the transducer’s 
output signal. The bias voltage is measured with a d.c. 
voltmeter across the transducer’s signal output and 
common leads with power applied. At the same time, 
the power supply voltage should also be checked to 
eliminate the possibility of improper power voltage 
affecting the bias voltage level. 


6 EXPERIMENTAL DATA COLLECTION 
6.1 Calibration 
6.1.1 Pre-Measurement Calibration 


The accelerometer and amplifier performance 
characteristics are generally stable. These, however, 
should be checked even on site. This should be carried 
out by reciprocity method for accelerometer using a 
standard accelerometer, miniature vibration source and 
sensitivity comparator, and for charge amplifier by 
charge simulation method using a calibrator producing 
known charge and a digital voltmeter. 


6.1.2 Under normal conditions, piezoelectric sensors 
are extremely stable and their calibrated performance 
characteristics do not change over time. However, often 


sensors are exposed to harsh environmental conditions, 
like mechanical shock, temperature changes, humidity, 
etc. Therefore a re-calibration cycle should be 
established. 


6.1.3 For applications where high accuracy is required, 
the accelerometer should be recalibrated every time 
after use under severe conditions or at least every 
2 years. 


6.2 Instrument Check-Up 


Having completed the installation of accelerometers 
and having made electrical connections of the 
equipment before data collection, a thorough instrument 
check is very essential. Considering the sources of 
vibrations, these would be repetitive in nature and signal 
validity checks could be easily carried out during this 
phase. The following requires special attention: 


a) To ensure that the mains supply frequency (50 
Hz pick-up, d.c. off-set and low frequency) 
variations should be minimum possible to an 
extent that does not affect measurement 
results. 


b) The sensitivity ranges should be selected to 
accommodate the signal within dynamic range 
of the instruments. 


Figure 6 shows instrument set-up for vibration 
measurements. 


6.3 Measurement Procedures 
6.3.1 Measurement Conditions 


The vibrations change according to various conditions 
to which the test part is subjected, for example gate 
openings, electrical load on machine. For each different 
condition the signal validity may be checked as 
mentioned in 6.2 for the procedure for instrument 
check-up. 


6.3.2 Measurement Time 


A portable signal processor conducts on-line analysis. 
However, the record time selection should be limited. 
The frequency range, the frequency resolution and 
record length are interrelated as follows: 


T = Ш 
where 
T = record time; and 
Љ = frequency resolution 


= (2.56 x Fmax )/ №; 
where 


Fma = maximum anticipated frequency of 
vibrations; and 


N, - samples in time. 


6.3.3 Recording Observations 


The records of the measurements conducted should be 
kept in a tabular form. The table should bear at the 
head all the pertinent details for example, reservoir 
level, condition of gates, machine speed, head on 
machines, load, etc, and date and time of experiment. 
In case of simultaneous measurements on a number of 
channels, all the locations form the columns and 
measurement conditions form the rows. Many sub- 
conditions within a condition are possible for example, 
a load on hydro-turbine with other unit at different load 
conditions. It is possible that the readings are not taken 
simultaneously or in the order indicated by the table 


Name of project 
Date 

Reservoir level 
Tail Race level 
Unit No. 

Gate opening 
Machine speed 


TURBINE GUIDE 
BEARING: 
VERTICAL 


“TURBINE GUIDE | GENERATOR 
| BEARING: 
VERTICAL 


HORIZONTAL . 


10! 
A ҰЯ 


SN 
NN is 


FLOOR BEARING: |THRUST BEARING: 


A | IZ 


24 Az 
Се 


IS 14793: 2013 
due to operational constraints or equipment limitations, 
therefore each condition and sub-condition as well as 
the points of measurements may be dated and time 
marked. 


Entries should be made in the record during 
observations for, 


a) actual parameters value while using indicating 
instrument; and 
b) file names, diskette identification numbers 


while using signal processor. 


A typical vibration measurement record is given 
below: 


CONTROL ROOM 
FLOOR: 
VERTICAL 


CONTROL ROOM 
FLOOR: 
HORIZONTAL 


GENERATOR 


| HORIZONTAL 


WATER PROOFING BY ADHESIVE SEALING 


CONNECTION WIRES 


ACCELEROMETER 


NEOPRENE RUBBER O-RING 
BOLTS 


KIKE 


WY 


Fic. 5 Water РЕООЕ HOUSING FOR ACCELEROMETER 


7 


IS 14793 : 2013 


6.3.4 Safety Criteria 


For evaluation of the safety criteria for the structural 
response to vibration (see IS 14881). 


CHARGE AMPLIFIER 
-INTEGRATERS RMS 
INDICATOR 


ACCELEROMETER 


| 


MANY SUCH CHAINS AS PER REQUIRED NUMBER 


| 


MULTI CHANNEL 
INSTRUMENTATION 
TAPE RECORDER 


MULTI CHANNEL 
SIGNAL PROCESSOR 
MEMORY 


| 
CHARGE AMPLIFIER | / | 
PRESSURE SENSOR 4-1 / | 
N 
NC | | APORTABLE PROCESSOR CAN ВЕ 

| x cc ea | USED AT SITE FOR REAL TIME ANALYSIS 
OPTIONAL IF ANALYSIS IS TO BE | 
| CARRIED OUT IN LABORATORY | 
| AND МОТ АТ SITE | 


Fic. 6 INSTRUMENT SET-UP FOR VIBRATION AND PRESSURE PULSATION MEASUREMENTS 


IS 14793: 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee, WRD 16 


Organization 
Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Andhra Pradesh Power Generation Corporation Limited, Hyderabad 


Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (I) Ltd, New Delhi 


Damodar Valley Corporation Ltd, Bihar 


Encardio-Rite Electronics Pvt Ltd, Lucknow 


IIT, Roorkee, Uttarakhand 


Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 


Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, Vadodara 


Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nasik 


Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, Karnataka 


Kerala State Electricity Board, Kerala 


NHPC Ltd, Faridabad 


NTPC Limited, Noida, U.P. 


Pubic Works Deptt, Government of Tamil Nadu, Tamil Nadu 


Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited, New Shimla 


Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Chennai 


Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited, Dehradun 


Representative(s) 
Suri Murari RATNAM (Chairman) 


Suri S. Р. Gupta 
Suni SANJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri D. SUDARSHAN 


Director (DAM SAFETY) 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Suri Ajay CHAURSIA 
Suri JALAJ PARASHAR (Alternate) 


Suri S. L. Gupta 
Suri Е. К. Матнов (Alternate) 


Suri S. G. CHAPHALKAR 
Suri К. Аш (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (INSTRUMENTATION) 
Director EMBANKMENT (N&W) (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. DATTA 
Suri К. 5. Das (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CIVIL) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (CIVIL) (Alternate) 


SHRI Амор GUJRAL 
Suri K. K. Елі (Alternate) 


Dr К.Р. бімен 
Dr Nayan SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri М. ASHOK Kumar 
Suri А. Manos Kumar (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


RESEARCH OFFICER 
ASSISTANT RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (Dam Design) 


CHIEF ENGINEER DESIGN 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


СҥшЕЕ ENGINEER (Ступ, DESIGNS) 
Project ENGINEER DesiGns (Alternate) 


Suri PHILIP ZACHARIAH 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Suri A. К. ТАШ 
Suri Н. V. S Ruprappa (Alternate) 


Suri R. C. SENAN 
SHRI MADHUKAR AGARWAL (Alternate) 


EIC, WRO and CE (G1) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Suri BRIJESH KUMAR GUPTA 


Suri V. SANTHANAKRISHNAN 
Suri S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate I) 
Suri V. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate П) 


ӛнкі Vyas Dev АЛМАМ! 
Suri N. К. Mamesuwari (Alternate) 


IS 14793 : 2013 


Organization Representative(s) 
Vasi Shums & Co Private Ltd, Mumbai Suri 7. M. KARACHIWALA 
In personal capacity (C-3/3188 Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110070) Dr A. К. DHAWAN 
BIS Directorate General Suri J. С. Arora, Scientist ‘F & Head (WRD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Shri К. К. Dash 
Scientist “С” (WRD), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 16 (503). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-А, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : С.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


