( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard
SELECTION OF GROUND IMPROVEMENT TECHNIQUES FOR FOUNDATION IN WEAK SOILS - GUIDELINES

UDC

624,138 : 624.15

@

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

October 19%

Price Group 5

Foundation

Engineering

Sectional

Committee,

CED 43

.

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Foundation Engineering Engineering Division Council. by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized had been approved by the Civil Sectional Committee

In poor and weak subsoils, the design of conventional shallow foundation for structures and equipment may present problems with respect to both sizing of foundation as well as control of foundation settlements. Traditionally, pile foundations have been employed often at enormous costs. A more viable alternative in certain situations, developed over the recent years is to improve the subsoil itself to an extent such that the subsoil would develop an would have adequate bearing capacity and foundations constructed after subsoil improvement for ground improvement has resultant settlements within acceptable limits. The techniques developed rapidly and has found large scale application in industrial projects.

IS 13094 : 1992

Indian Standard
SELECTION OF GROUND IMPROVEMENT TECHNIQUES FOR FOUNDATION IN WEAK SOILS - GUIDELINES
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the guidelines for selection of ground improvement techniques using one or more methods. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The necessary
IS No.

of soil structural

properties loads.

prior

to

imposition

of

3.3 Soil Densikation A technique to densify cohesionless imparting shocks or vibrations. 3.4 Soil Reinforcement Rods, strips or fabrics incorporated within soilmass to impart resistance to tensile, shear and compressive forces. 4 NECESSARY DATA 4.1 Following information shall be collected to establish the need for ground imporvement at a site, for selection of method to be adopted and for design of scheme selection. 4.1.1 Subsoil profile and soii charatcteristics up to a depth of about twice the width of the loaded area or up to dense/hard strata if encountered earlier. The information shall be acquired by conducting soil investigations as per IS 1892 : 1979. 4.1.2 Engineering properlies of subsoil shall include index properties, shear parameters, compressibility characteristics etc. shall be supplemented by 4.1.3 Boreholes number of static/ conducting a suitable dynamic cone penetration tests up to the depth to be improved. In conjunction with selected boreholes these tests serve as a economical and rapid method of establishing the state of subsoil before and after treatment. 4.1.4 Information shall be obtained with respect to nature of structure and area covered by it, intensity and nature of loading, permissible distortions, the structure can withstand. 5 CONSIDERATIONS NEED FOR GROUND 5.1 Based from site 1 FOR ESTABLISHING IMPROVEMENT soils by

following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard:
Title

are

1892 : 1979

6403 : 1981

Code of practice for subsurface investigaticn for foundations (first revision ) Code of practice for determination of bearing capacity of shallow foundations (first
revision )

8009 (Part

Code of practice for calcula1 ) : 1976 tion of settlement of foundaPart 1 Shallow tions : foundations subject to symmetrical static vertical loads practice Code of for ( Part 2 ) : 1980 calculation of settlement of foundations : Part 2 Deep foundations subjected to symmetrical static vertical loading

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, following definitions shall apply. 3.1.1 Ground Improvement Enhancement of the inplace properties of the ground by controlled application of technique suited to the subsoil conditions. 3.2 Injection Introduction material into pressure. 3.2.1 Preloading Application of loads to achieve improvement of a chemical/cementaceous a soil mass by application of the

on subsoil information obtained and the loading exerted by the

IS 13094 : 1992 structure, foundation design shall be carried out including sizing and settlement analysis. Ground improvement is indicated if the net loading intens5ty of the foundation exceeds computed as per the allowable pressure IS 6403 : 1981. 5.2 Ground treatment is also indicated if even for relative low loading intensities, the resultant settlement [ computed in accordance with IS 8009 ( Part 1 ) : 1976 and IS 8009 ( Part 2 ) : 1980 ] exceeds the acceptable limits for the structure both from view point of distortions induced in the structure and from operation angle. 5.3 Loose cohesionless deposits in seismic zones may be prone to liquefaction during earthquakes specially under high water table In such cases, analysis should be conditions. carried out for establishing liquefaction potential of the subsoil. Ground improvement is called for if such analysis establishes that the subsoil is prone to liquefaction. 5.4 Stability substantially 6 METHODS 6.1 Ground improvement following methods. 6.1.1 Soil Densifica tion
6.1.1.1 By application of shock and vibration to the subsoil and thereby causing rearrangement of the soil structure from a loose to medium due to dense state. This technique is applicable only to cohensionless soils under high water table conditions.

6.1.2.2 This technique is applicable to fine groundsoils such as silts and clays. Subsoils consolidation secondary high exhibiting be -amenable to characteristics may not required degree of impovement by the preloading method. 6.1.2.3 Removal of water from pore spaces has also been carried out by application of electric current to subsoil, the process being known as Electra Osmosis.
6.1.3 6.1.3.1 Injection and Grouting

Injection of chemicals, lime, cements etc, into subsoils improve subsoil by formation of bonds between soil particles. Mechanical compression of subsoil is also achieved under certain conditions provided grout is pumped in under high pressure. 6.1.3.2 Available methods are suitable sands as well as fine grained soils. 6.1.4 Soil Reinforcement
6.1.4.1

for

of soil in slopes can be enhanced by use of soil reinforcement.

is achieved

by the

Reinforcement introduced into the soil mass causes marked improvemement in stiffness and co;?sequently load carrying capcity and stability of soil mass.

6.1.4.2 Reinforcements may be in the form of dense granular materials in the form of stone columns. These are used where the primary requirement is increased in capability to carry vertical loads. 6.1.4.3 Reinforcements may also be in rhe form of horizontal or vertical strips and membranes. These reinforcements serve significantly to increase the capacity of soil to withstand tensile, shear and compression loads towards improvement of contribute and stability of soil mass. 6.1.5 Miscellaneous Methods Other methods used successfully inc!ude replacement of poor subsoil by competent fill. These methods, however have limitations of depths of application. 6.1.5.2 Improvement of properties of subsoils by heating and drying and by fusion at high temperatures have been employed with success. Soft soil have also temporarily been strengthened by freezing to improve stiffness. 6.1.6 Choice of Method
6.1.6.1 6.1.5.1

6.1.1.2 Methods under this head include vibrocompaction, compaction vibroflotation, piles, blasting and dynamic consolidation. 6.1.2 Pre-Consolidation
6.1.2.1

Expulsion of water from the pores causes consolidation of the soil thereby resula tin.g in build up of shear strength and substautlally reduced values of final settlements of foundations. This is achieved by precompression of the subsoil by subjecting the area to a preload. Preload can be of a soil itself or any suitable material. Preloading is generally carried out in stages to allow gradual build up of soil strength enabling it to safely suppost further stages of preload. For poorly draining soils such as soft clays, precompression is accelerated by provision of vertical drainage channels. 2

Annex A presents various methods of ground improvement alongwith principles,

IS 13094 : 1992 applicabilty to various soil coadirions, material required, results requirements, equipments likely to be achieved and limitations. This table may be referred to as guidance for selecting the proper method for a situation. 6.1.6.2 Annex B gives applicable grain ranges for different treatment methods. size 8.2 After completion of ground improvement work in a specific area, the field and laboratory tests shall be repeated to assess degree and adequacy of improvement of subsoil.
NOTES and major works it is desirable, to initially earmark a trial area for establishing the pattern and efficiency of the treatment technique employed and optimization of the same. 2 It will also be beneficial to include a programme of instrumentation to monitor the behaviour of subsoil during loading by measurement of pore pressure, soil movements, earth pressures, foundation settlement, etc.
1 For medium

6.1.6.3 For a particular situation more than one method may appear to be suitable. In a relative study should be made such cases for a proper selection. If necessary, a combination of more than one method may be more suitable. 7 EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES

9 RECORDING

OF DATA

The equipment and accessories will depend upon the method of ground improvement adopted. In practice, the type of equipment employed can vary considerably depending upon the design and resources of the contractor. However, not only it is important that the equipment should be capable of reaching the required depths but also the installation procedure should not adversely affect subsoil properties thereby reducing efficacy of treatment procedure adopted. 8 CONTROL WORKS OF GROUND IMPROVEMENT

9.1 A competent inspector shall be present to record the necessary information during execution of the ground improvement work. 9.2 Data to be recorded shall include:

4 Sequence of operation of the work; b) Sequence and spacing of treatment
points;

C>Depth of treatment; 4 Details of equipment
installation procedure Results of soil tests treatment; and Settlements

employed followed; if any; and before

and

Records of instrumentation,

8.1 Prior to commencement of ground improvement works, pilot boreholes with relevant field and laboratory tests shall be carried out in locations specific to area to be improved.

after

during preloading.

3

ANNEX

A

( Clause 5.1.6.1 )
SOIL IMPROVEMENT METHODS
._~.-__. r3

Summary ~___
Method

of Soil Improvement

Methods
Properties of Treated Material Special Adavantages and Limitations Relative cost

______
Principle Most Suitable Soil Conditions/Types Maximum Special Mate- Special Equipment Effective Treat- rials Required Required ment Depth >30 Ill Explosives, backfill to plug drill holes, hole casings Jetting or drilling machine

-I

Blasting

Shock wa vcs and vibrations cause liquefaction and displacement with settlement to higher density Densification by vibration; liquefaction induced settlement under overburden

Saturated, clean sands : partly satmated sands and silts ( collapsible loess ) after flooding Saturated or dry clean sand

Can obtain relative densities to 70-80, may get variabie density time dcpendent strength gain Can obtain relative densities of up to 80. Incffective in some sands

Rapid. inexpensive, can treat any me areas : variable properities, no improvemcnt near surface, dangerous Rapid, simple, good underwater, soft underlayers may damp vibrations, difficult to pc-netrate, stiff overlayers, not good in partly saturated soils Useful in saturated and partly saturated soils, uniformity

Low

z;iretory

None 20 m ( Ineffective ) above 3 - 4 m depth )

Vibratcry pile driver and 750 mm dia, open steel pipe

Moderate

Vibrocompaclion

Densification by vibration and compaction of backfill material Densification by displacement of pile volume and by vibration during driving

Cohesionless soils with less than 20 fines

30 m

Granular backfill, water supply Pile material ( often sand or soil plus cement mixture )

Vibroflot, pumps

crane,

Can obtain high relative densities, good uniformity

Moderate

Compaction Piles

Loose sandy soils : partly saturated clayey soils, loess

>20 m

Pile driver, special sand pile equipment

Can obtain high densities, good uniformity

l__~--_l_ Heavy Tamping (Dynamic Consolidation) Repeated application of high intensity impacts at surface Cohesionless soils, waste fills, partly saturated soils 30 m None Tampers of up to 200 tons, high capacity crane

____~_~ Can obtain good impro vemer,t and reasonable uniformity

Useful i,l soils with fines, uniform compaction, easy to check results, slow, limited improvement in upper l-2 m Simple, rapid, suitable for some soils with fines ; usable above and below water, requires control, must be away from existing structures

Modrrate to high

Low

Particulate Grouting

Penetration grouting-fill soil pores with Foil, cement, and/or clay

Medium to coarse sand and gravel

Unlimited

Grout, water

Mixers, pumps,

tanks, hoses

Impervious, high strength with cement grout, eliminate liquefactiou danger Impervious, 10~ to high strength eliminate liquefaction danger

Low cost grouts, high strength; limited to coarse-grained soils, hard to evaluate

Lowest of the grout systems

Chemical Grouting

Solutions of two or more cherr.icals react in soil pores to form a gel or a solid precipitate Lime slurry injected to shallow depths under high prsssure

Medium coarser

silts and

Unlimited

Grout, water

Mixers, tanks, pumps, hoses

Low viscosity controllable gel time, good water shut-off: high cost, hard to evaluate Only effective in narrow range of soil conditions

High to very . high

Pressure IEjected Lime

Expansive

clays

Unlimited, but 2-3 m usual

Lime, water surfactant

Slurry tanks, agitators? pumps, hoses

Lime encapsulated zones formed by channels resulting from cracks, root holes, hydraulic fracture

Compe titive with other solutions to expansive soil problems Low material high injection

Displacement Grout

Highly viscous grout acts as radial hydraulic jack when pumped in under high pressure Stabilizing chemicals moved into soil by electroosmosis or colloids into pores by electrophorasis

Soft, soils; soils voids

finegrained foundation with large or cavities

Unlimited, but a few m usual

Soil, cement water

Batching equipment, high pressure pumps, hoses

Grout bulbs within compressed soil matrix

Good for correction of differential settlemerits. filling large voids; careful control required

Electrokinetic Iniection

Saturated silts ; silty clays ( clean sands in case of colloid injection )

Unknown

Chemical stabilizer colloidal void fillers

DC power supply, anodes, cathodes

Increased strength, reduced compressibility, reduced liqucfaction potenti al

Existing soil and structlures not subjicted to high pressures; no good in soil with high conductivity

Expensive

Jet Grou ting

High speed jets at _ ands, silts, clays depth excavate in- ' ject, and mix siabilizer with soil to form columns or panels

Water, stabilizing chemicals

Special jet nozzle, pumps, pipes and hoses

Solidified columns and walls

Useful in soils that can't be permeation grouted? precision in locatmg treated zones

ANNEX A ( continued
Summary
Method Principle Most Suitable Soil Conditions/Types

)

of Soil Improvement

Methods
Properties 0 f Treated Material Special Advantages and Limitations

Special Mate- Special Equipment Maximum Required Effective Treat- Gals Required ment Depth __ Earth fill or other material for loading the site; sand or gravel for drainage blanket Earth moving equipment, large water tanks or vacuum drainage systems sometimes used; settlement markers. piezometers

. Cost

Relative

Preloading with/ without Drain

Load is applied sufficiently in advante of construction so that compression of soft soils is completed prior to development of the site

Normally consolidated soft clays, silts, organic deposits, completed sanitary landfills

Reduced water content and void ratio, increased strength

Easy, theory well developed, uniformity; requires long time ( vertical drains can be used to reduce consolidation time )

Low (Moderate if vert i cal drains are required ) Moderate

2 `;: z k g 8 k

Surcharge Fills

Fill in excess of that required permanently is applied to achieve a given amount of settlement in a shorter time; excess fill then removed DC current causes water flow from anode towards cathode where it is removed

Normally consolidated soft clays, silts, organic deposits, completed sanitary landfills

--

Earth fill or Earth moving other mateequipment: rial for settlement loading the markers, site; sand or piezometers gravel for drainage blanket

Reduced water content, void ratio and compressibility; increased strength

Faster than preloading without surcharge, theory well developed extra material handling; can llse vertical drains to reduce consolidation time

Electroosmosis

Normally consolidated silts and silty clays

--

Anodes (UFUally rebars or aluminium) cathodes ( well points or rebars )

DC power supply, wiring, metering systems

Reduced water content and compressibility, increased strength, electrochemical hardening

No fill loading required, be used in confined area, relatively fast; non-uniform properties between electrodes; no good in highly conductive soils

High

~~~~
Remnve and Replace Foundation soil excavated, improved by drying or admixture, and rccompactcd Inorganic soils 10 m Admixture stabilizers Excavnting, mixing, and Compaction equipment dewatcring system Mixing and compaction equipment Increased strength and stiffness, reduced comepressibility Uniform, controlled foundation soil when replaced; may require large area dcwatcring High

Structural Fills

Structural fill distributes loads to underlying soft soils

Use over soft clays or organic soils, marsh deposits

--

Sand, gra vel fly ash, bottom ash, slag, expanded aggregate, clam shell or oyster shell, incinerator ash Cement, lime asphalt, or chemical stabilizer

Soft subgradc protected by structural loadbearing fill

High strength, good load distribution to underlying soft soils

Low to high

*

Mix-inPlace Piles and Walls

Lime, cement, or asphalt introduted through rotating auger or special in-place mixer Drying at low temperatures; alteration of clays at intermediate temperatures (400-600�C); fusion at high temperatures (>lOOO~C) Freeze soft., wet ground to Increase its strength and stiffness

All soft or loose inorganic soils

> 20 m

Drill rig, rotary cutting and mixing head, additive proportioning equipment Fuel tanks, burners, blowers

Solidified soil piles or walls of relatively high strength

Uses native soil, reduced lateral support requirements during excavation; difficult quality control Can obtain irreversib12 improvements in properties: can introduce stabilizers with hot gases

Moderate to high

I -

_Heating Fine-grained soils, especially partly saturated clays and silts, loess 1.5 m Fuel Reduced water content, plasticity, water sensitivity; increased strength High

Freezing

All soils

Several

m

Refrigerant

Refrigeration system

Increased strength and stiffness, reduced permeability

No good in flowing ground water, temporary

High

-

ANNEX

A ( corduded

)

Summary of Soil Improvement
Metbod Principle Most Suitable Soil Conditions/Types Maximum Effective Treatment Depth Special Materials Required Special

Methods
Eqltipment Properties 0f Special Advantages and Limitations Relative

Required

Treated Material

* Cost

Vibro Hole jetted into Replacesoft, fine-grained mer.t Stone soil and backfilled and Sand with densely comColumns pacted gravel or sand Z 8
s

Soft clays and alluvia1 deposits

20 m

Gravel or crush& rock backfill

Vibroflot, crane or vibrocat, water

Iixcreased bc;:ring cap&city, reduced settlements

I_`&!sterthat- prccompression, avoids dewatcring required for remove aud replac:; limited bearing capacity In-situ rci!~forcement for soils that c:::i't

Moderate to high

.9 B
a

Root Pilts, Soils Nailing

Inclusions used to carry tension, shear, compression -~

All soils

Reinforcing bars, cement grout Can cor3truct earth structures to heights of several tons of m Metal or plastic strips, geotextiles

Drilling grouting ment

and equip-

Reinforced z3ne behaves as a coherent mass

Moderate to

be grouted clr mixedin-place with admixtures Economical, earth structures coherent, can tolerate c!eformations; increased allowable bearing pressure

high

Strips and Membranes

Horizontalt;;;jle strips, nes buried in soil under embankments, gravel base courses and footings

Cohesionless soils

Excavating, earth handling, and compaction equipment

Self-supporting earth structures, increased bearing capacity, reduced deformations -_

Low to moderate

IS 13094 : 1992

ANNEX B . ( Clause 6.1.6.2 )
TREATMENT METHODS
I

GRAIN SIZE RANGES FOR DIFFERENT

iravall

Sand
I I I

I

Silt \
\

Vibro-comoaction
I

Blast ina
I

I

Cla

`articulata

Grou
1

Chemical

Grout

_

I

0.1 Particla

0.01 Size - m m

9

I

I
Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Burcurr 0~1ndfun Standards Act, I986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
i

1

I

