Roafflrmed t996 1) (( Reaffirmed 2001

15:1303-1333

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING. TO PAINTS (

Second Revision )
Third Reprint JANUARY 1998

UJX

667'61 : 001'4

Q copyrighl BUREAU
MANAK

1984 STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARO

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI-110002

Gr

10

April

1984

IS : 1303- 1983

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO PAINTS (

Second Revision)

Paints and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CDC 8
Chaiwxax DE M.A. SIVAf3AMBAN MCt?lbCrS DR M. M. SHIBSALKAB Dr M. 11. Sivasamban SEBIL.K. AGBAWAL ( Ahmafr to ) Centr&~ork~~ilding Regional Representing Research Laboratory ( CSlR ), Hyderahad

Research

Institute

( CSIR ),

Sim

Saar R. S. SRIVASTAVA ( Altmatr ) B.~LJITSINQH Bhagsons Paint Industries ( India ), New Delhi SHRI HARDIP SINQE ( AIlcnrort ) SBRIKM. BANERJEE National Test House, Calcutta SERI V. M. BAVUEKAB Asian Pamts ( India ) Ltd, Bombay SHRI J. B. JAIZU( Ahmufe ) Da P. K. BIIANDABI Shalimar Paints Ltd, Calcutta SriRr S. RHATTA~~HABYYA Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, Rirhra SHRI G. N. TEWARI ( Altcmats ) SHRI N. S. BIRDIE Shri Ram Test House, Delhi SHRJ C. P. SHARDA ( Alterate ) Sass S. K. BOSE Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SHBI D. S. CEOWDHUBY ( Alternate ) DR S. CHANDBA Oil Technologists' Association of India, Kanpur S~IRI M. S. SAUNA ( Alternate ) SHBI A. S. DHIN~B_~ All India Small Scale Paint and Allied Industries Association. Bombay DIRECTOR ( EIC ) Exnort Inrpcction Council of India. Ca!tutta SHH~D. KACWCE~P He'avy Machine Building Plant, Heavy Engineering Co Ltd, Ranchi SARI D. P. MUKBERJEE ( Alfemrc ) ~ERI R. D. KAWATBA Directorate General of Technical Develoomrnt. . . New Delhi SHRI T. K. S. MANY Addisons Paints and Chemicals Ltd, Madras

BUREAU OF 1NDIAN STANDARDS %ii publication is protectad under the ladiaa G&m& Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any meaon except with written perminion of the publisher hall be deemed to be an infriugemeut of copyright under the rid Act.

IS : 1393- 1983

Srin~ M. M. GEOSH ( Affemutr ) SHRI V. MULLOTH Goodlasa Nerolac
SHRI S. S. .bKAII`AR (

Members Sam A~or MATRUR

R~$WWthtig
Indian Paint Auociation, Calcutta Paints Ltd, Bombay

SHRI M. PHILIP Indian Aluminium Company Ltd, Calcutta SZIII P. N. PX~DKE ( AJfsr~tr ) SHRI D. RAMAMUHTHY Bharat Heavy Electricala Ltd, Hyderabad SHI~IN. D. GUPTA ( AIfcrnnlc I ) SIIHI S. C. KAUSHIK ( Ahmule II ) Da R. J. RaT,tI Sudarshan Chemical Industries Ltd, Pune S~mr K. L. RATHI ( Alfarnulr ) SHRl P. SATYANARAYANA Development Commissioner ( Small Scale Industries ), New Delhi Da S. K. KAPOOR ( Ahmale ) SCIENTIFICAU~ISER TO THE CHIEF Naval Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ) OF Tltz NAVAL ST.4FF Garware Paints Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. R. SEQUERA Da P. G. CH.~UDHARI ( Akrnalc I ) SICICI C. R. TIUJSE ( Alfrraata II ) SENSORCI~E~~IST AND METALLUR- Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) QIST DEPL'TY DIHECTOR MET-IV ( A&ma11 ) S~IRIJ. P. SHUKLA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SURI S. S. KATIYAR ( Allrraarr ) The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay CAPT V. SUBRA~*NIAN C~PT S. B. KUN~EROI ( Altnnalr ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI V. D. TI~AI~~ Soave~on OF Wozzs ( AlImzat# ) Director General, IS1 ( J&-o&is h4& ) SERI S. K. MATEWR, Director ( Chem ) SHRI P. S. ARORA Senior Deputy Director ( Chem

AhmaL

)

), IS1

2

IS : 1303 - 1983

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO PAINTS (

Second, Revision )
0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 September 1983, after the draft finalized by the Paints and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1958 and subsequently redsed in 1963. In this revision about 160 additional terms have been included. The necessary modifications in the definitions of some terms have been Many terms which are not used frequently made by elaborating them. have been dropped in this revision. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard drawn from BS 2015 : 1965 `Glossary British Standards Institution. substantial assistance has been of paint terms', issued by the

0.4 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical definitions terms, and it may not necessarily include all the legal meanings of the terms.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard defines technical terms widely used in paint industry, and includes terms for paints, varnishes, enamels and allicxl products. . A - Resistance of a coating to frictional rubbing. Abrasion Resistance Abrasion test may be made by means of the finger alone, or with cloth The pressure, or a pad with or without a mildly abrasive powder. speed and time of rubbing as well as the character of the rubbing agent should be controlled when making comparisons of abrasion resistances of different surfaces. 3

IS : 1303 - 1983 Accelerated Weathering ( Artificial Weathering ) - Laboratory tests designed to simulate, intensify and accelerate the destructive action of natural outdoor weathering agents, such as light, heat, cold, water, There is no universally accepted wa %r vapour, rain, etc, on paint films. test and different procedures may have to be used to suit different conditions. - Any substance which increases the speed of a chemical Accelerator reaction and thus hastens the curing or cross linking of a system. - Resistance of paint, enamel Acid Resistance The term is of little value, unless it is referred mance under, specified conditions. or varnish film to acids. to a standard of perfor-

-- A soft or aerated material lightly bound or Acoustic Material bonrled to form a soft, absorbent coating or fabricated slab for the Special care should be taken while purpose of eliminating echoes. decorating to avoid modification of acoustic properties. Adhesion - The degree of attachment between a paint or varnish film and the underlying material which may be another film of paint or any other material, such as wood, metal, plaster, etc. After Tack - A film defect, in which the painted surface having reached a tack-free stage, subsequently develops a sticky condition. After Thickening See `Thickening'. on standing under once

in a coating Ageing 7 Change, if any, occurring defined conditions at or near ambient temperature. Air Drying &e `Drying'.

Airless Spraying - The it through an orifice at high vaporization of the solvents, heated. The term is not ing processes, which do not

process of atomization of a paint by forcing This effect is often aided by the pressure. especially if the paint has been previously generally applied to those electrostatic sprayuse air for atomization.

- Resistance of paint, enamel or varnish film to Alkali Resistance alkalis. The term is of little value unless it is referred to some standard of performance under specified conditions. Alkyd Resin See `Resin, Synthetic'. ) -. See `Cracking'. Synthetic*. 4

Alligatoring Amino Resin

( Crocodiling See `Resin,

IS t 1393 - 1983

to minimize the effects Paint - A paint designed of condensation of moisture under intermittently dry and humid conditions. Such a material normally has a matt textured finish and fiequently contains cork or some other heat insulating materials as a filler.
Anti-Condensation Anti-Corrosive -

A general

term
-

used to describe

material

used for

preventrng growth

corrosion.
Compositions

Anti-Fouling

of marine

fouling
Agent

organism

Paints formulated on bottoms of ships.
Agent ) -

for

preventing

Anti-Settling

( Suspending

porated in paint to keep pigment tion during storage.
Anti-Skinning

in suspension,

thus

A substance incordelaying sedimenta-

added to a paint with a view to Agent - Any material of oxidation or polymerization, preventing or retarding the process which results in the formation of an insoluble skin on the surface of the paint, in a container.
B

Baking Baking

-

See `Stoving'. -

Finish -

temperature
Barrelling Barrier

above

A paint or varnish 80�C for the development

that requires stoving of desired properties.

at

See `Rumbling'.

Coat, - A coating used to isolate a paint system from the surface to which it is applied in order to prevent chemical or physical interaction between them, to prevent the paint solvent attacking the underlying paint or to prevent bleeding from unc'erlying paint or material. Binder - The non-volatile portion of the `Vehicle' of a paint. It bincls or cements the pigment particles together and the paint film as a whole to the material to which it is applied.

- The description applied to a paint or varnish containing bits of skin, gel, flocculated material or foreign particles, which project above the surface when the paint or varnish is applied in a manner appropriate to its type and purpose. The term `Peppery' is sometimes used when the bits are small and uniformly distributed. The term `Seedy' spec ifically denotes bits which have developed in a paint or varnish during storage. Bituminous Paints -

Bitty

Paints

based

essentially

on

bituminous

ingredients. 5

IS : 1303- 1983 Bituminous Solution Varnish -

Bitumen Varnish

or

asphalt

dissolved based on

in organic bituminous/

solvent.
Bituminous

essentially

asphalt
Black

ingredients.

oil varnish, material, similar to a normal Japan - A black containing a drying oil and gilsonite or other asphaltic material. It dries, by oxidation, to a hard glossy film in which the gilsonite may be A good regarded as replacing the copal resin in a normal varnish. black japan can be varnished over without bleeding of the gilsonite.
Blast Cleaning - The cleaning and roughening of a surface by the use of natural or artificial grit or fine metal shot ( usually steel ), which is projected on to a surface by compressed air or mechanical means. Bleeding - The process of diffusion from a substratum, into and through beneath, thus producing and undesirable

of a soluble coloured substance a paint or varnish coating from staining or discolouration.

Blistering - The formation of dome-shaped projections or blisters in paint or varnish films by local loss of adhesion and lifting of the film Such blisters may contain liquid, vapour, from the underlying surface. gas, or crystals. Bloom -

varnish colour.
Blown

A thin whitish film which sometimes fbrms on glossy paint or films, thereby diminishing their lustre or veiling their depth of

has been partially oxidized by Oil - Vegetable oil which The blowing with current of air, whilst at an elevated temperature. characteristics of oil, such as its increased viscosity and degree of oxidation can be controlled by the time, temperature and the amount of air.
Blueing

paint

- Neutralizing the yellow cast of certain white by adding a trace of blue, thereby increasing apparent

pigment of whiteness.

Blushing - A milky opalescence which sometimes develops as a film of lacquer dries and if due to the deposition of moisture from the air or precipitation of one or more of the solid constituents of the lacquer or due to both of these conditions. Bodied Oils -

An oil of increased

viscosity

produced

by any means.

Bodying - An increase in the apparent viqrosity of a paint, varnish, resin or lacquer, which occurs either deliberately during manufacture or inadverten.tly during storage.

IS: Bodying

1303-1983

mainly used in wood polishing processes. In Up - A term up a transparent film of shellac of French polishing, it refers to building substantial thickness, essentially by pad application prior to the final spiriting off.
Boiled Linseed Oil

presence

of metallic

oil that has - Raw linseed compounds known as `driers'.

been

heated

in the

Boot-Topping

Composition

fouling compositions, applied of ships hulls and are usually
Break ( of Oils

- These are anti-corrosive on a load-line area ( air-water black in colour.

and antiinterface )

certain raw vegetable oils are heated, a muci) -When laginous product separates then it is said to `break'. This appears as a hazy suspension which may coagulate into a spawn-like mass. The insoluble matter is also referred to as the `Break' or `Mucilage'.
Bridging - The covering over of an unfilled gap, such as a crack or corner, with a film of paint. This introduces a weakness in the coating which may lead to an eventual cracking of the dried paint.

Bring Forward - A term used in repainting, to repair local defective areas with the appropriate paints so as to bring them in conformity with the surrounding areas before applying the finishing coat. Brittleness

the initial
Bronzing

- Change characterised by an appreciable flexibility, cohesion and adhesion of the film.

reduction

in

- A characteristic metallic lustre shown by certain highly for example, certain prussian and coloured pigments in full strength, phthalocyanine blues. Lacquer

Bronzing

metals

in order

- Transparent lacquer to preserve lustre and enrich

for application colour.

to bright or a with

Bronzing

lacquer, aluminium
Brush

Medium or Liquid - A vehicle, which is specially formulated for or gold bronze powder. A

either a varnish use as a binder and varnish,

Mark -

Ridge

in

a

dried

paint

film

left by the

brush.
Bubbling Build Bulking

of air or solvent

film defect, temporary or permanent, in which bubbles vapour, or both, are present in the applied film. of a paint or varnish of unit film. weight of material, usually

The solidity

expressed
Burning

Value - Solid value as litres per kilogram. Off -

is softened still soft.

The removal of paint by a process in which the paint by heat, for example, on a flame, and then scraped off while

7

IS I 1393- 1983

C
Caking

pact

- The settling of pigment particles of paint mass, which is ;lot easily redispersed by stirring. Paint -

into a hard

com-

Cement

powder,
Chalking

for mixing

A paint based on portland cement, supplied with water immediately before use.

as a dry

- A phenomenon manifested in paint film by the presence removable powder, evolved from the film itself at or just beneath the surface. Chalking may be detected by rubbing the film with the finger tip or other means.

of loose

- The phenomenon manifested breaks in the film that do not penetrate Different types of checking are given below.

Checking

in paint film by slight to the underlined surface. develop in

a) Irregular pattern type - Checking in which the breaks the surface of the film in no definite pattern.

b) Line type - Checking in which the breaks in the surface film are generally arranged in parallel lines, usually horizontally or vertically over the surface of the film. breaks often follow the line of the brush marks. c)

of the either These

Crow-foot type-

Checking in which the breaks in the surface of the film form in definite three prong pattern with the breaks running from a centre and forming an angle of 120" between the prongs. film which although dry

Cheesy

- The character of a paint or varnish is mechanically weak and rather soft. -

Chilling

ture which
CLip

The subjection of paint may result in a deterioration

and varnish film to low temperaof its normal characteristics. of a paint film to localized damage to the resistance of a finished car

Resistance - The resistance caused by impact, applied particularly body to stones or grit.
Chipping -

It is either

of the following: or rust scale by mechanical of a dried paint has been Normally film means. in* flakes by removal

a) The removal

of paint,

b) The total or partial accidental damage.
Chlorinated Rubber

increase its solubility inated rubber paints.

which - Rubber in organic solvents.

chlorinated to used in chlor-

8

IS : 1303 - 1983 Chroma See `Colour'.

Chromating

-Treatment of light alloys by chemical normally containing chromic acid or chromates or both in This treatment modifies the surface to give medium. protection against corrosion and to serve as a good base quent paint coats.

solutions a suitable improved for subsefrom

Ciasing - A defect in which a wet paint or varnish film recedes small areas of the surface leaving them apparently uncoated.
Clouding

in the clear varnish or lacquer film or - The development, liquid, of an opalescence or clouding caused by the nrecipitation of insoluble matter.
Coat - The paint, varnish or lacquer applied to a surface in a single apDlicatian to form a properly distributed film when dry. A paint system usually consists of a number of coats separately applied in a predetermined order at suitable intervals to allow for drying. It is possible with certain types of material, to build-up paint systems of adequate thickness and opacity by a more or less continuous process of application, namely wet on wet spraying. In this case no part of the system can be defined as a separate coat in the above sense. Following types are recognized.

4 Fullco@-

As thick a coat of paint, varnish or lacquer as can be applied in one operation (brush or spray) consistent with the production of a film of uniform appearance, satisfactory hardness, etc, when dry. coating, someGlaze coal - A translucent or semi-transparent times coloured. It may be either an intermediate or the final coat ofa paint system. It is frequently applied thinly with the object to modify but not obscure the ground colour.
Ground

b)

4

good opacity which coat - A coat of paint having is applied before a glaze coat or stumble. The final colour effect when glazed is dependent on the mutua! influence of the ground coat and the glaze coat.
Guide coat - A very thin coat of loosely bound paint applied over a continuous coating of surfacer or filler, prior to rubbing down. It is completely removed during the rubbing operations but, as it first disappears from the higher spots and ridges, it serves as a guide to the -operator in producing a smooth surface.

4

9

IS : 1303 - 1983

e) Mist

coat -

It can be of two types:

i) A very thin coat applied by spraying, more particularly in connection with cellulose lacquers. In some cases it may fdrrn a `fogged' coat or non-continuous film. ii) A thin coat of volatile thinners, with or without a small amount of lacquer, which is sometimes sprayed over a dry lacquer film to improve the smoothness and lustre.

f> Round coat d Sealing coat h) Sharp coat --

A full coat of a heavy bodied paint or varnish.
See `Sealer'.

A coat of white lead in oil thinned liberally with turpentine or white spirit. A sharp coat used for treating new plaster following the trowel is frequently referred to as `sharp colour'.

Coating

- A liquid, liquifiable for mastic composition, that is converted to a solid protective, decorative or functional adherent film after application as a thin layer. - The production of fine filaments instead of normal `atomized' particles when some solutions of certain classes of high polymers are sprayed. - The forces which bind the particles film together into a coherent whole.

Cobwebbing

Cohesion Cold

of paint or varnish

Checking - The development of hair cracks in a lacquer film when it is `subjected to a `cold check' test, for instance, when a furniture lacquer is subjected to defined cycles of alternating csld and normal temperatures. Cold Caring -

temperature.
Colophony

-

The

process

of

curing

at

normal

atmospheric

See `Rosin'.

Colour - The aspect of the appearance df objects which depends up-on the spectral composition of light reaching the retina of the eye and upon its temporal and spatial distribution. Mixtures of blends of these are also colours. The colours of objects have three attributes, hue, lightness and saturation. a) Hue - Colours are first divided into groups having the same hue that is, into reds, yellows, greens, blues, purples, etc. Almost all systems of colour terminology use the term hue in this sense, but in ordinary speech this quality is often called colour. 10

IS: 1303- 1983

/

b) Li&?USS-

The lightness of a colour is determined by the proportion of light which it ,reflects, irrespective of hue and Corresponding terms used are `Vahie' and LReflecsaturation. tance Value'. Su~Ururion - Colours of similar hue and lightness may differ in colourfulness or intensity of colour. This quality is termed saturation and may be defined as the intensity of any-particular hue when compared with a neutral grey of similar lightness, the spectrum colours being the most intense or of highest saturation. The terms `chroma' and `intensity' tire also used in similar sense.

4

Colour Floating - See`Floating'. colour Maich - Paints are said to match in colour if under specified conditions of illumination and viewing, no significant difference in their hue, saturation and lightness can be detected. a) Spectral match - Paints are spectral matches if at each wavelength of visible spectrum their .reflectances are thk same; a spectral match holds good for their illuminants and observers.

b) M&me&

match - Colour which match under one but have different spectral reflectance curves, are matches only; the phenomenon being known meiism'. Metameric matches, in general, no longer if there is a change in the illuminant, for example, light to tungsten lamp light.

iliuminant metameric as `metahold good from day-

with or without whiting, lightly Colour Wamh - Earth pigments, bond in glue size so as r~ facilitate ready removal, since frequent removal is necessary, for example, tinted lime wash or white wash.

Coinbing-

The act of partially removing a coat ofwet combs to imitate the grain of wood or other pattern.

paint with

Compatible

4

Two or more paints or varnishes which can be mixed without producing any undesirable effects, such as precipitation, coagulation, gelling, etc, in liquid state or during drying of film of the mixture, are said to be compatible. Different coats of paints which can be associated in painting system without producing.undesirable effects are said to be compatible.

b)

Consistency - It is the apparent viscosity of a paint or varnish when &earing forces of varying degrees are applied to it in various ways, for instance, when it is stirred in the can or poured from one vessel to another or Brushed ( or otherwise-spread out ) over a surface. 11

IS:1303Convection

1983 Oven Staving See `Stoving'.

Copal - Natural resin formed from the exudation of various tropical trees. The hard fossil types are the basis of copal varnishes, the softer types frequently obtained by the tapping of live trees being mostly used for spirit varnishes. Congo copal is the main surviving member of the fossil class and manila copal that of the spirit soluble class. Copolymer Covering See `Polymer'. See `Hiding power' and `opacity'.

Power

Cracking - It is generally the splitting of a dry paint or varnish film usually as a result of ageing. The following terms are used to denote the nature and extent of this defect:

4

HG cracking - Fine cracks which do not coat; they occur erratically and at random. - Fine are distributed pattern.

penetrate

the

top

b) Checking

cracks which do not penetrate the top coat and over the surface, giving semblance of a small

Cracking - Specifically, a breakdown in which the cracks penetrate at least one coat and which may be expected to result ultimately in complete failure.

4

Crazing broader. pattern

Resembles

checking

but

the

cracks

are

deeper

and

e) Crocodiling

or alligatoring - A drastic type resembling the hide of a crocodile. of small bowl-shaped

of crack

producing in a

Cratering - The formation paint or varnish film. Crawling Crazing Crinkling Crocodiling A pronounced See `Cracking. See `Wrinkling'. See `Cracking'.

depressions

form of `Cissing'.

Cross Brushing - A method of obtaining even distribution of paint by means of a brush whereby the direction of brushing each series of strokes lies at right angles to that of the previous series. Cross-Linking Agent - A substance which with the molecular chains of a thermoplastic them together will create a more rigid structure less infusible product. 12 will react chemically material and by linking resulting in a more or

IS : 1303 - 1983 CrowrfootiPg - A type of film defect where pattern resembling that of a crow's foot. Crystallizing Finish See`Finish'. or polymerization of a material in full development of desirable the curing of film ( see also object by small wrinkles occur in a

curing - The process of condensation by heat or chemical means, resulting properties. curing Agent - An additive `Cross Linking Agent' ). which

promotes

Curtain Coating - A metho'd of applying moving through a falling curtain of pamt. Curtaining See `Sagging'. D &leafing to reduced - Loss of leafing metallic lustre. of metallic

paint to an

pigments

in paints,

giving

rise

Dcscaling ( Scaling ) - The removal of mill scale or caked rust from steel by mechanical means, sometimes assisted by flame cleaning. Dilueat - A volatile liquid, which 4s not a solvent for the non-volatile consituents of a varnish or lacquer, Out may yet be used in conjunction with the true solvent, without causinig precipitation. Dipping It is:

a) the process of applymg paints, etc, my immersing therein an object to be cdated and allowing it to drain during and after removal; or b) the description of a preparation sultable application, namely a dipping paint. Dispersion - A two phase system in disperse phase, is permanently distributed second phase, called the continuous phase. for this method of the the

which one phase called as small particles through

Distemper - Although there is a tendency to apply this term to al1 water paints used for house .decoration, it should preferably be used solely to describe the earlier types of such products, namely, those in which the bindihg medium consists essentially of either glue or casein, or Similar sizing material. 13

IS : 1303 - 1983 Distensibility - Assessment of the adhesion whilst the film is still under stress. of a stretched paint film,

Dope - A class of lacquer-like materials used in the coating of textiles and leathers. In particular, aeroplane dope is used in the aircraft industry for tautering and protecting stretched linen fabric. to the Drag ( Brush Drag ) - Resistance Excessive drag applying paint by brush. paint or varnish ( see also `pulling' ). bristles, encountered when may be a serious fault in a

Driers - Substances which, when incorporated in relatively small proportions in drying oils, or in paints and varnishes based on drying oils, bring about an appreciable reduction in their drying time at ordinary temperature. These substances are usually compounds of lead, manganese, cobalt, etc. They are of the following types: a) Soluble driers - Driers which are more or less readily soluble at ordinary temperature in drying oils, hydrocarbon solvents and the like. Usually they, consist essentially of metallic salts of the organic acids, such as the resinates, iinoleates or naphthenates or octoates of lead, manganese or cobalt. b) Liquid driers - Solutions of `Soluble solvents, usually hydrocarbons. driers' in volatile organic

c) Paste driers - Driers made by grinding suitable compounds of lead or manganese with a small amount of water, linseed oil and Paris white, with or without other mineral extenders, to form a stiff paste. They are still some times used by painters when mixing their own linseed oil paints, but are now largely superseded by soluble and liquid driers. They are also known as patent driers. Dry Spray - The production of a rough or slightly bitty film caused by an atomized paint, the particles being insufficiently fluid to flow together to form a uniform coating. Drying - The process oT change of a coat of paint or varnish from the liquid to the solid state, due to the evaporation of solvent, physicochemical reactions of the binding medium, or a combination of these causes. When the drying process takes place during exposure to air at normal temperature it is called `air drying'; if it is accelerated by the applicaaion of a moderate degree of heat ( normally not exceeding 80�C ) it ir termed `forced drying'; as distinct from `staving'. Various successive stages in the drying of a paint or a varnish film are distinguished by qualifying terms ( with corresponding drying time ) as foIlows: 14

IS :1303
a) Dust dry When dust no longer adheres to the paint

- 1983

surface.

the paint is dry on the surface but is b) Surface dry - When soft and is tacky underneath. This condition is also commonly described as `sand dry'. from c) Tack free - Free known as touch dry. stickiness even under pressure; also

d) Hard dry - When the drying has reached such a stage that if desired, a further coat can be satisfactorily applied by brushing, if necessary, after flatting. The term is also used to describe certain degree of film hardness when tested by specified methods. e) Dry to handle - When the paint ened to be freely handled without surface damage. is sufficiently hard-

Drying oil - An oil, usually of vegetable origin, having the property of hardening by oxidation to a tough film when exposed in the form of a @in layer to air, for example, linseed and tung oil. Drying a coat Drying' Time of paint ). The and time which elapses between the attainment of a specified the application of dry state ( see also

Dmal-Pack

See `Two-Pack'. degree to which paints and paint materials witheffect of the conditions to which they are subjected.

Durability - The stand the destructive Dast Dry -

See `Drying.'

E
Earth Colours - A class of pigments which are usually mined directly from the earth, dried and ground. They are frequently also termed `Natural Pigments' or `Mineral Pigments'. Most earth pigments consist of complex mixtures of iron or manganese oxides with aluminium silicates. Typical example are red and yellow oxides of iron, yellow ochre, raw sienna, raw umber, etc. Efflorescence - The development of a crystalline deposit on the surface of brick, cement, etc, due to water, containing soluble salts coming to surface and evaporating, so that the salts are deposited. In some cases, the deposit may be formed on the top of any paint film present, but usually the paint film is pushed up and broken by the efflorescence under the coat. 15

IS : 1303 - 1983
Egg Shell See `Gloss'.

Electrodeposition - A method of paint application in which an article to be coated, which is an electrical conductor, is made one of the electrodes in a tank of water thinned paint. The other electrode is generally a metal: such as copper. The two electrodes are connected to a source of electric current, the polarity of the article to be coated being of the opposite sign to that on the particles in the liquid paint in the tank. The charged particles move towards the articles under the influence of the electric field, and when they give up their charge at the electrode ( article ) they are deposited and ultimately form a continuous film of paint. Electrostatic Detearing -- A process of removing blobs and the thick edges of paint from an article which has been coated by dipping. The pr@ess consists of passing the dipped article, after a limited period of haining over a grid at a high electrical potential. The blobs and. thick edges of paint are removed from the article by attraction to the grid. in which an eIectro_ Electrostatic Spraying - Methods of spraying static potential is created between the work to be coated and the atomized paint particles. The charged particles of paint are attracted to the articles being painted and are then deposited and discharged. The electrostatic potential is usdd in some processes to aid the atomization of the paint. terminology this is an apparently homoEmulsion - In scientific geneous material formed by the incorporation of two liquids, which are normally immiscible. One liquid is dispersed in the other in the form If the droplets remain permanently dispersed, the Qf minute drops. emulsion is said to be stable and certain compounds are added as stabilizers because of their power to keep the droplets dispersed. In paint industry, the term is frequently, if erroneously, applied to stable emulsion like dispersions of an organic binder in water, for example, po?yvinyl acetate emulsions, used for making emulsion paint. IEmulsion Paint - Generally, a paint in which the medium is an `emulsion' or an emulsion-like dispersion of an organic binder in water. Industrially, the name is mainly restricted to those paints in which the The medium may also be medium is an `emulsion' of a synthetic resin. tailed a latex by analogy with a natural rubber latex; polyvinyl acetate emulsion paint iS a typical example. by melting siliceous Enamel - One of the class of finishes obtained The term is al50 used in the paint industry to describe pigmaterials. mented varnishes which simulate in appearance, the flow, smoothness 16

IS : 1303 - 1983

The same broad definition applies to and gloss of `Vitreous Enamels'. `Enamel Paint' and `Hard Gloss Paint', although all these three may differ in degree in respect of one or more properties, such as flow, and in the retention of these propeltieson smoothness, gloss, opacity ageing.
Enamel

Paint Paint Resin -

-

See `Enamel'.

Epoxy

A paint

based on epoxy resin ( see also

`Resin' ).

Epoxy

Ssa `Resin'.

- The wearing away of the top coat of a painted surface, for Erosion example, by chalking, or by abrasive action of wind borne particles of grit, which may result in exposure of the underlying surface.
Etch -

in order
Etching

Roughening of a surfacz to increase adhesion.

by a chemical

agent prior to painting

paint is usually supplied as two separate Primer - A priming components which require to be mixed immediately prior to use, and therefore is usable for a limited period only. The mixed paint contains carefully balanced proportions of an inhibiting chromate pigment, phosphoric acid, and a synthetic resin binder in a mixed alcohol solvent On clean light alloy or ferrous or non-ferrous surfaces such solution. paint gives excellent adhesion, partly due to chemical reaction with the primer' ), and gives a corrosion substrate ( hence the term `etching inhibiting film, which is a very good base for the application of subAlthough these materials are referred to as sequent coats of paint. primers, the film which they give are so thin that it is better to consider them as etching solutions and to allow them with an ordinary primer if maximum protection is required. These materials are also known Printers', and `Self-Etch Primers'.
Extender

as `Pre-treatment

Primers',

`Wash

- An inorganic material in powder form, which has a low refractive index and consequently little obliterating power; but is used as a constitutent of paints to adjust the properties of the paint, notably its working and film forming properties and to avoid settlement on storage.

F
- The destruction of colouring matter in a paint surface ac a result of ageing, weathering or exposure to sunlight. The development of chalking Rives an appearance of fading, but in this case the original colour may be substantially restored by the application of a coat of varnish. Fading

17

IS:

1303 - 1983

False Body -

undergoes its former to remain

The apparently full bodied condition a marked reduction of viscosity when agitated con lition either immediately or subsequently, at rest ( see also `Thixotropy' ).

of paint which and returns to when allowed

Fast to Light

which retains conditions.'

- The description of a paint film, pigment or its origin4 colour on exposure to light under

dyestuff defined

Fat Edge - An accumulation of paint in the form of a ridge at the erlge of painted surface; this may arise either from faulty application by brushing or from drainage during, dlpping. Fattening - An increase to such an extent

necessarily
Feather

of paint in consistency as to make it unusable.

on

storage,

not

the thickness Edging - Reducing, film such as in the case of edge of a damaged
Feathering

of the edge of a dry paint area, prior to repainting.

by laying

- The operation of tapering off the edges o! a coat oi paint off with a comparatively dry brush.

FLeeding - An increase in consistency of paint to such an extent as to This is generally due to make it unusable except by undue thinning. chemical reaction between its constituents. Felting

operation of flatting a dry film of varnish or Down - The paint by means of a pad made of felt, or similar material, charged with very fine abrasive powder and lubricated with water or other suitable liquid.
Corrosion - A form of corrosion under paint coatings on metals characterized by a thread like form advancing by means of a growing head or paint. Filler -

Filiform

obtain
Finish

A composition used for filling fine cracks or indentations a smooth, even surface preparatory to painting.
-

to

The various

The general appearance of a painted surface types of finishes are distinguished as follows:

after drying.

of a paint system obtained by a) Crackle jinish - The appearance using materials so formulated that cracks develop in the last coat during drying, exposing the underroat in a more or less lacquer being subsequently regular pal tern, a coat of clear applier1 ov-r the whole surface.
18

IS :1303

- 1983 by

b) Crysta1fi~ingfini.h - The crystalline appearance developed certain types of paint on drying. Two main typesexiht: i) Lacquers, crystallize

which include in their composition materials which out from the medium as the solvent evaporates.

ii) Materials in which advantage is taken of the tendency of certain drying oils, notably tung oil to `frost' or `crybtailize' when dried under certain conditions.

Fiamboyant jnish

- The finish produced by application of a glossy, transparent, coloured finishing coat over a bright metallic surface. The latter may some times be producted by prior application of a coat of metallic paint.
produced by certain coloured paints containing metal powder which on controlled spray application, dry with an appearance similar to hammered metal.

4 4

Hammer jinish - A finish

Poiychtomatic Jinish - Apart from its literal meaning, this term is specially applied to a finish which has a metallic lusture and gives an iridiscent scintillating effect when viewed flom different angles. The effect is produced by application of special lacquers or paints which contain metallic powders in flake form, in addition to transparent colouring matter.
produced, which Textured jinish - A rough finish, deliberately may be achieved, for example, by the use of paints, the film of which remains in the plastic state sufficiently long to permit their being worked out into pattern of low relief, or by the itIcorporation in the paint of some coarse materials, such as sand or stone chippings, which automatically produce a rough surface. made

f)

- A finish in which a paint is intentionally g) Wrinklejnish to develop ridges or wrinkles on drying.
Flaking - Lifting of flakes or scales. of the paint from the underlying surface in the

form

Flame Cleaning - The structural steel resulting tion of any remaining rust, for wire brushing followed

application of an intensely hot flame to in the removal of mill scale and the dehydraleaving the surface in a condition suitable by an <mmediate application of pamt.

Flash Dry ( verb ) - To allow the greater part of the more volatile solvents in a sprayed coat of lacquer or enamel to evaporate before proceeding either with application of another coat or with stoving. 19

IS:1303-1983 Flash Off Time - The time allowed to elapse between the spray application of successive wet on wet coats or the time allowed for the evaporation of the bulk of the solvent before entering into a stoving oven. Flash Point - Maximum temperature of a liquid at which the vapours given off are sufficient to form a flammable mixture with -air, under specified conditions of the test. The Sash point is an arbitrary figure and depends on the method of test. Methods commonly employed are Pensky-Martens ( open and closed ), Cleveland, and Abel. Flashing - A fault in the paint film in which patches glossier general finish develop especially at joints or laps in the coating. Flat See `Gloss'. than the

Flat Oil Paint - An oil paint which possesses a high pigment binder Such paints may ratio such that the film dries with little or no gloss. have relatively poor flow, in which case the production of a smooth surface depends largely on the skill of application. Flat Varnish - Varnish ting suitable ingredients. made to dry with a dull surface by incorporavarnish a paint

Flatting Agent A material other coating materials to reduce

incorporated in a paint, the gloss of dried film.

or

Flatting Dqwn - Cutting or rubbing down the surface of varnish with fine abrasives to produce a smooth dull surface. degree to which Flexibility - The to conform to movement or deformation out cracking or flaking. Floating
taining

or

a paint film, after drying, of its supporting surface,

is able with-

- A defect which is sometimes apparent in coloured paints condrying OI storage, one or mixtures of different pigments. During more of he pigments separates or floats apart from the others and concentrr tes in streaks or patches on the surface of the paint, producing a variegated effect. of loosely coherent solid aggregates

Flocculation - The development in a pigment-vehicle dispersion.

Flooding - An extreme case' of floating in which pigment particles float in such a manner as to produce a colour, which though uniform over the whole surface, is markedly different from that of the new]) applied wet film. 20

IS : 1303 - 1983 degree to which a wet paint film can flow out Flow - The mottles application so as to eliminate brush marks or spray produce uniform smooth surface on drying ( see alga `Levelling' ). paint in which Flow Coating - The process of applying is poured or is allowed to flow over the object to be painted, if any, being allowed to drain off. Fluorescent Flushing Paint see`Luminous Paint'. after and

the paint the excess,

It is:

a) a process of agitating with oil, a paste consisting of pigment dispersed in water, in order to displace the water and form a paste of pigment dispered in oil; or b) a process of applying a coating material, -in excess, to the inside of hollow articles by pouring or squirting, and subsequently allowing the excess to drain out. Footing Forced The gradual deposition of `foots' from an oil or varnish.

Drying

See `Drying'. the viscosity of paints.

Ford Cup -

A flow cup used for measuring

French Polish - A lacquer made essentially from shellac and methyand benzoin !ated spirit. Other spirit-solube gums; such as sandarch some special property, It is added to impart are sometimes applied with cambric covered rubber of cotton or wool, lubricated with oil. The oil is afterwards removed by `Spiriting Off'. - The formation of translucent finely wrinkled surface on a Frosting film of oil or paint during drying, particularly when exposed to gas, fumes, etc. This defect is especially characteristic of paints and varnishes containing certain oils which have not received adequate heat treatment. Full Coat Full Gloss See `Coat'. See `Gloss'.

Fungicidal Paint - A paint which discourages growth of fungi on its The fungicidal properties are normally conferred by dry applied film. the addition of special additives; although certain pigments, such as, z'nc oxide, commonly used in paints may themselves contribute the fungicidal properties of the paint. Fnngicidal Wash - A wash containing fungicides, used before painting and designed to kill existing spores or germinations or to prevent their inception. Many of these substances are toxic ( to human beings ) when used in concentrated form and therefore, need careful handling. 21

Is t 1303 - 1983

G
Gas Checking See `Webbing'. its general meaning ( conversion of a liquid to a specifically to denote the deterioration of a paint partial or complete changing of the medium into condition which is unworkable even with the also `Livering' ).

Gelling - Apart from jelly ), this term is used or varnish owing to the an insoluble jelly-like addition of solvent ( see
Glaze Coat -

See `Coat'. of a surface by the application

Glazing - The enrichment or modification of a thin, translucent, coloured coating.

Gloss - The degree to which a painted surface possesses the property of reflecting light in a mirror like manner ( specular reflection ). The extent to which this property is developed depends mainly on the composition of the paint, surfaces ranging from dead flat to full gloss being order of gloss are The following stages in increasing obtainable. normally recognized: free from sheen even when viewed a) Rat ( mutt ) - Practically from oblique angles; gloss value varying from 0 to 5; b) Eggshell jut c) Eggshdl gloss d) Semi-gloss Gloss value Gloss value from 6 to 15; from 16 to 30;

GIoss value from 31 to 50; and when viewed

e) Full gloss - Smooth and almost mirror like surface from all angles, gloss values 51 and above. Glossing up is the undersirable due to handling or polishing. Gold Size - This types of materials. term is used development

of gloss on a tlat paint

to describe

the following

two different

a) An oleo-resinous varnish which dries rapidly to a tacky condition, but which hardens slowly. It is used chiefly as an adhesive for fixing gold leaf to a surface. b) An oleo-resinous varnish, containing high proportion of driers, It is frequently used which rapidly dries hard after application. for the preparation of stopping and filling compositions. 22

IS t 1303 - 1983 Graining - A method of imitating the grains of various kinds of wood by using a semi-transparent `graining colour' over a dq ground colour and manipulating it, while wet, with various appliances to produce the desired effect. Blasting See `Blast Cleaning'.

Grid

Through - The showing through of the underlying surface due to the inadequate opacity of a paint film which has been applied to it. Grinning Ground -

A general term for any surface suitable for the reception of
See `Coat'. See `Coat'. -

paint.
Ground Guide Coat Coat -

Guns Mastic `Mastic' ). h

A natural resin used

for

picture

varnish

( see also

Rosin - See `Rosin'.

H Hair
Cracking See `Cracking'. See `Finish'.

kIusssasser Finish #%ard Dry Hard Gloss

See `Drying.' Paint See`Enamel'.

Hard stopping - A material in a stiff paste form, which is usually applied by means of knife, to fill deep inc entatlons in a surface and which dries hard thronghout. It should not be confused with glazing putty which is of a different consistency and which hardens n,ore slowly.
Hardener -

It is:

a) a crosslinlcing agent used to effect the hardening of resin system, or b) a resin ad@?
Eardne$s

to harden a paint film.

- The ability `of a paint film, as distinct from its substrate, to resist indentation or penetration by a hard object.

23

IS : 1383 - 1983 Heat Resistance -

paints are concerned, standard of performance
Heat Resisting Heavy Paint

A term used in comparative sense, as far as but is of little value unless it is referred to some under specified conditions.
-

A paint

with improved

resistance

to heat.

Bodied - Having a thick of paints, it is also associated a substantial coating. The term `Obliterating Power', but this use Hiding Power see `Opacity'.

consistency of high viscosity. In case with the ability to leave, after drying, is also, sometimes, used to denote high is deprecated.

Highlighting

certain surface.
Hold

parts
Out -

- Emphasizing the impression of a relief by making of finished surface lighter than the genera1 colour of that

a somewhat
Holidays

The ability of a paint absorptive surface. Skipped
-

film to dry to its normal left uncoated with paint.

finish on

or missed
see `Polymer'.

areas,

Homopolymer Hot

of hot lacquers or paints, the viscosities Spraying - The spraying of which have been reduced to spraying consistency by means of heat instead of by addition of volatile solvents. By such a process, it is with higher solid contents and therefore possible to apply materials better builds. Hot Hue
Surface -

An abnormally

absorbent

surface.

-. See `Colour'.
Surface -

Hungry

been fully in a patchy

satisfied film.

A surface, the absorptive power of which by the coats of paint applied to it, usually

has not resulting

I Impact Resistance -

The

ability

of a paint

film to resist a sudden or has

blow.
Inert Pigment - A pigment which remains relatively inactive chemically unchanged in paints under stated conditions. The term little significance unless the conditions are stated.

Infra-Red Drying - A method of stoving paint or varnish films employing radiant energy from the sources, such as gas heated panels, filament lamps or low temperature electrical radiants. 24

Is : 1303 - 1983 Inhibitive Pigments - A pigment which retards or prevents the corrosion of metals by chemical and/or electrochemical means, as opposed to a# purely barrier action. Red lead and zinc chromate are examples of inhibitive pigments as opposed to red iron oxide which has little or no inhibitive action. Inhibitor - A material used normally in small proportions to arrest or retard a chemical reaction, for example, use of arsenic or antimony compounds as inhibitors in acid pickling solutron and the use of small proportions of antioxidants to reduce the skinning of paints or varnishes in partially filled containers or to stabilixe paint in dipping tanks. Insulating Varnish - A varnish insulation for electrical equipment. Intensity See `COlOUr'.

often

used

to provide

electrical

K Keeping Property - The ability of paint to retain its original teristicsin general when stored under prescribed conditions. charac-

Key - Any special quality of the surface or of a previous coat of paint, which assists adhesion of subsequent coat. One example is that of rough or abraded surface which provides a mechanical key for the applied film. Knifing Filler - A filling composition suitable for application filling knife as distinct from one made for brush application.
joinery

with a

Knotting - A quick drying composition used in the prevention of for painting, to form a local impervious covering for knots and other resinous areas liable to stain or soften a superimposed coat of paint. L

Lacquer - A term usually applied to coating compositions which dry solely by evaporation of the solvent for example, cellulose lacquers and The term is also used with reference to gold stoving spirit lacquers. finishes for tin plate which are not formulated on spirit or cellulose basis and do not dry solely by solvent evaporation. Lake - A special type of pigment consisting essentially of an organic soluble coiouring matter combined more or less definitely with an inIt is characterLed generally by a bright colour organic base or carrier. and a more or less pronounced translucency. 25

I8 t 1303 - 1983 Lap ( noun ) - The region where a coat extends over an adjacent fresh Feat ( The object of the painter is usually to effect a joint between the two coats without showing the lap ). place one coat of finishing material alongside Lab ( verb ) -To another partly extending over it, causing increased thickness where the two coats are present. Lapping Time See`Wet Edge Time'. emulsion. Now also applied to

Latex - Originally a natural rubber emulsions of various synthetic resins. Latex Paint -

A paint based on pigment emulsion of synthetic resin. final light strokes of the brush during a painting

Laying Off 7 The operation.

Lead Free - Paints or varnishes for special purposes where the presence of lead constitutes a danger, for example, in certain explosives In these cases, the quantities of lead factories and in food packing. permitted are very low, much lower than the limits permitted for lead restricted paints, and are normally specified for particular purpose bv the users'. Lead Paint - The term applie's to any paint, paste, stopping, filling or other material used in painting, which contains more than 5 percent lead as lead oxide ( PbO ), in its pigment when determined by a certain defined method ( see aho `Lead Restriction' ). Lead Restriction a given limit. Normally a paint having a lead content below

Leafing - *The action involving the floating and slight overlapping of certain metallic and other pigment particles, in the form of thin flakes, on the surface of a paint film. Leafing may occur when such pigments are mixed with a suitable vehicle and applied as a paint film Levelling - The ability of a coat of wet paint to flow out to a level surface ( see afso `Flow' and `Pulling Over' ). Life - The period of time during which a paint film continues the purpose for which it was designed. to serve

Lifting - The softening of a dry film of paint or varnish when another coat is applied over it, manifested by wrinkling of the first coat. Lightness See `Colour'. with lime-wash 26 made from hydrated lime

Lfme Washing - Coating or by slaking quick lime.

IS : 1303 - 1w:

oil extracted Linseed Oil - A drying ( Linium usilatissimum ). The oil is refined

from the seeds of the fiax plant by treatments which remove water and mucilaginous material and is then described as acid or alkali refined oil according to the method of treatment. Further processing gives boiled oil, blown oil or stand oil.
Liquid Driers See `Driers'.

Livering - A progressive thickening in the consistency of a paint or varnish due to gelation, to a stage where it is unsuitable for application ( see also `Gelling' ).
Long Oil -

Length'

A high ratio and `Short Oil' ).
Paint -

of oil to resin in a varnish

medium

! see `Oil

Luminous

A paint

which

exhibits

fluorescence

or phospho-

rescence.

4

Fluorescent paint - It contains pigments which are capable of absorbing energy from the blue or ultraviolet end of spectrum and re-emitting it in the form of light in the visible wavelengths. A fluorescent paint ceases to glow if activating source is removed.

b)

Phos~?hore~cen~ gaint - It contains pigments ( phosphorus ) which absorb energy at one wavelength and emit it over a period, ie the form of light at a longer wavelength in the visible spectrum. It differs from a fluorescent paint in that it continues to glow even after the stimulant is removed.
( or sAf-luminous paint ) - Normally this is a phosphorescent paint, containing a portion of radioactive compounds and in such paint, the phosphorous is permanently activated by absorbing energy from the bombardment by the radioactive rays and emits light in the visible spectrum. Radioactive

4

M
Mar-Resistance - The property of a to remain unimpaired

enables the pressure.

film

paint or by light the

varnish film which abrasion, impact or figure and texture

Marbling - Imirating with finishing of 1)oIished nlarblc or other decorative

materials, stones. 27

IS : 1303 - 1983

that part of a continuous surface to which it is Masking - Covering not desired to apply paint. Mask may be made by sheets of brown paper stuck in position by adhesive tape or plastics or metal shields for long runs of masked jobs.
Mass Tone -

The

colour,

by

reflected

light,

of a bulk of undiluted

pigment. Loosely used to describe a plastic Mastic - An adhesive composition. filler, stopper, putty or adhesive ( Kot to be confused with gum mastic which is natural resin used for picture varnish ).
Match See `Colour'.

Matt

-

See `Gloss'.
( Of Varnishes ) -

Maturing

ness, working the tank.

properties,

etc,

The process are inlproved

by which clarity, brightby stoving the varnish in

Medium ( In Paints or Enamels ) - The continuous phase in which the pigment is dispersed; thus in the Iiquid paint it is synonymous with `Vehicle' and in dry film, it is synonymous with `Binder'. Metallic Paint - A paint which on application gives a film with a metallic appearance. This effect is normally p~.o(lucecl by incorporation of fine flakes of such metals as copper, bronze or aluminium. Match See `Colour

Metameric Mildew

Match'.

Collection

presence mildew. collect.

- A phenomenon of a coating manifested by the of mould or fungus growth of a type familiarly known as A microscope is necessary to differentiate mildew from `dirt Two types are common, namely:

a) The spore type, which b) The mycelium
Milkiness -

resembles type.

caviare

in appearance;

and

or filament

which

should
-

A whitish or translucent normally be transparent.
The layer

appearance

in

a varnish

film

Mill-scale

of black oxide of iron produced

during

the hot

rolling

of steel. 28

IS t 1393- 1983 Mist Coat Monomer See`Coat'. The unit molecule from which a polymer is built up. Polishing by friction with a rotary mop.

Mop Polishing

Mottling - The picking out of highlights and other markings in the operation of g-raining in imitation of wood or other materials by a supplementary process of glazing. Mucilage See`Break'.

N Natural Pigments See`Earth Colours'.

Nibs - Small pieces of foreign material, pieces of skin, coagulated mediums, etc, which project above the surface of an applied film, usually a varnish ( see also `Bitty' ). Non-drying Oil - An oil which undergoes little or no oxidation when exposed to air and therefore has no film forming properties. ingredients of a coating composition Non-volatile Matter -The which after drying, are left behind on the material to which it has been applied, and which constitute the dry film.

0 Obliterating Power See`Opacity'.

Off White - A colour which is obviously not white, but is also not sufficiently far away from white to enable it to be called by a definite colour name. Oil Absorption ( Value ) - The number of millilitres or grams of oil, used to bind together 100 g of pigment under specified conditions The unit used should be stated. The figure is not absolute, of test. but depends on the method of determination. Oil Bound - The description of water paint; contains a proportion of drying oil in the binder. the medium of which

Oil Length - The ratio of oil to resin in a medium ( see `Long Oil' and `Short Oil ). For an oleo-resinous varnish, the oil length may be 29

IS : 1303 - 1983 expressed in terms of parts by mass of- OII to one part by mass of resin. For an alkyd resin, the oil length is expressed as a percentage of oil by mass in the resin. Oil Stain See`Stain'. with

Oleo-Resinous - Varnishes composed of drying oils in conjunction resins, which may be either natural and'or synthetic.

Opacity ( Hiding Power ) - Qualitatively it is the ability of a coat of paint ( or a paint system ) to obliterate the colour of a surface to which it is applied, and quantitatively it is the extent to which the paint obliterates a colour of an underlying surface of a diRerent colour It is of following when a film of it is applied by some standard method. types: (a) Wet opacity - It is the maximum number of square metres of a smooth, non-absorbent surface which can be obscured by 10 litres of material viewed immediately after application. (b) Dry ofiacity - It is the maximum number of square metres of a smooth non-absorbent surface which can be obscured by 10 litres of material, viewed after the film is hard dry. Orange Peel - The pock-marked appearance, in particular of a sprayed film, resembling the skin of an orange, resulting due to the failure of the film to flow out to a level surface. Organosol - A dispersion of finely divided resin particles in an organic liquid which may be wholly or partly volatile. After application the coating is heated and the resin particles with any non-volatile portions of the carrier are fused to a continuous film. Over-Spray - Sprayed paint which misses the surface to be coated. Although often unavoidable, much can be done towards reducing overspray by skilful manipulation of the spray gun trigger.

P Paint - A pigmented material, which when applied in a liquid form to, a surface, forms after a time a dry adherent film. The following main types are recognized: a) Oil paint - A paint that contains dryrhg oil or oil varnish as the basic vehicle ingredient. 30

IS : 1393 - 1983

b)

W&r paint (emulsion paint ) - A paint emulsion or dispersion as the vehicle.

that

contains

a water

concenPaste paint - A paint in which the pigment is sufficiently c> trated to permit a substantial reduction with vehicle before use. Paint Filler Set `Filler'. A material
film,

Paint Remover varnish or lacquer by scraping. Paint
System -

which

when

softens it, so that

applied to a dry paint, it can be easily removed, say

See `Coat'.

Peeling -- The spontaneous removal in ribbons or sheets varnish or lacquer film from a surface due to loss of adhesion
Petrifying

of a paint,

a dilute emulsion of drying oil and/or Liquid - Usually resin in water, used as a sealing coat before applying an oil bound water It may also be used in place of water to thin paint to a porous surface. the first coat of water paint before application to a Dorous surface.
Resin See `Resin'.

Phenolic

Phomphating

of steel or certain other metal surfaces - The treatment by chemical solutions containing metal phosphates and phosphoric acid as the main ingredients, to form an adherent corrosion inhibiting lacquer which serves as a good base for subsequent paint coats.
Phosphorecent Paint See `Luminous

Paint'.

PicLIing - A treatment for the removal of rust and mill-scale from steel by immersion in an acid solution containing an inhibitor. Pickling shall be followed by thorough washing and drying before painting.
Pigment - Material, usually a fine powder, which is insoluble in paint media and which is used because of its optical, protective and decorative properties. In modern uses the term is often used to include extenders, as well as the lvhite or coloured pigments. Pigment-Binder paint, preferably Ratio - The ratio of total expressed as a ratio by volume pigment to binder in a

Pigment Volume Concentration - Ratio of the volume of the pigments in a producr to the corresponding total volume of the non-volatile matter. 3:

ISr1303-

1983

Pin-Hording - The formation of minute holes in film during apptrcation and drying. Sometimes due to air or gas bubbles which in wet film burst, forming small craters that faii to flow out before the film has set ( see also `Blistering' and `Bubbling' ). Pink Primer . Pitting corrosion. Traditionally a wood primer, pink in colour. by localized

The formation

of holes or pits in a metal surface,

Plaster Primer - Primers, with a degree of resistance to alkali, which are used for priming plasters and cements of varying degrees of alkalinity. The primer shall not only resist saponification, but insulate succeeding coats of paint from attack. Plastic Emulmion Paint Plasticizer - A non-volatile forming materials in the paint, lity of a dried film. Pock-Marking depressions formed Poiychromatic See`Paint'. substance, incorporated with the film varnish or lacquer, to improve the flexibi-

A film defect in the shape of irregular and unsightly during the drying of the paint or varnish film. See`Finish'.

Finish -

Polyester Resin Polymer or irregular irregularities

See`Resin'.

A substance composed of molecules characterised by regular branch, functions and other minor repetition (end, being neglected ) of one or more types of chemical units.

a) Homopoiyner - Polymer in which the molecules consist of one kind of chemical unit repeated any number of times. bj Copolymer - Polymer in which the molecule consists of more one kind of chemical units, derived from more than monomer. than one

Polymerization - Polymerization refers to the process of formation of large molecules, in the form of either linear chains or three dimensional network, from smaller molecules with or without the simultaneous formation of other products. Polyurethane Resin See`Resin'. 32

IS : 1303 - 1983 Popping

partially

in a film of paint or varnish - Eruptions set, so that craters remain in the film.

after it has become

Poi Life - The period after mixing the two packs of a two-pack during which the paint remains usable.
Pre-fabrication

paint

Primer - A quick drying material apnlied as a thin film to a metal surface after cleaning, for example, by a blast cleaning process to give protection during the period before and during fabricaPrc-fabrication primers should not interfere seriously with tion. conventional welding operations or give off toxic fumes during such operations. - Usually restricted to mean the chemical treatment of metal surfaces, before painting, with various surface active preparations and may comprise cleaning/removal of grease, contaminants, dust, rust, etc, followed by the formation of a rust inhibiting layer of phosphate or chromate. Pre-treatment Primer See `Etch

Pre-treatment

Primer'. system applied to its conditions and

Primer - The first complete coat of paint of painting a surface. The type of primer varies with the surface, painting system to be used.
Primer Print Surfacer See `Surfacer'.

Resistance - The ability of a coating of paint, varnish or lacquer to resist taking on the imprint of another surface placed on it, under normal conditions of practical use or under defined conditions of experiment. Pulling -- The resistance to the movement of brush, during the applicaSuch a tion ol`a material, due to the viscous nature of the medium. material is sometimes referred to as being sticky under the brush ( see aho `Drax' ). Pulling Over - A process of levellmg a cellulose lacquer film, usually on wood, lay rubbing it with soft cloth pad soaked in a mixture or ol.sanic so!\`cnt, which is only a partial solvent for the lacquer film. - The action of a coat of paint or varnish which softens a previous (o,,t to such an extent as to make brush application difficult, anti in extl exne cases, cau~s an objectionable intermingling of the two coals. Putty A highly Pulling-Up

knife and stoving.

which

pigmented normally

stiff plastic material which is applied by a hardens on air-drying chemical curing or 33

IS : 1303 - 1983 R Radiant Rain Raised Heat Drying See `Infra-Red

Drying'. spotting caused by rain

Spotting Grain

( see`Water

Spotting'

The particular ).

case of water

where fibres flom the a) A condition of wood surface structure become unduly prominent due to wetting with or materials containing water. b) Prominence of the harder portions of the grain softer portions have suffered shrinkage.
Reducing

woodwater

of wood when the

of the white pigment, that is, the Power - The strength degree to which it is able to produce a very pale tint when mixed with a defined proportion of coloured pigment. The paler the tint produced, the greater the reoucing power.
Reflectance Residual Value See `Colour'.

Tack - Tackiness remains does not reach the really tack-free stage.

in

the film which

although

set,

Resin

-_It is an amorphous thermoplastic solid organic Natwd substance obtained from the secretion of certain plants and insects or dug up form the ground ( fossil resin ), where it has lain since the.treas These resins, as from which it was formed decayed in prehistoric times. distinct from gums, are not soluble in water, but may be dissolved in organic solvents or vegetable oils, if necessary, after heat treatnient to form varnishes.
Resin, Synthetic - A group of synthetic substances of relatively high molecular mass, produced by polycondensation, polyaddition, polymerization reaction from one or more of simpler/lower molecular mass materials. These are designed to achieqre superior performance compared Chem,ically modified natural resin/polymer:, such as to natural resin. cellulose acetate or nitrate, hardened casein, ester qtirn ant1 chlorinated synthetic resins are of rubber are not considered to be synthetic resins. the following type<:

from a) Acrviic resin - Synthetic resin resulting of derivatives of acrylic acid or methacrylic esters, nitriles, amides, etc. 34

the polymerization acic!, for example,

IS:1303- 1983

b)

Alkyd resin -

Synthetic resin resulting from the interaction of, primarily polyhydric alcohols, such as pentaerythritol, glycerol, glycols; polybasic acids or anhydrides, such as phthalic anhydride, isophthalic acid, meleic acidlanhydride, fumaric acid, adipic acid; and fatty acids or vegetable oils with or without natural/synthetic monobasic acids and other modifying chemicals or resins, such as rosin, ester gum, acrylates/methacryvinyl, toluene, isocyanates, silicones, phenolics. lates, styrene, The alkyd resins may be dissolved/diluted in mixtures of organic Normally alkyd resins are classified as: solvents, water, etc. i) Long oil alkJ)d modifying agent, ii) St~ort oil alkyd ing agent. containing and containing more than 60 percent oil as a

less than 40 percent

oil as modify-

Amino rrsin -

Synthetic resin made by the interaction of amide or amino compounds, such as urea, thiourea, melamine or allied Certain chemicals with aldehyde in presence of solvents. alcoholic solvents may also take part in the reaction.

Epoxy resin -

A synthetic resin containing epoxide groups and in which a final polymer is formed as a result of reaction taking place substantially at the epoxide groups. A common type is the resin made from epichlorohydrin and bisphcnol A.

ISydrocarbon resin -

Resin derived from unsaturated hydrocarbons. Resins derived from petroleum sources are important sub-class of this group and known as petroleum resins.
&tonic rcsin -

formeldehyde

A product and/or other

of reaction aldehydes.

between

a ketone

and

g) Maleic resin - Synthetic resin manufactured by reacting maleic anhydride, maleic acid or fumaric acid \\ith polyhytlric alcohols and rosin or ester gum and/or terpenes and/or unsaturated hydrocarbons and may be mothfed with other chemicals. h) Mplamiw rcsiu - An amino resin made by condensation reaction be!rvccn melamine and aItIehy(Ies in presence of solvents. j) P/zmolic rrs;/t -- Syntlrctic resin, normally of thcrmosctting type, ~~roJuccd I)y the reaction of a phenol with formaltlchyde or a componn(l whicir is ca;2able of providirig rncthylcne bridges. I'l~enof, cr(:;oJ, xylcnc~l xnd resorcilwl xc corrlntionly used. The tern: inclulles l)ol!~ tI!c simple contlen~atiou prorlncts ( pure or 100 Irer'c(`lr: ~)llcnolics 1: ;lnd those rno,lifie!l with resin or rosin esters.

k) Polyamide r&n - A product of reaction between polyamine and polybasic acid. Also a polymer derived from cyclic compound like caprolactam. m) Polyester resin It is of following types: polyester made by condensai) UNalUrated - An unsaturated tion between polyhydric alcohol and a polybasic acid or anhydride which must include an unsaturated acid or anhydride and may also contain some monobasic acid. In pramtice, such polyester is dissolved in an unsaturated monomer such as a styrene and immediately before use an activator and an accelerator are added. The composition reacts to form a hard tough film, no loss of solvent by evaporation being necessary. ii) Saturated - A condensation acids or anhydrides with monobasic acid. product of saturated polybasic polyols and may also contain

4

Polyurethane rcrin - A synthetic resin produced by the reaction of a polyhydroxy reactant, normally of polyester or polyether type, with polyisocyanate.

P) Silicon resin - These are organ0 siloxane polymers containing siliconoxygen lingakes in the polymer chain and are character&d by excellent heat resistance. 9) Qrenated resin A resin modified A resin derived with styrene. of terpenes.

r) TcrpGne resin -

by polymerization

s) Urea resin - An amino resin made by reaction between urea and aldehyde in presence of solvents. Certain alcoholic solvents may also take part in the reaction.

t)

Vinyl resin - A synthetic resin of thermoplastic type obtained by the polymerization of monomers containing the vinyl groups. In strict chemical terminology the description covers not only the polymerized vinyl ester, for example, polyvinyl acetate, but also polystyrene and polyacrylates. Vinyl resins may be applied as solutions in organic solvents, for example, as plastisols, as organosols, or in aqueous dispersion, or latex form.

Retarder - Generally a component added to a composit.ion to slow down a chemical or physical change. A slowly evaporating solvent may be added to a paint, varnish or lacquer to delay the set of the film after application and so improves the application properties or to give a better film, for example, one with improved flow. 36

Rivelling Roller

-

See `Wrinkling'. It is:

Coating

4

a process by which material; the sheet which is kept coated lacquer.

a film is applied mechanically to sheet is passed between horizontal rollers, one of with a film of liquid varnish, enamel or by means of a hand operated roller,

b)

the application of a paint wall surfaces, etc.
-

Ropey . .Finish out, tms being

A finish in which the brush marks have not flowed the normal appearance of a paint or varnish having poor levelling properties. A similar appearance may also be produced in a paint, which normally has good levelling properties, by continuing to brush the paint after the film. has begun to set.

Rosin

- The solid resin-like material obtained as the residue from the preparation of turpentine from the crude oleo-resin of pine trees. Also known as `Colophony' or `Gum Rosin'. . a dried paint Rubbing ( Rubbing Down ) - The process of levelling film .by rubbing it, either wet or dry, with such abrasives as cuttle fish bone, pumice, abrasive paper or rubbing compound.

of a coating material, ( adj ) - The description application and drying is suitable for rubbing or flatting example, rubbmg varnish.
Rumbling

Rubbing

which after down, for

- A piocess by which paint is applied to small articles, such as hairpins, children's building bricks, etc, which are unsuitable for coating by any of the normal methods. The articles are placed in a drum together with a little more paint than will be sufficient to cover the total surface of all the articles and the drum is rotated until the paint is evenly distributed. The articles are then emptied from the drum generally on the wire trays and the coating air-dried or stoved. It is also called as"Tumbling' or `Barrelliny'. Runs - Narrow downward movements of a paint or varnish film; may be caused by the collection of excess quantities of paint at irregularities in the surface, fur example, cracks, holes, ctc, the excess material continuing to few after tl!c surrounding surf`rce has set. Small characteristically shaped runs arc known as `Tears?.

Rust

- The coating of red or yellow oxitles of iron produced when iron and steel is exposed to a humid atmosphere. :Not to be confused wi:h `White Rust' which is a term loosely used to describe corrosion products of certain non-ferrous metals.

37

ISr1303-1983
S

~w3h!i - A downward movement of a paint film between the time of application and setting, resulting in an uneven coating having a thick lower edge. The resulting sag is usually restricted to a local area of a vertical surface and may have the characteristic appearance of a draped curtain, hence the synonymous term `Curtaining'.
Sags -

See `Sagging'. and certain

Sand Blasting - The removal of rust and scale from steel metal surfaces by a blast of sand-laden air. Sanding - An abrasive process used to level a coated application of a further coat ( see `Rubbing' or `Rubbing

surface, prior Down' ).

to

Sanding Sealer - A specially hard first coat which has of sealing or filling, but not obscuring, the grain of wood. is then suitable for sanding.

the property The surface

the formation of a soap by the reaction Saponification - In general, In painting practice saponifibetween a fatty acid/ester and an alkali. cation refers to the decomposition of the medium of the paint or varnish film by alkali and moisture in a substrate, for example, concrete or Saponified paint or varnish rendering based on cement, sand and lime. In very severe cases the film films may become sticky and discoloured. may be completely liquified by saponification. Scaling See`Flaking' See`Silk Screen Painting'.

Screen Painting -

Scuffing - Very light rubbing down of a paint surface prior to varnishing, graining or other finishing processes either with very line ( or worn ) sand paper, cuttle fish bone or powder pumice on a felt rubbing block. Stumble Glaze process. A transparent preparation used in the stumbling

Stumble Stain - A semi-transparent stain for application over an Brush, stipple or sponge may be used for opaque groundwork of paint. manipulating the stumble, or it may be combed, so that various effects,. In namely, wood graining and other more formal patterns are possible. this, the non-flowing property of the stumble greatly assists. 38

IS : 1393 - 1983 8combling - A technique of painting, in which portions of the last colour coat are removed or textured whilst- still wet, in order to expose part of colour underneath, used to achieve a variety of broken colour effects.

sealer - A clear or pigmented liquid used on absorbent surfaces prior to painting, which when dried, reduces the absorptive capacity of surface, often known as suction. Also used where necessary to prevent any soluble or diffusible matter from `bleeding' into and disfiguring new paint, or to protect the existing paint system from the softening action of solvents in a top coat ( see a&o `Sanding Sealer' ). Sealing
Coat See `Sealer'.

seediness - A defect in a varnish, lacquer or paint caused by small particles originatin from reaction between the vehicle components or between the vehicB e and the pigment. On appliCation coated surface tiay present bitty, specky or sandy appearance. &If%tch Semi-gloss Primer See `Etch Primer'.

See `Gloss'.

Set - A condition of paint or varnish film when it has dried to a point where for all practical purposes it ceases to flow.
Settling - The deposition of solid constituents, for example, pigment and extenders, in a paint on standing in container ( see `Caking' ).

Shade - The term used for a colour especially with regards to its depth or as distinguished from one nearly like it. Sheariness - A variation in gloss or sheen on a paint surface which should have been uniform in this respect. Sheen - The gloss seen at grazing viewed normally appears matt. angles on a surface, which when

Shelf Life - The time that a paint will keep in good condition when stored in the original sealed containers, under normal storage conditions on shelves of a shop or stock room. Shellac Soap

See`Resin, Natural'.

Piiiming - The act of priming new wood or iron work on the maker's premises, prior to the delivery in the primed condition. Oil -

Short

"Oil Length' ).

Alow

ratio of oil to resin in a varnish medium ( see also 39

ZSz 1383.1983 Shot Blasting - The removal of qust and scale from steel and certain other metal surfaces by a blast of ai+ laden with fine ( metal particles,. normally small steel shots ( see `Blast Cleaning' ). Silk Screen Painting - A method of making repeats of a motif or. pattern, the process is controlled by a framed screen of fine mesh ( of silk or similar material ) carrying a transferred masking film into which a design has been previously cut, SO that the mesh ia exposed only in selectThe pattern is reproduced by drawing a suitable paint across ed areas. the screen with a rubber squeezer, which forces the colour through th& By careful registering, a number of parts where the mesh is exposed. screens can be used in succession over the same design for multiplecolour work. irregularities left on ( or in ) the Silking - The parallel microscopic dried surface of a glossy paint or varnish film, producing the appearance appear in the. of silk. In dipping or flow coating, the irregularities direction of the flow and in brushing, in the direction in which the film was finally brushed. Six&age - The blotching effect caused by `sinking effect caused by softening an underlying undercoat. Sinking Za - Loss of gloss due to absorption ing coat by the undercoat. in' or the similar

of the medium of a finish-

Size - This term originally referred to an aqueous solution of animal glue, but has subsequently.been extended to cover water soluble cellulose derivatives and starches. Sizing It is the process of: to to

a) applying size to various building and decorating materials regulate porosity or to provide a buffer coat, for example, prevent oil in varnish striking into a sanitary wallpaper. b) applying a mordant or isinglass. in gilding processes, for example,

gold size sheet in

c) applying a thin coat of varnish to tin plate or aluminium before enamelling, in the tin printing industry. Skinning - The formation of a surface skin on paints the container.

or varnishes

Sleepy - The description of a recently applied glossy coating which has lost its initial gloss other than by bloom and become dull or lacking in lustre. 40

IS I 1393 - 19g3 Slushing - The process by which a coating is liberally applied to surfaces, which require protection but which are more or less hidden from view and not readily accessible for painting by ordinary methods. The paint or similar material is swilled on and the excess drained OK Smudge - A mixture of residues of paints times added. It is of unknown and variable in normal paint system. Solids -

to which thinners are somequality, and has no place which, after

drying,
Solvent

The non-volatile matter in a coating composition are left behind and constitute the dry film.

- Liquids, usual!y volatile, which are used in the manufacture of paint, to dissolve or disperse the film-forming constituents, and which evaporate during drying, and therefore do not become a part of the dried film. They are used to control the consistency and character of the finish and to regulate application properties. Solventless Paint or Varnish - A term used strictly to describe coating material containing no thinner, but which is extended to cover a material containing a small proportion of thinner.

organic practice
Spinning

an in

surface
Spirit

- A method of coating, by centrifugal action.

which

distributes

the paint over a flat

-

industrial
Spirit Spirit

Gerierally refers to commercial methylated spirit.
See `Stain'. -

ethyl

alcohol,

normally

sold as

Stain

Varnish

industrial lacquer'.
Spiriting

methylated

A lacquer spirit.

based on a solution The more correct

of resin or term would

resins in be `spirit

in a French polishing process by Off - The 3nal operation which the last trace of oil are removed by drawing a rag, damped with methylated spirit, rapidly and repeatedly over the :urface.

Split Spray - An unsymmetrical spray pattern, resulting in the application of bands of paint of uneven thickness, caused either by a defective spray or nozzle, or by partial blockage of the nozzle or air passages of a spray gun.
Spot Finishing See `Spotting

In'. which patches

Spotting

The development of small areas on a painted surface, differ in colour or gloss from the major portion of the work.
In -

Spotting

Rubbing

down

and 41

refinishing

small

defective

in the coating.

IS : 1303 - 1983
Spray

Mottle

-

see `orange

Peel'.

of applicatiod'in which the coating material is Spraying - A method broken up into a fine mist, which is directed on to the surface to be This atomization process is generally but not necessarily, coated. effected by a compressed air jet ( scc &so `Hot Spraying ). Spraying can `Spraying' or `Airless Spraying'. also be carried out by electrostatic
Stabilizer - Substance added, usually in small proportions, to retard undesirable chemical or physical changes, for example, small qtlantities of stabilizers arc added to retard the dechlorination of chlorinated rubber or the coagulation of an emulsion.

Stain - A solution or suspension of colouring matter in a vehicle designetl to colour a surface by penetration without hiding it. True stains are classrfied as `Water Stains', ` oil Stains' and `Spirit Stains' according to the nature of the vehicle. The so called varnish stains are varnishes coloured with transparent material. These have not the same powet of penetration as the true stains, and leave a co~our coating on tire surface.
Stainer - Coloured pigments ground in media compatible with paint vehicle, added in relatively small proportions to already prepared paint to modify their colour. With the introduction of latex paints of many types, stainers have been tlevelopetl which can be used both witit organic scrlvent thinned paints and with water thinned paints. Such dual propose tinters are known as `Universal Stainers' or `Universal `l'inters'.

Staining Power - The colour to a white pigment `Tinting Strength'.

degree under

to which a colourecl pigment imparts defined conditions of tests. Also called

The detailed procedure for determining staining power normally laid down in specifications for pigments need to be carefully adhered to if consistent results are to be obtained. The corresponding property of white pigment is `Reducing Power'. oil polymerrzetl or bodied by Stand Oil - Drying oil or semi-drying heating under xvacuum/inert atmosphere, in contrast to `Bio\vn oil'. The unqualified term normally refers to linseed stand oil, but may be applied Stand oils dry to films which are generallv tough and to other oils. more water rrsistant than those from unbodied oils. The degree ol change in properties depends on the cxtrnt of polymerization as indicated by viscosity.
Stipple

brush marks - ( a ) T o even out a coat of paint and remove and other imperfections, immediately after application by systematically dabbing the surface with soft stippling brush. 42

IS : 1303 - 1983

b) To produce a textured different colour 01 by disturbing

effect, either by applying spots of a the surface of paint or rubber stippler.

C) To produce a textured effect by applying spots of same or different colour on a painted surface with spray gun by applying special technique.
Stopper - A stiff paste used for filling holes and cracks and similar defects in surfaces, normally applied after priming ( see `Hard Stopping' and `Filler' ). Stoving ( Backing ) - A process of drying and hardening a paint or varnish coating by heating usually at temperature above 80�C ( SCG `Force-Drying' ). The principal stoving treatment consists of:

Convection a> transferred convection.

oven staving -

to the paint

A stoving treatment in which heat is surface largely, although not entirely, by

b)

Radiant heat staving -

A stoving treatment in which heat is transferred to the paint surface mainly by ra:!iation from a hot surface, such as electric lamps or gas heated panels. This is often known as infra-red drying or stoving. or other coatings It is usually accomof various types, to

Stripping - The removal of old paint, distemper with or without the aid of solvents, blow lamp. etc. plished by the aid of stripping knives or scrapers suit the particular job. Suction Surfacer See `Drying'.

- A pigmented composition, essentially a thin filler and/or sealer, designed particularly for smoothening or facing up slightly uneven surfaces, in preparation for the subsequent application of a paint system. A surfacer is normally sanded to a smooth surface after it has dried. Suspending Seating Agent See `Anti-settling

Agent'.

Jt is the: varnish or varnish, or lacquer after it

a) Exudation of oily matter from film of paint, nf~cr the film has apparently dried. b) Dcvolopmcnt of gloss in a dry film of paint has been flatted down.

c) Often incorrectly used to describe condition of moisture from humid atmospheres on relatively co!d surfaces, for example, sweating of walls.
. 43

IS : 1303- 1983 Swelling See `Water Swelling'. based on synthetic Synthetic' resin.

Synthetic Paint Synthetic Resin -

Paints

Sre`Resin,

T Tack - Slight stickiness of the surface of the film of paint, lacquer, apparent when the film is pressed with the finger. Tack Fzcc See`Drying'. varnish or

with a tacky substance, such as a Tack Rag - A fabric impregnated which is used to remove dust from a surface delayed drying varnish, Tack rag should he after rubbing down and prior to further paintmg. stored in an air-tight container.to conserve its tackiness. Tacky Tears Having a tack.

See`Runs'. which on normal application gives a tex-

Textured Paint - A paint tured finish ( see `Finish' ). Thermoplastic and hence hardened

Having the property of being softened by cooling; this process is repeatable. An organic coating

by

heating

Thermoplastic Paint or Varnish the dried film of which is thermoplastic. Thermosetting - Having a property application of sufficient heat curing. Thermosetting Paint or Varnish the dried film of which is a thermoset. -

material, on the material,

of becoming An organic

a thcrmoset coating

Thickening - An increase in consistency of a paint or varnish usually due to loss of thinner or chemical changes in the composition ( see `Fattening' and `Feeding' ). Thinner - Volqtile liquids added to paints and varnishes to facilitate applictition and to aid penetration by lowering the viscosity. They should be miscible with the paint or varnish at ordinary temperatures and should not cause precipitation o<the non-volatile portion either in .

IS : 1303- 1983 the container or in the film during drying. For some purposes, thinner containing a small proportion of non-volatile material may be used. proportion of thinners to be Thinning Ratio - The recommended added to a paint or varnish to render it suitable for a particular method of application.
Thixotropic Paint - A paint which while free-flowing and easy to manipulate under a brush, sets to a gel within a short time, when it is allowed to remain at rest. Because of these qualities, a thixotropic paint is less likely to drip from a brush than other types, and can be applied in rather thicker films without running or sag&:ng. - A full bodied material which undergoes a reduction in body when shaken, stirred or otherwise mechanically disturbed, and which readily recovers the original full-bodied condition on standing ( see `False Body' ). - The colour of a large proportion of white paint mixed with a small proportion of coloured paint or stainer. Tinters Tinting See `Stainers'.

Thirotropy

Tints

The final adjustment of colour of a paint to the exact colour
See `Staining Power'.

required.
Tinting Tone Strength

- The use of this term is to be deprecated since it is variously employed in different senses. According to the context `hue' or `undert&e are the preferred terms. Toner -- A salt of an organic dyestuff without inorganic extender. The term is also loosely applied to pure pigment dyestuff, but this use of the term is deprecated. Solids Dry See `Solids'. See `Drying'.

Total Touch

Tumbling

A process used in some paint store- See also `Rumbling'. houses whereby containers are repeatedly up-ended to redisperse pigments, which may have settled or ca! ed during storage of paint.

- A colourless volatile liquid, distilled from the products of certain pine trees and consists of complex mixture of terpene hydro,carbons. Turpentine

45

IS I 1303 - 1983 Turpenting was formerly extensively used in paints and varnishes, but has now been largely replaced by white spirit. Two-Pack - A paint or lacquer, the materjals for which are supplied in two parts, which must be mixed in the correct proportions before use. The mixture will then remain in a usable condition for a limited time only. The two parts of the two-pack paint are often (though not necessarily ) supplied in the correct relative proportion, either in entirely of appropriate sizes or in a single container separate containers divided into two compartments, the term `Dual-Pack' is often used to describe the latter type of container.

U Undercoat - The coat or coats applied to a surface af:er priming, filling, etc, or after the preparation of a previously painted surface, and before the application of finishing coat. Undertone - Colour obtained when a pigment is used in very thin The hue of the underlayers or greatly extended with white pigment. tone may often differ from that of the mass-tone. Universal Stainers See `Stainer'. See`Stainer'. V Value See`Colour'. essentially on Varnish may of solvents.

Universal Tinters -

coating composition based Varnish - A transparent resins and organic solvents, with or without a drying oil. generally be of three types: a) Lacquers Those which usually form on evaporation

b) Air-drying varnishes - Those which usually form films by oxidation, polymerization or by any other chemical reaction at room temperature. c) Staving varnishes - Those which form films by chemical on application of heat at specified time and temperature. 46 reaction

IS : 1303 - 1983 Varnish Stain See `Stain'. ir ).

Vehicle - The liquid portion of a paint in which the pigment dispersed, it is composed of the binder and the thinner ( see `Medium' Vinyl Resin See `Resin, Synthetic'.

It Viscosity - The internal resistance to flow, possessed by a liquid. is determined by measuring the force required to shear the liquid, for example, to move one layer over another in orderly flow without turbulence at defined rate. Most paint solvents, and many oils and varnishes are what are termed Newtonian liquids, that is, when they are tested in suitable viscometers at a fixed temperature, their rate of flow ( shear ) is proportional to the shearing force. The viscosity of these liquids at a fixed temperature is thus a constant. For most paints and other pigmented materials, the rate of flow is not proportional to the shearing force, but may vary with the time and rate of shearing. For these materials only an apparent viscosity, a figure which refers only to the behaviour of the material under the particular circumstances and precise conditions of measurement, can be determined.
NOTE Viscosities of Newtonian liquids are usually determined in poises. In some types of viscometers ( for example, the Ostwald viscometer? where the liquid fall under its own mass ) the rate of flow is determined by the ratto of viscosity to density, termed kinematic viscosity. The results of this type of measurement are often reported in stokes, the unit of kinematic viscosity. The relation between the two units, namely, stokes and poises is:

Kinematic

viscosity ( stokes ) =

Dynamic Viscosity ( poises ) Density ( g/ml )

Vitreous

Enamel

-

See `Enamel'. The portion of a surface coating composition which specified conditions leaving behind the non-volatile

Volatile Matter evaporates off under component.

W
Wash Primer See `Etching Primer'.

Washability - The ease with which the dirt can be removed from a In case of water-based paints, it refers also paint surface by washing. to the ability of the coat to withstand washing without removal or substantial damage. Water Spotting - The spotty appearance of a paint film, which is caused by drops of water on the surface and which remains after the Water water has evaporated, the effect may or may not be permanent. spots usually appear lighter in colour than the surrounding paint. 47

IS : 1393 - 1983 Water Stain See `Stain'.

Water Swelling - A continuous absorption of moisture by a solid mass This phenoaccompanied by an increase of volume, is called swelling. menon may be regarded as an intermediate stage between solubility and insolubility. Water Thinnable for its application. Paint Any paint which is thinnable with water

Weathering - The behaviour frost and atmospheric pollution

of paint films when exposed to sun, rain, ( see a&o `Accelerated Weathering' ).

Webbing - The development of wrinkles, often in well-defined pattern, This condition in the surface of a paint or varnish during drying. &uIts from the irreversibIe swelling of partiaily dried surface skin ( see &o `Frosting' ) and may be aggrevated by impure gas fumes during stoving in a gas oven, in which case it is termed as `Gas Checking' ( webbing is generally regarded as a paint defect, but is made use of in some paint finirhes to give textured coating, which obscures minor faults and indentations in the surface to be coated ). Wet EdgeWhen painting large An edge which remains workable. durfaces, it is generally necessary to join up to the edge of a paint film which has been left for an appreciable time. When this can be done by blending, the edge with free working paint without any lap showing the fils is said to present a wet edge. Wet Edge Time - The time taken to reach the stage at which film no longer has a `Wet Edge'. a paint

of painting, whereby further coats are Wet-on-Wet - A technique applied before the previous coats have dried, and the composite film The process demands specially formulated.painta. then dries as a whole. Wet Scrub Resistance when in contact with water Ability of a paint film to withstand scrubbing, or detergent solution or soap solution. of excess paint from articles which

Whirling - Centrifugal removal have been coated by dipping. White Rust See`Rust'.

used thinner for paints and White Spirit - The most commonly varnishes. Internationally, however, the preferred term is `mineral solvents for paints' and the description given is that the material shall consist of mainly aliphatic hydrocarbons with certain boiiing rap@.

IS : 1303 - 1983 Whitening in the Grain - A fault which sometimes develops in varnished or polished open grained woods, filled or unfilled. It is manifested as a streaky white appearance& Wrinkling - The development of wrinkles in a film during drying, usually due to the initial formation of surface skin. Also known as `Rivelling' ( gee.also `Crinkling' and `Finish' ).

Y of ydlow colour on ageing; Yellowing - The developtint noticeable in dried films of white paints q clear varnishes. most

z
zinc Dust paints.
Finely divided zinc metal used as a pigment in protective

anticorm&+ primer for iron and steel, ZincRich PrSmer --An hmrpor&ng zinc dust in a concentration Micient to give electrical conductivity in t.hq dried film, thus enabling the zinc metal to corrode prefemnti&y to the substrate, to the give cathodic protection.

49

INTERNATIONAL
Base

SYSTEM
UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

OF UNlTS

( SI UNITS )

Units

QUANTITY
Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units Units

SYMBOL m kg 8 A K
Cd

mol

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL rad sr

QUANTITY

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemen volt Pascal force

SYMBOL

DEPINITION I 1 N = 1 kg.m/ss J = I N.m 1 J/s 1 Wb/ms 1 A/V 1 W/A

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress

N J
W Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 W = 1 1 1 T S = V=

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1)

1 Pa = 1 N/ms

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS HeWquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375,323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062,91 11 3239399,91 11 3239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 8-77 00 32

Central Laboratory:

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 Regional Central `Eastern CVfices:

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 : 1114CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktda, CALCUTTA 700054

32376 17 337 86 82 60 38 43 235 23 15 832 92 95

Northern : SC0 335-338, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 180022 Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 800113 TWestern : Manakalaya, E9, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East),
MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices:

`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 389001 * Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 580,058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 482003 Plot No. 82-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 Kalaikathir Buildings, 870 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-B-56C, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 1171418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 T.C. No. 14/1421, University PO. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM `Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, PO. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 TSales.Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 *Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, BANGALORE 560002 895034

550 13 48 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8711996 541137 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 68 76 23 89 23 52 51 71 28 23 05 32 36 35 621 17 271085 309 65 28 222 39 71

Printed at Simca Pdnting Press, Delhi

