( Reaffirmed 1998 )

IS:10206-1982

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING STEEL WIRES
Methods of Sampling Sectional
Chairman DR DAROOASIH~E

Committee,
Representing

SMDC 4,
Institute,

Indian Agricultural New Delhi

Statistics Research

Members SHRI J. N. GARQ (Alternate to Dr Daroga Singh ) Central Statistical Organisation, New Delhi SHRI S. N. AQARWAL Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI M. G. BIIADE SHRI H. L. CAADHA ( Alternate) The Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur Dn M. M. CHAI~RABORTY Government of India Mint ( Ministry of Finance ) SHRI A.W. CHACV_~THP: Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New SHRI S. K. DAS Delhi SHRI B. DASGUPTA ( AhOUZtC) Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd, Magpur SHRI B. K. DWJRITVA RAO Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI D. B. G~oslr Ferrow Alloys Corporation Ltd, Shreeramnagar SHRI C. N. HA&MAN 4,. \ SHRI A. SAN~AMESWARA Rao ( -4~ternate ) Italab Private Ltd, Bombay SRRI S. S. HOPI'AV.JIK SIIRIJ. P. PATEL ( Alternate ) SURI P. K. KRISH~AMO~R~HY Ministry of Railways Sa~r R. K. DAS~UPTA ( Alftmate) Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur SHBI K. S. MAHAPATRA SHRI U. N. SARKAB ( Alternate ) Mitra S. K. Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. K. MITRA SHARI M. N. MITRA ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India, Bhilai SHRI B. MUK~~ERJEE National Test House, Calcutta SHRI P. K. PAIN Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta SHRI R. .I. PANneY Therapeutics Chemical Research Corporation, SHRI B. R. PAT~L Bombay Army Statistical Organization ( Ministry of SHRI T. R. PURI Defer-ice), New Delhi ( Continuedoa page 2 )

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the In&an CopurigZrrAct ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. *

IS:10206-1982 (Confinuedfrom,bagc 1)
Representing Members Essen & Co, Bangalore DR J. RAJARAM SHRI V. SHANKARNA~AYAN ( Alternate I ) SHRI K. N. GURURAJACHAR( Altw&e II ) Authority of India Ltd (R & D DR M. RANQA RAO Organization ) , Ranchi SHRI A. K. SATSANQI ( Alternate) Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur Da B. R. L. Row SHRI G. L. JKTHWANI (Alternate ) Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of SERI P. M. SENOUPTA Defence) SHRI T. K. BRATTACRARJEE (Alternate) Bharat Aluminium Co Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. C. VIDYARTHI SHRI S. D. JEA ( Afternate ) Director General, IS1 (Ex-oficio Member) SERI Y. K. BHAT, Director ( Stat ) Secretary SERI N. SANEAR Deputy Director ( Stat ), ISI

2

1$:10206-1982

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING STEEL WIRES
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 June 1982, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Sampling Sectional Committee had been apporved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 Steel wires have been found to be highly versatile and are used in variety of ways, for example, for general engineering purposes, telegraph and telephone purposes, in machine screws, wood screws, springs, umbrella In the context of this ever increasing ribs, spokes, ropes and rivets. production of steel wires, it is imperative that due consideration is given to the sampling procedures which will help in the proper and objective evaluation of the visual, dimensional, physical and chemical properties of this product. 0.3 Proper quality control during the process of manufacture would substantially reduce the quality fluctuations of the ultimate product. For effective process control, the use of statistical quality control techniques is imperative, for which helpful guidance may be obtained from IS : 397 (Part I)-1972* and IS : 397 (Part II )-1975t. A recommended frequency of testing and inspection is, however, given in Appendix A to serve as a guide to the manufacturers. 0.4 This standard contains clauses 4.2.1 and 4.4.1 agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. which call for

0.5 In reporting the results of a test or analysis, if the final value observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960:. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes comformity for steel wires. the methods of sampling and criteria for

*Methods for statistical quality control dewing production: variables (first revision) . tMethods for statistical quality control during production: attributes and count of defects (first r&ion ). $Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rcuisud).

Part Part

I Control charts for II Control charts for

3

IS : 10206 - 1982 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose 2.1 Coil 2.2 Item -A of this standard, length the following of wire as drawn for inspection definitions shall apply.

One continuous

in the form of a coil. or testing.

unit such as coil meant

2.3 Lot - The total number manufactured under essentially 2.4 Lot Size Number Collection

of items of same grade and dimensions similar conditions of manufacture.

of items in a lot. of items selected for inspection or testing from

2.5 Sample a lot. 2.6 Sample

Size -

Number

of items in a sample. imposed on an item with

2.7 Defect - Failure to meet the requirement respect to a single characteristic. 2.8 Defective An item having one or more

defects. number of

2.9 Acceptance Number (a) -The maximum permissible defectives in the sample(s) for acceptance of the lot.

2.10 Acceptable Quality Level (AQL) -The maximum percent defective that, for the purpose of sampling of steel wires, can be considered satisfactory as a process average. NWCE - When a purchasrr designates some specific value of AQL, he indicates to the supplier that his (purchaser's) acceptance sampling plan will accept great ma.jority of the lots that the supplier submits, provided that the process average level of percent defective in these lots is not greater than the drsignated value ofAQL. Thus, AQL is a designated value of percent defective that the purchaser indicates which will be accepted most of the times ( approximately 89 or 99 percent ). 3. PROCESS CONTROL

3.1 The object of inspection and testing steel wires by the purchaser is to ensure their conformity to the specification requirements, whereas the inspection done by the manufacturer during production is to ensure conformity to relevant specification as also to maintain better control over the process. Quality control during production can build the quality and reliability in steel wires whereas inspection done later on can only sort out the good products from the bad ones. Because of the economy that it is recommended that the would result from the former approach, manufacturer should take representative sample of material and test at 4

IS : 10206 - 1982
regular intervals to control the quality fluctuations during production. The inspection levels given in Appendix A may serve as a guide for routine control over the manufacturing process. 4. LOT INSPECTION

4.1 In case adequate and satisfactory system of quality control has been maintained, the resulting data and information may be made available to the purchaser, along with items supplied to enable him to judge the acceptability of the lot. When it is not possible to make such information available to the purchaser or if the purchaser so desires, the procedure laid down in the following clauses shall be followed for determining the of the relevant conformity of the steel wires to the requirements Specifications.
4.2 The sample shall be selected and examined for each lot separately for ascertaining their conformity to the requirements of the relevant specifications. 4.2.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser, each and every coil shall be visually examined for freedom from defects and defective ones removed.

4.3 The

lot which is free from surface defects shall be inspected for dimensional requirements. The number of items to be selected from a lot for this purpose depends upon the size of lot and shall be in accordance with co1 1 and 2 of Table 1. 4.3.1 The it,ems shall be selected the items at random the provisions followed. from the lot at random. For selecting contained in IS : 4905-1968* shall be

4.4 Each

of the items selected according to 4.3 shall be inspected for Any item failing to meet the dimensional dimensional requirements. The lot shall be considered requirements shall be termed as defective. as conforming to the dimensional requirements, if the number of defectives found in the sample is less than or equal to the corresponding acceptance number given in co1 3 of Table 1; otherwise the lot shall be rejected.

4.4.1 In case of those lots which have not been found satisfactory, all the items in the lot may be inspected for dimensional requirements and the defectives be removed, if agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier.
*Methods for random sampling.

5

IS:10206

- 1982

TABLE 1 SCALE OF SAMPLING AND ACCEPTANCE NUMBER FOR DIMENSIONAL AND PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS ( Clauses 4.3, 4.4, 5.2 and 5.4)
LOT %XE (No. OF COILS )

DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS rP-----? Acceptance S;Tfle i Number (2) (3) 0 1 1 2 3

c__-~---) Sample Size (4) 2 3 5 8 13

PHYSIOAL CH~RAOTERISTIC~

Acceptance Number (5) 0 0 0 0 1

(1)
Up to 26 ,, 25 50

51 ,, 150 151 ), 300 301 and above

a 13 20 32 50

NOTE - The associated AQL ( see 2.10 ) for dimensional and physical characteristics is 2'5 percent. This AQL values will strictly hold good only in the case of larger lots.

5. PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 5.1 The lot which has been found satisfactory
for visual and dimensional requirements shall next be tested for physical characteristics like tensile test, bend test, wrapping test, adhesion test, coating test and resistance test. 5.2 The number be in accordance of items to be selected at random with co1 1 and 4 of Table 1. for this purpose shall

5.3 From each of the items specimens of adequate length physical tests specified.

so selected, the required number shall be prepared and subjected

of test to the

5.4 If an item fails to meet the requirement for any of the physical tests specified, it shall be termed as defective. The lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of physical characteristics, if the number of defectives found in the sample is less than or equal to the acceptance number given in co1 5 of Table 1, otherwise the lot shall be rejected. 6.

CHEMICAL

CHARACTERISTICS

6.1 The lot which

has been found satisfactory with respect to visual and dimensional requirements shall be tested for chemical analysis. The test certificate for the basic steel issued by its manufacturer shall be provided 6

IS :10'206 - 1982
in respect of each heat/cast and the lot shall be considered to have conformed to chemical requirements on the basis of basic steel manufacHowever, in the absence of these turer's chemical analysis certificates. certificates and also in the case of dispute between the purchaser and the supplier, the lot shall be tested in the following manner. The number of coils required for this purpose shall be taken at random in accordance with co1 1 and 2 of Table 2. These may be taken from those coils which have been found conforming to dimensional and physical requirements.
TABLE 2 SCALE OF SAMPLING FOR CHEMICAL ANALYSIS

NUMBER OF COILS IN A LOT
(1)

NUMBER OF COILS TO BE SELECTELI
(2)

Up 26 101

to
to to

25 100 300

2 3 5 8

301 and above

6.2 From each of the coils so selected a test piece of required be cut and tested for chemical analysis.

length

shall

6.3 When two samples are analysed for chemical analysis from a lot, the lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of the specification if both the samples pass and shall be rejected, if both samples fail. If one sample fails, two more samples shall be taken and tested for the characteristics in which it has failed. The lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements if both the samples pass; otherwise the lot shall be rejected. 6.4 When three or more than three samples are analysed from a lot, calculate the mean ( 2 ) and the range (R )from the test results, as given below: Average Range Sum of the test results ( ' ) =-umber of test results

(R) =

Difference minimum

between the maximum values of' test results.

and

6.5 If the specification limit for the characteristic is given as a minimum value, the expression (2 - kR) shall be calculated from the relevant test If the value obtained is greater than or equal to the minimum results. specification limit, the lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of that characteristic. 7

IS:10206 - 1982
6.6 If the specification limit for the characteristic is given as a maximum value, the expression ( x + kR ) shall be calculated from the relevant test results. If the value obtained is less than or equal to the maximum specification limit, the lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of that characteristic. 6.7 If the characteristic has two-sided specification limits, the expressions (2 -- kR ) and ( i + kR ) shall be calculated from the relevant test results. If the values obtained lie between the two specification limits, the lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of that characteristic. 6.8 The value of the accordance with Table level.
TABLE 3

factor k referred to earlier shall be chosen in 3 depending upon the desired acceptable quality

VALUES OF k FOR ACHIEVING DIFFERENT ACCEPTABLE QUALITY LEVEL

ACCEPTABLE QUALITY LEVEL
(PERCENT)

VALUE OF k (2) 0'4 0.5 0.6

(1) 2.5and up to40 1.0 2.5 np to and excluding Lessthan 1-O

APPENDIX

A

(Clauses 0.3 and 3.1 )
RECOMMENDED
SL

LEVELS

OF INSPECTION/TESTING
Frequency of InsjectionlTesting

NO.

Characteristics for Inspection/ Testing

composition i> Chemical ii) Visual inspection for surface defects iii) Dimensions and weight iv) Tensile test v) Bend Test vi) Wrapping test vii) Coating viii) Resistance test test

A product Each Each Every coil coil

analysis

from

every cast

fifth coil do do do do

