IS 14135 : 1994

(Reaffirmed 2005)

Indian Standard

CODE FOR HYGIENIC PRACTICES FOR, PROCESSING AND HANDLING OF DEHYDRATED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES INCLUDING EDIBLE FUNGI

UDC

664.83/86.047:613.2:006.76

0

BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAI-IADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

J1c1.y 1994

Price Group

4

Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, FAD 45

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalizccl by the Food Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Customers do not have the available knowledge or means of determining the hygienic quality of the food they purchase. For this, they rely on the hygienic standards of various industries that prcparc and handle foods. Unless the factory producing the food is governed by a strict hygienic code in rcspcct of layout, plant and personnel, the quality of food produced cannot be considered as safe. Thcsc factors have been taken into consideration in the preparation of this Code. This Code is an adjunct to IS 2491 : 1972`Code for hygienic conditions for food processing units (lirsr revision)`and it covers rcquircmcnts specific to the units for processing and handling ofdchydratcd fruits and vcgctablcs. This code is subjccl to the provisions of the Factories Act, 194X and the Ptwen/ion ojI;rmd Ad~~/lr,nlin~t and the Fruit Producls O&r, 1955, amcndcd up-to-date. In the preparation of this Code, considerable assistance has been dcrivcd from the Kccommcndcd International Code of Hygienic Practice for Dchydratcd Fruits and Vcgctablcs including Edit-k Fungi CACiRCP 5-1971, published by Codcx Alimcntarius Commission. This basic principles of hygicnc underlining the technical advice in this Code should bc applied with appropriate modifications to all types of dehydrated fruits and vegetables.

Act, 3954 and the Rules framed thereunder

IS 14135 : 1994

Indian Standard

CODE FOR HYGIENIC PRACTICES FOR PROCESSING AND HANDLING OF DEHYDRATED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES INCLUDING EDIBLE FUNGI
1 SCOPE 1.1 This Code of hygienic practices applies to fruits and vegetables which are artificially dehydrated (including freeze-dried), either from the succulent stage or in combination with sun:drying, and covers the products commonly associated with the phrase `dehydrated food'.

contamination of the product with undesirable micro-organisms, smoke, gases, odour, chemicals, filth or other foreign material. 3.2.3 Areas where raw materials are received or stored should be so separate from areas in which, final product preparation is conducted as to preclude contamination of finished product. Areas and compartments used for storage, manufacture or handling of edible products should be scparatc and distinct from those used for inedible material. 3.3 Ventilation and Lighting
3.3.1 The premises shall be adequately lighted and

2 REFRRRNCRS The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 PLANT CONSTRUCTION 3.1 Sire 3.1.1 Units for processing and handling of dehydrated fruits and vegetables shall preferably be situated in open, clean and healthy surroundings away from cattle sheds, open sewage drains, garbage dumps or other places likely to breed flies. It shall be free from sources of obnoxious fumes, smoke, odours or excessive dust. There shall not be accumulation of trash, garbage or similar waste in the vicinity of the unit. 3.2 Building 3.2.1 The structure shall be of permanent nature and shall be suitable in size, construction and design to facilitate maintenance and hygienic operations for processing purposes. It should provide sufficient space for housing of equipment and storage of materials (raw as well as finished products) as is necessary for hygienic operations. The material of construction shall be bricks, plaster, cement, concrete, tiles or any other equivalent materials which ensure cleanliness. 3.2.1.1 Construction of the building shall be Such that it shall be rodentproof, flyproof and birdproof. 3.2.2 No portion of building shall be used for domestic purposes or other types of food preparations unless separated by suitable partitions or locations or other effective means so as to avoid 1 AND FACILITIES

ventilated. Light bulbs and fiiturcs suspend&l in the processing area shall be of safety type and shall not be fmed above the processing table lo prevent contamination of food in case of breakage. Vcntilation and lighting shall also be in accordance with theFactories& 1948 [see also IS 3103 : 1975 and IS 3646 (Parts 1, 2 and 3) : 19661. Exhaust fans should be provided, where ncccssary. 3.3.2 Special attention should bc given to the vcnling of areas and equipment producing cxccssivc heat, steam, obnoxious fumes or vapours or contaminating aerosols. Good ventilation is important to prevent both condensation (which may drip into the product) and mould growth in overhead structures (which growth may fall into the food). Light bulbs and fixtures suspended over food in any step of preparation should be of the safety type or othcrwise protected to prevent food contamination in the case of breakage. 3.4 Floor The floor shall be smooth, free from crcviccs, washable, properly sloped to gullies conncctcd to scwcrs or drains. It shall be impervious to water and not affected by weak acids, alkalies or steam. Ccmcntcd floor shall be made for work room, store room and godown. 3.5 Walls and Ceilings Internal walls and ceilings should have smooth, non-absorbent light-colourcd surface, free from

IS 14135: 1994

crcviccs and sharp angles, to facilitate their efficient cleaning. The junction of the floor with the walls and the junction between the two walls should be rounded to prevent accumulation of dust.

with no cross-connection or back-siphonage the lines carrying potable water. 4 RAW MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS 4.1 Environmental
Sanitation Food Production Area in Growing

with

and

The building shall be maintained in a proper state of repair and clcanlincss at all times. Whenever required, it may bc lime washed, painted, disin* fcctcd, disinfested and dcydorized. 3.7 Ihhge Effcctivc drainage should be provided to drain off a large quantity of water used for washing the raw marcrinl, machincty equipment, tables, floor, etc; IS to 30 cm half circular drains with glazed pipe at the bottom should bc provided. The slope of the lloor should hc towards the drains and the farthest end of the floor from the drains should not be more than 5 m. The drain openings should be provided with screen traps to prcvcnt solid matter fromclogging the drains. The ends of the drains leading to the outside of the factory should be made rodentproof by providing screens. The screens shall be examined periodically and replaced or cleaned, if .ncccssary. The drains should have water seals of minimum S cm dia. At least 50 percent of the length of the drain should be covered to facilitate the movement of trolleys. Mesh type cover for the drain should be better to prevent habitation of cockroaches and rodents in closed areas of the drain. 3.8 Water Supply
3.8.1 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and potable water (see IS 4251 : 1967). Running water

4.1.1 Sanitary Disposal of Human Waste

and Animal

Adequate precautions should be taken to ensure that human and animal wastes are disposed off in such a manner as not to constitute a public health or hygienic hazard, and extreme care should be taken to protect the product from contamination with these wastes. 4.1.2 Sanitary Quality of Irrigation Water. Water used for irrigation should not constitute a public health hazard to the consumer through the product. 4.1.3 Animal, Plant, Pest and Disease Control Where control measures are undertaken, treatment with chemical, biological or physical agents should be done only in accordance with the recommendations of the appropriate official agency, by or under the direct supervision of personnel with a thorough understanding of the hazards involved, including the possibility of toxic residues being retained by the crop. 4.2 Sanitary Harvesting and Food Production
4.2.1 Equipment and Product Containers

under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms and areas in which food is handled and equipment is washed. 3.X.2 The cquipmcnt shall be so installed and used that backsiphonage of liquid into the potable water lint is precluded. 3.8.3 The storage tanks for water should, unless completely sealed, be kept covered with tight fitting lids, cxamincd regularly and cleaned at least once cvcry six months. The date of the last cleaning and next cleaning shall hc prominently.displaced on the storage tanks. 3.8.4 The water shalt bc periodically examined as dcsircd by the Licensing Authority chemically and hactcriotogically. A record of such examination shall bc maintained.

Equipment and product containers should not constitute a hazard to health. Containers which are reused should be of such material and construction as will facilitate thorough cleaning, and should be so cleaned and maintained as not to constitute a source of contamination to the product. 4.2.2 Sanitary Techniques Harvesting and production operations, methods and procedures should be clean and sanitary. 4.2.3 Removal of Obviously Unfit Materials Unfit products should be segregated during harvesting and production to the fullest extent p#acticable and should be disposed off in such a place and in such `a manner that they cannot result in contamination of the food and water supplies or other crops. 4.2.4 Protection of Product from Contamination Suitable precautions should be taken to protect the raw product from being contaminated by animals,
2

Whcrc non-potabtcwatcr is used for such purposes as fire control it must be carried in completely separate lines, identified prcfcrably by colour and

1s 14135 : 1994

insects, wrmin, birds, chemicals or microbiological contaminants or other objcctionahlc substance during handling and storage. The nature of the product and the method of harvesting will indicate the type and dcgrcc of protection required. 4.3 `i'ransport:rtiolr 4.3. I Fmilitics Convcyanccs Ibr transporting the harvcstcd cropor raw product from the production arca, place of harvest or storage should bc ildCqUatC for the purpost intcndcd and should bc of such malcrial and construction as will pcrmil thorough cleaning and should bc so clcancd and m:rimaincd as not to cons~ilulc iI source of contamination to the product.

remove the pollutants from the air blown across or through the product. 6 GISNERAI, HYGIENE
6.1 For general cleanliness, all the floors shall bc

swept and washed with detergent at least once in a shift. 6.2 Waste and rubbish shall be collected in covered rcceptaclcs and shall not be allowed to scatter on the floor of the unit. It shall be disposed off in a manner which is not detrimental to the hyiicnc of the surroundings after its disposal. 6.3 Adequate mcasurcs shall bc taken to prcvcnl mould growth on cyuipmcnt and internal strutturcs of processing and storage rooms. Adcquatc steps shall be taken to prcvcnt infcslation by cockroaches and other households pests. 6.4 When pesticides arc used, due cart shall bc exercised to prcvcnl contamination of cyuipmcnt, raw materials and packaging materials. Under no circumstances shall any pcsticidcs bc used during processing. 6.5 Floors and drains shall bc kept clean. The drains shall bc made pucca with proper slope and bc swept and washed periodically in order to keep them free from any deposits. The deposits provide suitable substrate for fast growth of the mioro-organisms. 6.6 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and potable water. The storage tank for water shall, unlesscompletclyscaled, be kept covcrcdwith tight fitting lids, examined and cleaned regularly. 6.7 Proper places shall be provided for storage of brooms, brushes, buckets and other cleaning gear. 6.8 Window glass and light fittings shall be maintaincd clean and dust-free at all times. 6.9 There shall be no cobwebs in any part of the funit. Birds and domestic animals shall not be allowed in any part of the unit. 6.10 No lavatory, sink, cesspool or garbage shall bc so situated or maintained that odours or fumes therefrom pervade any room where the product or raw materials are prcparcd or stored. 6.11 Thcdoorsandwindowsshall bcsuch that they would not allow entry of flies or any other type of crawling insccls and birds. 6.12 The factory cflluents shall be disposed ofl from the factory in a manner which is not dctrimcntal to the hygiene of the factory and its surroundings. The effluents shall not bc let off on road or in the open outsidc thy filctoty prcmiscs.
3

All handling procedures should be such as will prevent the product from being eontaminatcd. Extrcmc cart should bc taken in transporting perishable products to prcvcnt spoilage or deterioration. Special equipment - such as refrigeration equipmcnt - should bc used if the nature of the product or distances involved so indicate. 5 1'1,AN'T AN I) EQULI'MKNT IIYGIENF
5.1 Material

free from pits, crevices and loose scale; npn-toxic; unaffccted by food products; capable of withstanding repeated exposure to normal cleaning; and non-absorbent unless the nature of a particular and otherwise acceptable process renders the use of a surface, such as wood, necessary. 5.2 Sanitary
tion Design, Construction and Installa-

All food contact surface should be smooth;

Equipment and utensils should bc so designed and constructed as will prevent hygienic hazards and permit easy and thorough cleaning. Stationary equipment should be installed in such a manner as will permit easy and thorough cleaning. 5.3 Equipment
and Utensils

Equipment and utensils used for incdiblc or contaminating materials should be so identified and should not be used for handling edible products. 5.4 Construction
of Drying Equipment

Equipment used for drying should bc so construclcd and opcratcd that the product cannot be advcrscly affccled by the drying medium. 5.5 In arcas cxpcriencing high concentration of airborne pollulants, equipment shall bc used to

IS 14135 : 1994 7 OPERATION PRACTICES TION REQUIREMENTS 7.1 Raw Material Handling 7.1,1 Acceptance Criteria AND PRODUC7.6 Preservation of Finished Product

Only sound and wholesome raw materials should be used. Raw materials should not be accepted by the plant if known to contain decomposed toxic or extraneous substances which will not be removed to acceptable levels by normal plant procedures of sorting or preparation. 7.1.2 Storage ' Raw materials stored in the plant premises should be maintained under conditions that will protect them against contamination and infestation and minimize deterioration. 7.2 Inspection and Sorting `Prior to introduction into the processing line, or at a convenient point within it, raw materials should be inspected, sorted or culled as required to remove unfit materials. Such operations should be carried out in a clean and sanitary manner. Only clean, sound materials should be used in further processing. 7.3 Washing or Other Preparation Raw materials should be washed as needed to remove soil or other contamination. Water used for such purposes should not be recirculated unless suitably treated to maintain it in a condition as will not constitute a public health hazard. Water used for washing, rinsing or conveying final food products should be of potable quality. 7.4 Prepnration and Processing Preparatory operations leading to the finished product and the packaging operations should be so timed as to permit expeditious handling of consecutive units in production under conditions which would prevent contamination, deterioration, spoilage, or the development of infectious or toxigenic micro-organisms. 7.5 Packaging of Finished Product
7.5.1 Materials

Methods of preservation or treatment of the finished product should be such as to kill any insects or mites remaining after processing and to result in protection against contamination, deterioration, or development of a public health hazard. The finished product should be of such moisture content that it can be held in the localities of origin and distrubution under anjl normally foreseeable conditions for those localities without significant deterioration by decay, mould, enzymatic changes, or other causes. 7.7 Storage and Transport of Finished Products The finished products should be stored and transported under such conditions as will preclude the contamination with or development of pathogenic or toxigenic micro-organisms and protect against rodent and insect infestation and deterioration of the product or of the container. The product should be stored under a) suitable conditions of time, tcmpcraturc, humidity, and atmosphere, to prcvcnt significant deterioration. Humidity control is of primary importance for dehydrated/ dried product. Where dehydrated products arc stored b) under conditions in which they may become infested by insects and mites, appropriate methods of protection should bc used regularly. The dehydrated products should be stored in such a manner that thay can be fumigated in situ or so stored that they can be removed elsewhere for fumigation in special facilities (for example, fumigation chambers, steel, barges, etc). Cold storage can be used, either to prevent infestation in localities where insects are likely to be present in ordinary storage or to prevent insects damaging the product. 8 HYGIENE CONTROL PROCEDURE
8.1 Sanitation Control Programme It is desirable that each plant designates a single individual, whose duties are preferably different from production, to be held responsible for the cleanliness of the plant. His staff should be a permanent part of the organization and should be well trained in the use of special cleaning tools, methods of disassembling equipment for cleaning, and in the significance of contamination and the hazards involved. Critical arcas, cquipmcnt and materials should be designated for specific attention as part of a permanent sanitation schedule.
4

The packaging materials should be stored in a clean and.sanitary manner. The packaging material should provide appropriate protection from contamination and should not permit objectionable substances to the product beyond limits acceptable to the official agency having jurisdiction.
7.5.2 Techniques

The packaging should be done under conditions that preclude the introduction of contamination into the product.

IS14l3!5:
83 Lahoratoly c0nt.ro1 Procedures

1994

InadditiontoanycontrolbytheotIicialagency~g jurisdiction, it is desirable that each plant in its own interest should have access to laboratory control of the sanitary quality of the products prooessed The amount and type of such control will vary with the food product as well as the needs of management Such control should reject all foods that are unlit for human consumption. Analytical procedures used should follow recognised or standard methods in order that the results may be readily interpreted. 9 EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 9.1 Every person employed for handling of' raw materials and end products and in packing section in the factory shall be medically examined by an authorized registered medical practitioner and the examination shall include X-ray of the chest for tuberculosis. The examination shall also include: examination of stool for protozoa1 and helminthic infestation for those parasites which are transmitted by ingestion, and for the presence of Salmonella, Shigella species and Vibro cholerae. Subsequently, the employee shall be medically examined once in a year or more frequently; if necessary, to ensure that he/she is medically fit and free from communicable diseases. A record of such examination shall be, maintained. 9.1.1 It shall be impressed on all employees that they should notify the medical officer or management, cases of fever, vomitting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentary, boils, cuts and sores and ulcers (however small), discharging ears and notifiable diseases occurring in their own homes and families. 9.1.2 No worker who is suspected to be suffering from any of the .disorders listed above shall be permitted to work inside the unit. The supervisor shall check the personal hygiene of the workers befeore the start of work and whenever they enter any processing room after any absence. 9.2 Employees shall keep their finger nails short and clean and wash their hands with soap or detergent and water before commencing work and after each absence, specially after using sanitary conveniences. Towels used for drying hands should be clean. No worker shall allow his hands or any part

of his body or clothing to come in contact with the food. He/she should adopt strict hygienic practices so as to avoid adding any microbial contamination to the material. Women employees shall keep their hair tied into a knot under head gear. 9.3 All employees shall be `inoculated and vaccinated against the emetic groups of diseases once a year. In case of an epidemic, all workers shall be inoculated. A record shall be maintained. 9.4 No worker shall be allowed to work without proper clothing and foot wear. 9.!l Employees shall be provided with clean uniforms (preferably white) or aprons or both mouth masks and clean washable caps where necessary. 9.51 Separate room or place for changing the clothes shall be provided. The clothes shall not be hung in any processing room. 9.6 Bating, spitting, nose cleaning or the use of tobacco in any form or chewing betel leaves shall be prohibited within the manufacturing, packing and storage area of the unit. Notice to this effect shall be prominently displayed and enforced. 9.7 Sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences shall be provided, maintained and kept clean in every factory. The conveniences shall be properly lighted. Separate conveniences shall be provided for each sex No convenience shall open directly into any work room in the factory. The conveniences shall always be maintained clean and in good repairs. 9.8 Sufficient number of wash basins with adequate provision of nail brushes, soap, and towels, shall be installed in or alongside the sanitary conveniences. 10 CHECK LIST FOR HYGIENE AND SANITATION 10.1 A check list for use by a responsible officer of the management is given in Annex B. It shall be used at regular intervals to ensure hygienic sanitation and safety measures.

ANNEX

A

( czLzz4se 2)
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS
IS No.

Title C&e of practice for industrial veutilation (first revision) 5

IS No.

Title

3103 : 1975

3645 (Part 1) : code of practice for interior illumination: Part 1 General re1992

1s 14135 : 1994

IS No.

Title quirements & recommendations for working interior (first revision)

IS No.

Title

3646 (Part 2) : Code of practice for interior il1%6 lumination : Part 2 Schedule of illumination and glare index

3646 (Part 3) : code of practice for interior illumination : Part 3 Cakulation of coefficient 1%8 of utilisation by the B2 methods 42.51: 1%7 Quality tolerance for water processed food industry. for

ANNEXB ( Clause 10.1)
CHECK LIST FOR HYGIENIC PRACTICES FOR PROCESSING DEHYDRATED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES INCLUDING B-l B-l.1 B-l.2 SITE Are there any sources producing obnoxious fumes, smoke, odours or excessive dust nearby? Any cattle sheds/garbage dumps/tannery and open sewage drains nearby? Yes/No AND HANDLING EDIBLE FUNGI OF

Yes/No Yes/No YeS/NO
Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No

B-2 BUILDING B-2.1 B-2.2 B-2.3 B-2.4 B-2.5 B-2.6 B-2.7 B-2.8 B-2.9 B-2.10 B-3.1 B-3.2 B-3.3 B-3.4 B-3.5 B-3.6 B-3.7 B-3.8 B-3.9 B-3.10
B-4.1 Is the structure of permanent nature and of suitable size to house the entire infrastructure? Is the building rodent-proof, fly-proof, insect-proof and bird-proof? Is any part of the building being used for domestic purposes/food preparations without proper partitions? Are the premises adequately lighted and ventilated? Are the floors smooth and clean and being maintained properly without any breakages/crevices? Are the roofs/ceilings free of water leakage? Are the doorsMndows having proper netting/mesh? Are schedule repairs, white-washing, disinfection being carried out regularly? Are the lights shielded to prevent broken glasses contaminating the product? Is the drainage system satisfactory?

Yes/No
Yes/No

Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No
Yes/No

B-3 RAW MATERIAL Is the produce cultivated in proper surroundings? Does the water quality used for irrigation constitute a public hazard through the product to consumer? Are the disease control measures during irrigation taken as per the recommcndations of the concerned authorities? Is the produce harvested with equipment that does not constitute a hazard to health? Arc all the unfit materials disposed off suitably? Is the raw product protcctcd from contamination? Do the techniques used in handling products prevent contamination of the product? Arc the raw materials received and stored separately from the finished product? Is sorting done to remove unfit materials before processing? Is raw material washed by using potable water?
AND GENERAL HYGIENE Yes/No Are all the surfaces coming in contact with food smooth, free from pits, crevices, loose scales ctc?

Yes/No
Yes/No Yes/No

Yes/No Yes/No
Yes/No Yes/No

B-4 PLANT, EQUIPMENT

6

IS 14135 : 1994 B-4.2 B-4.3 B-4.4 B-4.5 B-4.6 B-4.7 B-4.8 B-4.9 B-4.10 B-4.11 B-4.12 B-4.13 B-4.14 B-4.15 B-4.16 B-4.17 B-4.18 Are these surfaces made of non-absorbent and non-toxic material? Is the equipment so designed and constructed that it permits easy and thorough cleaning? Is the equipment used for inedible or contaminating material identified and kept separately? Does the drying medium adversely affect the product? In.areas of high air pollution, is the air used for drying made pollutant free before use? Are the floors swept/washed with detergent at least once a shift? Is the waste and rubbish kept in covered receptacles before disposal? Is there any mould growth on the internal structures of processing and storage rooms? Are the premises kept free from cockroaches and other household pests and rodents? Are the drains cleaned regularly? Are the doors and windows properly protected to prevent the entry of flies? Is the processing area free from dust, cobwebs, domestic animals and odours, fumes, etc Are all the parts of equipment coming into contract with food, sanitized before use? Is there adequate supply of potable water? Is the potable water stored in clean storage tank and examined regularly? Is the water being analysed for its potability and record of such analysis being maintained? In case non-potable water is used for .other purpose (like fire fighting), are there separate lines for the same? PACKlNG AND STORAGE
Yes/No

Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No
Yes/No

Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No
Yes/No Yes/No

Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No
Yes/No

B-5 PROCESSING, B-5.1

B-5.2 B-5.3 B-5.4

Is the process of drying right from preparatory operation till packing so planned that it prevents contamination, deterioration, spoilage of the product or development of infectious or toxigenic micro-organisms? Is the packing material stored in a clean and sanitary manner? Does the method of preservation provide protection against contamination and deterioration of the product? Are the finished products stored under proper conditions and protected against spoilage? PROCEDURES

Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No

B-6 CONTROL AND MONITORING B-6.1 B-6.2 B-6.3 B-6.4

Is there a defined sanitation schedule? Is it being followed? Is the responsibility for cleanlinessvested in a specifically trained person with supporting staff? Is there laboratory cantrol of the sanitary quality of the products processed? Are there defined analytical procedures for rcjcction of products that are unfit for human consumption?

Yes/No

Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No

B-7 EMPLOYEE HYGIENE B-7.1 B-7.2 B-7.3 B-7.4 Are the employees being subjected to complete medical examination by authorised Registered Medical Practitioner at least once an year? Is record of medical examination of employees maintained? Are cases of fever, vomitting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentry, boils, cuts, sores, ulcers or any other notifiable diseases reported by the employees? Arc any of the employees suffering from any of the above disorders allowed to work inside the unit? 7
YcsfNo Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No

IS 14135 : 1994 B-7.5
B-7.6 B-7.7 B-7.8 B-7.9 B-7.10 B-7.11 B-7.12 B-7.13 B-7.14

Are the employees inocculated and vaccinated against the enteric group of diseases once a year and record maintained thereof? Are the employees keeping finger nails short and clean? Are the employees washing their hands with soap or detergent, especially after using sanitary conveniences? Is any employee chewing tobacco, smoking, eating or drinking in manufacturing, packing and storage area? Are the employees wearing washed and clean uniform? Are the employees wearing head gears. Arc the fcmalc cmployccs keeping their hair tied under the head gear? Are sufficient number of sanitary conveniences and wash basins provided for the employees? Is there adequate water supply, soaps/detergents available for sanitary conveniences? Arc there adequate provisions for drying hands after washing? Are the floors and wash basins of toilets being thoroughly cleaned?

Yes/No

Yes/No
Yes/No Yes/No

Yes/No
Y&No Yes/No

Yes/No
Yes/No
Yes/No

Burcrcl of Indian Standards BIS isa statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harnmnions development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to coneected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these pubfications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude he free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises pn. the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically: a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to thd,latest issne of `BIS Hand&x&' and `Standards Monthly Additions'.
This lndian Standard has been developed from,& : ~0. FAD 45 ( 250 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Arryind No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Afar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 33101 31,331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha Common to all offices) Telephone 3310131 331 1375 37 84 99, 37 85 61 G 7 86 26, 37 86 62 53 38 43, 53 53 1 35 02 16, 235 r 235 15 19, 235 16 40 23 84 04 42 23 15

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054
: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600 113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 400093

632 92 95, 632 78 58 1 6327891, 6327892

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Ik.l~~-110015, India

