WaT HTA IS 16646 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


gda dam tre (uaii) & 
fet Rasta ana yA: at a 
are tte ua fafetst — faferfte 


Transportable Refillable Fully 
Wrapped Composite Cylinders for 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) — 

Specification 


ICS 23.020.30; 75.160.30 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM Rt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF FS, 9 FGM WAL At, ae fereit-110002 
Hrib m MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2017 Price Group 9 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas Cylinders 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


The purpose of this standard is to provide specification for design, manufacture, inspection and testing of fully 
wrapped fibre in forced composite cylinders used for filling, storage and transportation of LPG. 


While formulating this standard, considerable assistance have been derived from ISO 11119-3 : 2013 ‘Gas 
cylinders — Refillable composite gas cylinders and tubes — Design, construction and testing — Part 3: Fully 
wrapped fibre reinforced composite gas cylinders and tubes up to 450 litre with non-load-sharing metallic or non- 
metallic liners’. 


This standard is applicable only for composite cylinders with non-metallic liners (Type 4 cylinders). 
Type of cylinders for LPG: 


a) Type! Metal cylinders, 

b) Type2 Metal lined hoop wrapped composite cylinders, 

c) Type3 Metal lined full wrapped composite cylinders, 

d) Type4 Non-metal lined full wrapped composite cylinders, and 
e) Type5 Full wrapped composite cylinders without liner. 


This standard refers only to technical sustainability and does not absolve the user from legal obligation relating to 
health and safety at any stage. 


While implementing this standard, the manufacturer and the inspection agency shall ensure compliance with 
statutory regulations. It is the responsibility of the owners and the users to ensure that the cylinders are periodically 
tested as per norms laid down in Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 as amended from time-to-time and as enforced by 
statutory authorities under the rules. 


The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 
Pressure 1Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 
1 kgf/mm? 9.806 65 MPa 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded offin accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16646 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


TRANSPORTABLE REFILLABLE FULLY WRAPPED 
COMPOSITE CYLINDERS FOR LIQUEFIED 
PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard deals with fully wrapped fiber reinforced 
composite cylinders with non-metallic non-load sharing 
liner (Type 4 cylinders) intended for storage and 
transportation of liquefied petroleum gases (see IS 
4576) exposed to ambient temperature and with the 
test pressure of 30 bar of nominal capacity exceeding 
0.5 litre up to and including 150 litre water capacity. 
This standard specifies the minimum requirements for 
the materials, design, manufacture, construction, 
inspection, testing and marking on these cylinders. 


This standard is applicable to fully wrapped fiber 
reinforced non-metallic non-load sharing liner 
reinforced by fibres of glass, carbon or aramid or 
combination thereof. 
NOTE — This standard does not address the design, fitting 
and performance of removable protective sleeves or fixed 


protective casing, wherever external casing are fitted should 
meet the test requirements prescribed in this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
were valid. All standards are subject to revision and 
parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standards indicated 
below. 


IS No./ Title 
International 

Standard 
4576 : 1999 Liquefied petroleum gases — 
13360 : 2013 Specification (second revision) 
(in Various Method of testing mechanical 
Parts) properties 


IS/ISO 11114-1 : Transportable gas cylinders — 
2012 Compatibility of cylinder and valve 
materials with gas contents — Part 1: 
Metallic materials 
IS/ISO 11114-2 : Transportable gas cylinders — 
2013 Compatibility of cylinder and valve 
materials with gas contents — Part 2: 
Non-metallic material 


IS No./ 
International 
Standard 
ISO 75-3 : 2004 Plastics — Determination of 
temperature of deflection under 
load — Part 3: High-strength 
thermosetting laminates and long- 
fibre-reinforced plastics 

ISO 3341: 2000 Textile glass — Yarns — 
Determination of breaking force and 
breaking elongation 

ISO 8521 : 2009 Plastics piping systems — Glass- 
reinforced thermosetting plastics 
(GRP) pipes — Test methods for the 
determination of the apparent initial 
circumferential tensile strength 


Title 


ISO 14130: Fibre-reinforced plastic composites — 
1994 Determination of apparent inter 
laminar shear strength by short-beam 
method 
ASTM D Standard Test Methods for 
2196-15 Rheological Properties of Non- 
Newtonian Materials by Rotational 
Viscometer 
ASTM D Standard Test Method for Apparent 
2290-16 Hoop Tensile Strength of Plastic or 
Reinforced Plastic Pipe 
ASTM D Standard Practice for Fabrication of 
2291-16 Ring Test Specimens for Glass-Resin 
Composites 
ASTM D Standard Test Method for Tensile 
2343-09 Properties of Glass Fiber Strands, 
Yarns, and Rovings Used in 
Reinforced Plastics 
ASTM D Standard Test Method for Short- 
2344-16 Beam Strength of Polymer Matrix 
Composite Materials and Their 
Laminates 
ASTM D Standard Test Method for Transition 
3418-15 Temperatures and Enthalpies of 
Fusion and Crystallization of 
Polymers by Differential Scanning 
Calorimetry 
ASTM D Standard Test Methods for Properties 
4018-17 of Continuous Filament Carbon and 


Graphite Fiber Tows 


IS 16646 : 2017 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions apply. 


3.1 Ambient Temperature — Temperature of 
surroundings 


3.2 Aramid Fibre — Continuous filament of aramid 
laid up in tow form. 


3.3 Batch of Non-metallic Liners — Quantity of a 
maximum of 2 000 liners having the same nominal 
diameter, length, thickness and design, made 
successively from the same batch of materials and 
subjected to the same manufacturing process. 


3.4 Batch of Finished Cylinders — Quantity of up to 
200 finished cylinders plus cylinders for destructive 
testing, successively produced by the same 
manufacturing process of the same nominal diameter, 
thickness, length and design which may contain 
different batches of liners (providing the batches are 
nominally the same and have had the same treatments), 
fibres and matrix materials. 


3.5 Burst Pressure — Highest pressure reached in a 
liner or cylinder during the relevant burst test. 


3.6 Carbon Fibre — Continuous filaments of carbon 
laid up in a tow form. 


3.7 Composite Overwrap — Combination of fibres 
and matrix. 


3.8 Equivalent Fibre — Fibre manufactured from the 
same nominal raw materials, using the same process of 
manufacture and having the same physical structure and 
the same nominal physical properties, and where the 
average tensile strength and modulus is within +5 
percent of the fibre properties in an approved cylinder 
design (see Annex A). 


3.9 Equivalent Liner — Liner that are manufactured 
from the same nominal raw materials, using the same 
process of manufacture and having the same physical 
structure and the same nominal physical properties as 
in an approved cylinder design (see Annex A). 


3.10 Exterior Coating — Layers of material applied 
to the cylinder as protection or for cosmetic purposes. 


3.11 Glass Fibre — Continuous filaments of glass 
laid up in a tow form. 


3.12 Liner — Inner portion of the composite cylinder, 
comprising a non-metallic vessel, whose purpose is both 
to contain the gas and transmit the gas pressure to the 
fibres. 


3.13 Matrix — Material that is used to bind and hold 
the fibres in place. 


3.14 Non-load Sharing Liner — Liner that has a burst 
pressure less than 5 percent of the nominal burst 
pressure of the finished composite cylinder. 


3.15 Thermoplastic Material — Plastics capable of 
being repeatedly softened by increase of temperature 
and hardened by decrease of temperature. 


3.16 Thermosetting Material — Plastics that when 
cured by the application of heat or chemical means, 
harden permanently into a substantially infusible and 
insoluble product. 


3.17 Nominal Outside Diameter — Diameter of the 
cylinder specified by the manufacturer for the type 
approval including tolerances (for example +1 percent). 


3.18 Working Pressure — Settled pressure of a 
compressed gas at a reference temperature of 15°C in 
a full gas cylinder. 


3.19 Removable Protective Sleeve — External sleeve 
intended to provide protection to the cylinder during 
operation which is not integral part of the design, not 
permanently fixed to the cylinder but which can be 
removed during service without destroying the sleeve. 


3.20 Protective Casing — A transparent/opaque/ 
coloured protective case fixed on cylinder to keep it in 
upright position and protect cylinder and valve from 
external damage. 


3.21 Finished Cylinder — Fully wrapped composite 
cylinder with protective casing. 


3.22 Cylinder — Composite cylinder complete with 
liner, metal boss and fibre reinforcement. 


3.23 Test Pressure — For this application, test pressure 
is 30 bar. 


3.17 Fibre Tow — It is an untwisted bundle of 
continuous filaments. 


4 SYMBOLS AND UNITS 


4.1 Symbols and Their Designations 


Symbol Designation Unit 
P, Burst pressure of liner Bar 
Pi Burst pressure of finished cylinder Bar 
P, Test pressure Bar 
Pax Maximum developed pressure at 65°C Bar 
P, Working pressure Bar 

5 GENERAL 


A fully dimensioned sectional drawing of the cylinder, 
together with material used, design calculations, 
construction and scheme of manufacture, shall be 
submitted by the manufacturer to the inspecting agency, 


for final approval of the statutory authority.Finite 
element analysis shall be part of type approval test. 


6 MATERIALS 
6.1 General 


The materials used for manufacture of composite 
cylinders shall be of uniform and consistent quality. 
The composite cylinder manufacturer shall verify that 
each new batch of material has the correct properties 
and is of satisfactory quality and maintain records, from 
which the batch of materials used for the manufacture 
of each cylinder can be identified. 


The manufacturer shall collect documentation from the 
suppliers of raw materials to be able to identify the 
batch of materials used in the manufacture of cylinders 
and shall ensure that their properties meet the design 
requirements. 


Materials for each part of the cylinder shall be 
compatible with Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) and 
as specified in ISSO 11114-land IS/ISO 11114-2. 


6.2 Liner Material 


The liner (including metal boss) shall be manufactured 
from the material compatible with the liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG). The liner material shall be 
evaluated by the manufacturer as suitable for the 
application and approved by the statutory authority. 


Metal boss, made of forged metal, attached to a non- 
metallic liner shall fulfil the performance requirement 
of this standard. 


6.3 Composite Materials 


The overwrap material shall be carbon fibre or glass 
fibre or aramid fibre, or any combination thereof. 


The matrix shall be a polymer suited to the application, 
environment and intended life of the composite 
cylinders for example epoxy or modified epoxy with 
Amine or Anhydride curing agents. 


Batches of the material shall be identifiable and 
documented for traceability 


7 DESIGN AND MANUFACTURE 


7.1 General 


Fully wrapped composite cylinders for LPG shall be 
manufactured with non-metallic non-load sharing liner. 
The cylinder shall have following parts: 


a) An internal non-metallic liner, 
b) Metal boss for thread connections, 


c) A composite overwrap formed by layers of 
continuous fibre in the matrix, and 


d) An external protection casing. 


IS 16646 : 2017 


The thickness of the cylinder including the liner shall 
be determined by satisfactory completion of the 
performance test described in 9. 


The cylinder may also include an external coating and/ 
or additional parts such as valve shrouds/handles, bases, 
cages. Where these are integral part of the design, they 
shall be fixed to the cylinder such that they cannot be 
removed without the use of special tools only by the 
manufacturer or the testing stations approved by the 
statutory authority. 


The location of openings for service connection shall 
be restricted to one end of the cylinder and it shall be 
along the central axis only. Where it is necessary for 
production reasons to have an opening on both ends, 
the non- service opening shall be permanently sealed 
before completion of the cylinder. 


7.2 The fully wrapped composite cylinder for LPG 
with a non-load sharing non-metallic liner shall be 
designed for non-limited life. 


The re-qualification period for these cylinders shall be 
as approved by the statutory authority. 


7.3 The cylinders shall be designed to be suitable for 
the temperature range of —40°C to 65°C. The design 
shall bear the temperatures beyond this range during 
filling or discharge for short duration. 


7.4 Liners 


The liner (including metal boss) shall be manufactured 
from a material suitable for the gas to be contained as 
per ISSO 11114-1 and IS/ISO 11114-2. Furthermore, 
the liner materials shall be evaluated by the 
manufacturer and approved by the statutory authority 
as suitable for the specific application. Metal bosses 
attached to a non-metallic liner shall fulfil the 
performance requirements of this standard. 


The materials used for manufacture of liner shall be of 
uniform and consistent quality. The composite cylinder 
manufacturer shall verify that each batch of material 
has the properties as declared and is of satisfactory 
quality and maintain records, from which the batch of 
materials used for the manufacture of each liner can be 
identified. 


The manufacturer shall collect documentation from the 
suppliers of raw materials to be able to identify the 
batch of materials used in the manufacture of cylinders 
and shall ensure that their properties meet the design 
requirements. 


7.5 Composite Overwrap 


7.5.1 The overwrap materials shall be carbon fibre or 
aramid fibre or glass fibre, or combination thereof. 


IS 16646 : 2017 


The suppliers of the filament material, the matrix 
component materials and, if applicable, the adhesive 
component material shall provide sufficient 
documentation for the composite cylinder manufacturer 
to be able to identify fully the batch of materials used 
in the manufacture of each cylinder. 


The materials used for manufacture of composite 
overwrap shall be of uniform and consistent quality. 
The composite cylinder manufacturer shall verify that 
each batch of material has the properties as declared 
and is of satisfactory quality and maintain records, from 
which the batch of materials used for the manufacture 
of each composite overwrap can be identified. 


The manufacturer shall collect documentation from the 
suppliers of raw materials to be able to identify the 
batch of materials used in the manufacture of cylinders 
and shall ensure that their properties meet the design 
requirements. 


Batches of the material shall be identifiable and 
documented for traceability. 


7.5.2 Winding 


Procedure shall be defined for the winding and curing 
process to ensure good repeatability and traceability. 


For all cylinders, the following parameters shall be 
defined and monitored: 


a) Batch number of fiber used; 

b) Number of strand used; 

c) Winding tension of strand; 

d) Winding speed; 

e) Winding angle and/or pitch for each layer; 

f) The number and order of layer; 

g) Percentages of the components of the matrix 
system and their batch number; 

h) Resin bath temperature range; and 

j) The procedure used to obtain correct 
impregnation. 


7.5.3 Protective Casing 


All the cylinders shall have a protective casing to keep 
it in upright position and protect cylinder and valve 
from external damages. 


The shape/construction and material shall be designed 
by the manufacturer and shall meet the requirement 
of 9.12, 9.22 and 9.23. 


NOTE — An external sleeve may be fixed intended to protect 
the cylinder during operation, which is not an integral part of 
the cylinder, which can be removed during service. 


7.6 Design Submission 


The design submission for each new design of cylinder 
shall include a detailed drawing along with 


documentation of the design including materials, 
manufacturing and inspection particulars as detailed 
in 7.6.1, 7.6.2 and 7.6.3. 


7.6.1 Liner and Metal Boss(es) 


Following documentation for the liner and metal 
boss(es) shall be include (but not be limited to): 


a) Material, including limits of chemical 
analysis; 

b) Dimensions, minimum thickness, straightness 
and out of roundness with tolerances; 

c) Process and specification of manufacture; 

d) Inspection 
requirements); 


procedures (minimum 

e) Material properties; 

f) Dimensional details of valve threads and any 
other permanent features; and 


g) Method of sealing boss to liner for bonded 
bosses. 


7.6.2 Composite Overwrap 


Following documentation for composite overwrap shall 
be included (but not be limited to): 


a) Fiber material, specification and mechanical 
properties requirements; 

b) Minimum composite thickness; 

c) Thermosetting matrix — specifications 
(including resin, curing agent and accelerator) 
and resin batch temperature where applicable; 

d) Thermoplastic matrix system — main 
component materials, specifications and 
process temperatures; 

e) Overwrap construction including the number 
of strands used, number of layers, layer 
orientation and tensioning of the fiber at 
wrapping where applicable; and 

f) Curing process, temperatures, duration and 
tolerances. 

7.6.3 Finished Composite Cylinder 


Following documentation for the finished composite 
cylinder shall be include (but not be limited to): 


a) Nominal water capacity in litres at ambient 
conditions; 

b) List of intended contents if intended for 
dedicated gas service; 

c) Working pressure, P „that shall not exceed 2/3 
times test pressure; 

d) Test pressure, P,; 

e) Minimum design burst pressure; 

f) Design life in years; 

g) Nominal weight of the finished composite 
cylinder, including tolerances; 


h) Details of components which are permanently 
attached and form part of the qualified design 
(for example neck rings, protective boots, 
casing etc); and 

j) Change of structural design of protective 
casing. 


7.7 Manufacturing 


The liner and metal boss wherein incorporated shall 
be manufactured in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
design as approved by the statutory authority. 


The composite cylinders shall be fabricated using a non- 
load sharing liner fully overwrapped with layers of 
continuous fibers in a matrix applied under controlled 
tension to develop the design, composite thickness as 
specified in 7.6.2. 


After wrapping is completed the composite shall be cured 
using a controlled temperature profile as specified in 
the documentation. The maximum temperature shall be 
such that the mechanical properties of the liner material 
and composite overwrap are not adversely affected. 


The internal and external surface of the finished 
cylinder shall be free of defects which can adversely 
affect the safe working of the cylinder. There shall be 
no visible foreign matter (for example resin, water, 
plastic particles, foreign particles or other debris) 
present inside the cylinder. 


NOTE — If cylinders are subjected to fibre tensioning during 
wrapping, the tensioning shall be monitored and recorded. 


8 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL AND 
CERTIFICATION 


8.1General 


This section describes tests to be conducted on fully 
wrapped composite cylinders, cylinder liners and the 
material used in the manufacture of cylinders for: 


a) prototype testing of new cylinder design; 
b) design variant testing; and 
c) production testing. 
The lists of tests which are mandatory or optional are 


identified in the schedule of testing and inspection in 
Table 1. 


Prototype testing or design variant shall be approved 
by statutory authority. 
NOTE — Appropriate safety precautions should be taken in 
order to reduce the risk to testing person while handling / testing 
pressurized cylinders. If necessary, during positioning and 


handling of cylinders, they can be depressurized between 
individual tests. 


8.2 Prototype Testing of Cylinder Design 


8.2.1 Prototype testing shall be carried out on each 
new design of cylinder. 


IS 16646 : 2017 


All the tests shall be carried out on cylinders of identical 
design (that is materials, liner, and manufacturing 
process) from the same factory (where approval is 
granted).The tests shall be performed on cylinders 
having the same nominal dimensions (that is same 
diameter, length, liner wall thickness and composite 
thickness). 


8.2.2 A minimum of 30 cylinders that are guaranteed 
by the manufacturer to be representative of the new 
design, shall be made available for prototype testing. 
Inspector shall select and mark the cylinder for various 
tests. 


8.2.3 The inspector shall verify that the batch of liners, 
prior to being wrapped, complies with the design 
requirements and is inspected and tested in accordance 
with 10.1 


8.2.4 The inspector shall verify that the composite 
material(s) prior to the cylinders being wrapped, 
comply with the design requirements and are tested in 
accordance with 10.2 


8.2.5 The inspector shall verify that all cylinders in 
the batch produced for new design approval comply 
with the design submission and are tested in accordance 
with 9. 


8.2.6 Following tests shall be conducted for type 
approval tests: 


i) Liner material test , in accordance with 9.1; 


ii) Composite material test, in accordance 
with 9.2; 


iii) Liner burst test, in accordance with 9.3; 
iv) Hydraulic proof test, in accordance with 9.4; 
v) Resin shear test, in accordance with 9.5; 
vi) Cylinder burst test, in accordance, with 9.6; 


vii) | Ambient pressure cycle test, in accordance 
with 9.7; 

viii) Vacuum test, in accordance with 9.8; 

ix) Environmental cycle test, in accordance 
with 9.9; 

x) Stress rupture test (creep test), in 
accordance with 9.10; 

xi) Flaw test, in accordance with 9.11; 

xii) Drop test, in accordance with 9.12; 

xiii) High velocity impact (gunfire) test, in 
accordance with 9.13; 

xiv) Fire resistance test, in accordance with 9.14; 

xv) Permeability test, in accordance with 9.15; 

xvi) Torque test, in accordance with 9.16; 

xvii) Leak test, in accordance with 9.17; 

xviii) Pneumatic cycle test, in accordance 
with 9.18; 


Table 1 Type Approval /Design Variant Tests with Quantity 
(Clause 8.1) 


SINo. | Clause Test Quantity New Design Variant Changes 
No. Design Length Diameter Liner Equivalent | Composite Neck | Equivalent | Thread 
35% >50% <20% |<20% < 50| Thickness Fiber Thickness or Boss Matrix 
<50% E ji > 10% Pattern or Liner 
z Base Form 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) 
i) | 9.1 Liner material test — X 
ii) | 9.2 Composite material test = X X X 
iii) 9.3 Liner burst test 01 x x x x 
iv) | 9.4 Hydraulic proof test 02 X X X X X X X X X X 
v) 9.5 Resin shear test 01 x x 
vi) | 9.6 Cylinder burst test 03 X X X X X X X X X X 
vii) | 9.7 Ambient pressure cycle test 02 X X X X X X X X X X 
viii) | 9.8. |Vacuum test? 01 X X x’ X 
ix) | 9.9 Environmental cycle test 02 X X X 
x) 9.10 |Stress rupture (Creep test) 02 X X X X X X 
xi) 9.11 |Flaw test 02 X X X X X X 
xii) | 9.12 |Drop test 02 X X X X X X X 
xiii) | 9.13 |High velocity impact test (Gun fire test) 02 X x? 
xiv) 9.14 |Fire resistance test 02 x x x x?) 
xv) | 9.15 {Permeability test 02 X X X X 
xvi) | 9.16 |Torgue test” 01 X X X 
xvii) | 9.17 |Leak test 02 X X X X X 
xviii) | 9.18 |Pneumatic cycle test 01 X X X X X X 
xix) | 9.19 {Leakage test with service valve” 02 X x? 
xx) | 9.20 |Spike puncture Test 01 X X X X 
xxi) | 9.21 |Lifting test 02 X X X 
xxii) | 9.22 [Straightness 02 X X X 
xxiii) | 9.23 [Verticality 02 X X X 
X — Test is applicable 
D Test to be conducted for reduction in diameter only or if an increase in diameter requires only or if increase in diameter requires a larger caliber. 


? Only if cylinder in previous fire test leaked at the neck boss. 
>) Optional test, required according to the design and intended use of the cylinder. 
9 For liner thickness decrease only. 
> Only if type of valve is known. 


9) When a cylinder design has only a different thread compared to an approved design only the torque test, in accordance with 9.16 shall be performed. 


L107 : LP99T ST 


xix) Leakage test with service valve, in 
accordance with 9.19; 
xx) Spike puncture test, in accordance 


with 9.20; 
xxi) Lifting test, in accordance with 9.21; 
xxii) Straightness test, in accordance with 9.22; 
and 


xxili) Verticality test, in accordance with 9.23. 


8.2.7 After completion of each test, the cylinder shall 
be destroyed to ensure that it does not mix with new 
batch and go for pressurizing again. The Inspector shall 
ensure that tested cylinders are destroyed and recorded. 


8.2.8 If the results of the verification according 
to 8.2.3, 8.2.4, 8.2.5, and 8.2.6 as applicable are 
satisfactory, the statutory authority shall issue a design 
approval certificate. 


8.2.9 After completion of type approval, the design 
parameters, manufacturing process, raw material 
specifications shall be frozen and no alteration shall 
be made without approval of the statutory authority. 


8.3 New Design 


A cylinder of new design shall require complete type 
approval tests as specified in 9. 


8.3.1 A cylinder shall be considered as a new design 
when it conforms to any of the following conditions: 


a) If cylinders are manufactured in a different 
factory. 

b) If there is a change in the manufacturing 
process. 

c) Thenominal outside diameter has changed by 
50 percent or more from the approved design. 


d) The cylinder is manufactured with a different 
class of fibre (for example glass, aramid or 
carbon) or the fibre is produced from a 
different precursor or a different winding 
pattern is used. 

e) The matrix material (resin, curing agent, 
accelerator) are different, not chemically 
equivalent to the original design (for example 
change from epoxy to polyester or vice versa). 


NOTE — Where a new matrix material has been 
prototype tested for an existing design, then all the 
manufacturer’ existing prototype tested designs are 
regarded as prototype tested with the new matrix system 
without the need for any additional prototype testing. 

6) The material of the liner is changed to different 
composition. 


7) Liner is manufactured by a different process. 
8.4 Design Variant 


A reduced testing programme may be carried out for 


IS 16646 : 2017 


cylinders within the definition of a design variant 
compared with that required for a prototype testing. 
Design variant testing shall be conducted for each 
design variant of the cylinder. 


8.4.1 A cylinder shall be considered to be a design 
variant, compared with a previously prototype tested 
cylinder, when any of the following conditions apply: 


a) The nominal length of the cylinder has 
changed by more than 5 percent 

b) The nominal outside diameter has changed by 
less than 50 percent 

c) There have been changes to the composite 
thickness or wrap pattern other than the 
changes necessary to accommodate the 
changes of diameter and/or length; 

d) The minimum wall thickness of the liner has 
increased by more than 10 percent 

e) The design or method of joining of neck boss 
to the liner has changed 

f) Matrix material that is resin, curing agent and 
accelerator are from different suppliers but are 
chemically equivalent to the original design. 

g) Equivalent fibre are manufactured from the 
same nominal raw materials, using the same 
process of manufacture and having the same 
physical structure and the same nominal 
physical properties and where the average 
tensile strength and modulus is within +5 
percent of the fibre properties in an approved 
cylinder design. 


h) Where a new equivalent fibre has been 
prototype tested for an existing design, all the 
manufacturer’s existing prototype tested 
designs are regarded as prototype tested with 
the new fibre without the need for any 
additional prototype testing. 

j) Equivalent liners are manufactured from 
equivalent raw materials, using the same 
process of manufacture and having the same 
physical structure and the same nominal 
physical properties as in an approved cylinder 
design. 

k) The equivalent liner material shall be 
subjected to the material tests specified in 9.1 
for polymer liners and the liner burst test 
specified in 9.3 and shall meet the minimum 
requirements specified in 9.3.2 and the criteria 
of 9.3 

m) Where a new equivalent liner has been 
prototype tested for an existing design, all the 
manufacturer’s existing prototype tested 
designs are regarded as prototype tested with 
the new liner without the need for any 
additional prototype testing. 


IS 16646 : 2017 


8.4.2 When, cylinder design has only a different thread 
compared to an approved design only the torque test, 
in accordance with 9.16, shall be performed. 

NOTE — The standard thread shall be 3⁄4” 14 NGT or any thread 


accepted by the statutory authority, but for some special 
application thread size may change. 


8.4.3A cylinder approval by a reduced series of tests 
(a design variant) shall not be used as a basis for a 
second design variant approval with a reduced set of 
tests, that is multiple changes from an approved design 
are not permitted. If a test has been conducted on a 
design variant (A) that falls within the testing 
requirements for a second variant (B) then the result 
for (A) can be applied to the new design variant (B) 
test programme. However design variant (A) shall not 
be used as the reference for determining the testing 
required for any new design variant. 


Where a design variant involves more than one 
parameter change all the tests required by those 
parameter changes shall be performed once only. 


The statutory authority shall determine the level of 
reduced testing if not defined in Table 1, but a fully 
approved design shall always be used as a reference 
for the new design variant (that is new design variants 
shall not be approved by reference only to a previous 
design variant). 


9 TEST PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA 


9.1 Liner Material Test 


Following tests to be carried out on the non-metallic 
liner material as per the test procedure specified in IS 
13360. 


a) for thermoplastic materials — viscosity, 
melting point, water content, density, melting 
flow index and chemical resistance. 

b) for thermo set and elastomeric materials — 
viscosity, elongation at break, tensile strength, 
chemical resistance and glass transition 
temperature. 


NOTE — Alternative standards are acceptable providing that 
they give equivalent results. 


Criteria — The properties of the material shall be 
within the tolerances set by the material manufacturer 
and as laid down under design requirements. 


9.2 COMPOSITE MATERIAL TEST 
9.2.1 Procedure 


Tests on the composite materials to establish their 
mechanical properties shall be carried in accordance 
with 


a) for tensile properties of fiber 
1) For glass ,aramid — ISO 8521, ASTM D 
2290 and ASTM D 2291; ISO 3341 or 
ASTM D 2343 
2) For carbon — ASTM D 4018 


b) Shear properties for composite material: ISO 
14130 or ASTM D 2344. 

c) Matrix properties: glass transition temperature 
as per ASTM D 3418, heat distortion 
temperature as per ISO 75-3, viscosity as per 
ASTM D 2196. 


Equivalent tests in accordance with alternative 
standards or test specifications acceptable to the 
inspecting authority may be applied. 


Criteria — Mechanical properties shall meet the 
minimum requirements as specified by the 
manufacturer. 


9.3 Liner Burst Test 
9.3.1 Procedure 


The hydraulic burst test shall be carried out at ambient 
temperature, on liner complete with metal boss. The 
liner shall be pressurized at a controlled rate not 
exceeding 5 bar/s until failure. The pressure against 
time curve shall be plotted. 


The maximum pressure achieved during the test shall 
be recorded as the liner burst pressure (P,,). 


9.3.2 Criteria 


The burst pressure of liner (P) shall be equal to or 
greater than the minimum design burst pressure of the 
liner as specified in the design documents. The liner 
shall remain in one piece. 


9.3.3 Parameter to Monitor and Record 
Following shall be examined and recorded: 


Burst pressure, number of pieces after test, description 
of failure, that is brittle fracture, ductile fracture etc, 
pressure / time curve or pressure / volume curve. 


9.4 Hydraulic Proof Test 


9.4.1 Procedure 


The cylinder shall be pressurized gradually and 
continuously until the test pressure P, is reached. The 
pressure shall be held for a period of minimum 30 s. 
The tolerance of applied test pressure shall be — 0/+5 
percent. 


9.4.2 Criteria 
The cylinder pressure shall remain steady. 


There shall be no leaks. 


There shall be no visible permanent deformation after 
the cylinder is depressurized. 


9.4.3 Parameters to Monitor and Record 


a) Test pressure; 
b) Leakages, if any; and 
c) Graph between pressure versus time. 
NOTES 
1 Cracking of resin is not necessarily a sign of permanent 


deformation. 


2 Alternatively a pneumatic pressure can be used provided that 
appropriate measures are taken to ensure safe operation and to 
contain any energy that can be released, which is considerably 
more than in hydraulic test. 


9.5 Resin Shear Test 


Prototype matrix materials shall be tested on a sample 
coupon representative of the composite overwrap in 
accordance with ISO 14130 or an equivalent standard 
acceptable to the competent authority. This test shall 
be repeated when matrix materials are changed and are 
not chemically equivalent to those used in the original 
design. 


9.6 Cylinder Burst Test 


The cylinder burst test shall be carried out using a test rig 
which allows pressure to be increased at a controlled rate. 


9.6.1 Procedure 


The test shall be carried out at ambient temperature, 
the cylinder shall be pressurized hydraulically gradually 
and regularly at a constant rate of not more than 10 
bar/s. Prior to commencement of the test, it shall be 
ensured that no air is trapped in the cylinder. The 
cylinder shall be pressurized until failure, that is leakage 
through the pressure envelope or burst. The pressure 
against time curve or pressure against volume curve 
shall be plotted. 


9.6.2 Criteria 


The burst pressure shall be greater than or equal to the 
manufacturer’s minimum specified design burst 
pressure and shall not be less than the below specified 
criteria. The cylinder shall burst without fragmentation 
or disbanding / loosening of fibre, in any portions other 
than the area of rupture. 


The cylinder shall not leak below the required burst 
pressure as specified below: 


a) The burst pressure, P, for cylinders with 
carbon fibre reinforcement shall be not less 
than the test pressure, P, x 2.0. 

b) The burst pressure, P,, for cylinders with 
aramid fibre reinforcement shall be not less 
than test pressure, P, x 2.1. 


IS 16646 : 2017 


c) The burst pressure, P, for cylinders with glass 
fibre reinforcement shall be not less than the 
test pressure P, x 2.4. 


9.6.3 Parameters to Monitor and Record 
The following shall be monitored and recorded: 


a) Burst pressure; 

b) Location of burst and number of pieces; 

c) Description of failure, that is brittle fracture, 
ductile fracture etc; and 

d) Pressure / time curve or pressure / volume 
curve. 


9.7 Ambient Pressure Cycle Test 
9.7.1 Procedure 


The cycle test shall be carried out using a test rig which 
allows pressure to be increased and decreased at a 
controlled rate and automatically suspends the test when 
the cylinder has failed, either by leakage or rupture. 


The test shall be carried out with a non-corrosive liquid 
subjecting the cylinder to successive reversals at an 
upper cyclic pressure not less than 30 bar. The value 
of the lower cyclic pressure shall not exceed 3 bar. The 
frequency of reversals of pressure shall not exceed 
15 cycles per minute. 


The cycle tests shall be carried out at ambient conditions 
and the temperature on the outside surface of the 
cylinder shall not exceed 50°C during the test. The 
temperature of the external surface of the cylinder shall 
be continuously monitored. 


The number of cycles achieved during the test shall be 
recorded. After completion of this test, the cylinder shall 
be subjected to leak test according to 9.17 and followed 
by burst test as per 9.6. 


9.7.2 Criteria 


The cylinders shall withstand 12 000 cycles without 
leakage. If the cylinder is designed to pass 12 000 
hydraulic cycles to test pressure and achieves this level 
consistently in the test, it shall not be necessary to limit 
the design life of the cylinder. The cylinder shall satisfy 
the requirement of leak test according to 9.17 as well 
as burst test as specified in 9.6 after the cycle test. 


9.7.3 Parameters to Monitor and Record 
The following shall be monitored and recorded: 
a) Number of cycles achieving upper cycle 
pressure; 
b) Minimum and maximum cycle pressure; 
c) Temperature of the external surface of the 
cylinder; 
d) Pressure cycle frequency; 


IS 16646 : 2017 


e) Test medium used; 
f) Mode of failure, if appropriate; and 
g) Burst pressure achieved. 


9.8 Vacuum Test 


When this test is carried out, cylinder shall be subjected 
to a vacuum test prior to the environmental cycle test. 
When this test is not carried out, a warning shall be 
permanently marked on the cylinder. 


9.8.1 Procedure 


The cylinder shall be subjected to a series of cycles 
from atmospheric pressure to a vacuum as follows: 


The cylinder contents shall be evacuated to reduce the 
pressure to a pressure of 0.2 bar absolute at ambient 
temperature. The vacuum shall be maintained at this 
level for at least one minute. Pressure in the cylinder 
shall then be returned to atmospheric pressure. The 
above procedure shall be repeated for 50 cycles. 


9.8.2 Criteria 


After cycling, the interior of the liner shall be inspected 
for damage. Any evidence of disbonding, folding or 
other damage shall be noted. Ifthe cylinder then passes 
the environmental cycle test it shall also be deemed to 
have passed the vacuum test. 


9.8.3 Parameters to monitor and record 


The parameters that shall be monitored and recorded 
are: 


a) number of cycles achieving lower cyclic 
pressure; 

b) 
c) 
d) 


minimum and maximum cyclic pressure; 
cycle frequency; and 

results of visual inspection like delamination, 
disbonding, blister formation, folding of liner, 
cracks or any other damage. 


9.9 Environmental Cycle Test 


When the vacuum test (see 9.8) is carried out, the 
vacuum tested cylinder shall be used for the 
environmental cycle test. When the vacuum test is not 
conducted, fresh cylinders shall be taken, the 
manufacturer shall ensure a warning is marked on the 
cylinder, “Not for Vacuum”. These tests shall be 
performed in an environmental chamber. Cylinder shall 
be without paint and any removable protective coating/ 
casing. 


9.9.1 Procedure 


The cylinder and the contained pressurizing medium 
shall be conditioned for 48 h at atmospheric pressure, 
at between 60°C and 70°C and at a relative humidity 
greater than or equal to 90 percent. The intent of this 


10 


requirement can be met by spraying with a continuous 
fine spray or mist of water in a chamber held between 
60°C and 70°C. 


The hydraulic pressurizing medium, located in the 
circuit external to the cylinder under test, shall 
commence the cycle testing at ambient temperature. 
5 000 cycles shall be applied from a pressure 
approximately equal to atmospheric pressure to 20 bar. 
The cylinder skin temperature shall be maintained 
between 60°C and 70°C by regulating the environmental 
chamber and the cycle frequency. The cycle frequency 
shall not exceed 10 cycles/ minute. 


On completion of these cycles, the pressure shall be 
released and the cylinder shall be stabilized at ambient 
conditions. 


The temperature shall then be reduced and the cylinder 
and its contained pressurizing medium is stabilized at 
a temperature between —40° C and —50 °C. 


The hydraulic pressurizing medium external to the 
cylinder under test, shall commence the cycle testing 
at ambient temperature. 5 000 cycles shall be applied 
from a pressure less than 2 bar to 20 bar (two-third of 
the test pressure). The cylinder skin temperature shall 
be maintained between —40°C and —50“C by regulating 
the environmental chamber and the cycle frequency. 
The cycle frequency shall not exceed 10 cycles/ minute. 
The fluid shall also be selected to ensure that it functions 
at the temperatures specified in the various cycle tests. 


On completion of these cycles, the pressure shall be 
released and the cylinder is stabilized at ambient 
conditions. 


The cylinder shall then be subjected to leak test. 


On completion of the above tests, the cylinder shall be 
subjected to burst test. 


9.9.2 


Criteria 
There shall not be any leakage/rupture during cycle test. 


a) The burst pressure shall be greater than 85 
percent of the minimum design burst pressure; 

b) The burst pressure, P,, for cylinders with 

carbon fibre reinforcement shall be not less 

than the test pressure, P, x 1.7; 

c) The burst pressure, P,, for cylinders with 

aramid fibre reinforcement shall be not less 

than the test pressure, P, x 1.9; and 

d) The burst pressure, P,, for cylinders with glass 

fibre reinforcement shall be not less than the 


test pressure, P, x 2.2. 
9.9.3 Parameters to Monitor and Record 


The following shall be monitored and recorded: 


a) Temperature of cylinder body during each part 
of test; 

b) Humidity during first part of test; 

c) Test media used; 

d) number of cycles achieving upper cyclic 
pressure at each stage; 

e) minimum and maximum cyclic pressure; 

f) frequency of cycles; 

g) visual inspection; 

h) burst pressure meeting requirements as per 
9.6; and 

j) Pressure time curve / pressure volume curve. 


9.10 Stress Rupture Test — Exposure to Elevated 
Temperature Test (Creep Test) 


9.10.1 


The test shall be conducted at (70 + 5)°C and a relative 
humidity e”95 percent. 


Procedure 


Two cylinders shall be hydraulically pressurized to 30 
bar and kept at the test temperature and shall be 
maintained at this pressure, temperature and humidity 
for 2 000 h. 


The use of a water spray or suspending the cylinder 
over a water bath are both methods that can be used to 
meet the requirements of this test. 


After this test, the cylinders shall be subjected to leak 
test (see 9.17) and burst test (see 9.6). 


9.10.2 Criteria 


The cylinder shall not exhibit any visible deformation 
or loose fibres (unraveling) and shall satisfy the criteria 
of the leak test 9.17. The burst pressure shall be equal 
to or greater than 100 percent of the minimum burst 
level required in the burst test see 9.6 for the relevant 


A 


1 


A 


| 
| 
a, = 


O, aa 
ZEO tA os 


PRK ERK KKK KRY 


IS 16646 : 2017 


fibre. 
9.10.3 Parameters to Monitor and Record 


The following shall be monitored and recorded: 


a) Temperature and relative humidity at least 
twice a day; 
b) 


c) 


Cylinder pressure at least twice a day; and 


Burst pressure and parameters specified for 
burst test. 


9.11 Flaw Test 


Two cylinders shall be tested in accordance with the 
following procedure: 


9.11.1 Procedure 


Two flaws, one longitudinal and the other transverse 
shall be made on each of the two cylinders in the mid 
length of the cylindrical part, along two planes forming 
an angle of approximately 120 degrees as shown in 
Fig. 1. 


The flaws shall be made with a 1 mm thick cutter to a 
depth equal to at least 40 percent of the composite 
overwrap thickness but not more than 2.5 mm deep 
and to a length between the centre of the cutter equal 
to five times the composite overwrap thickness 
(see Fig. 1). 


After introducing the flaws one of the two cylinders 
shall be subjected to burst test. The other cylinder shall 
be subjected to ambient pressure cycle test, except that 
the upper cyclic pressure shall be 20 bar and the number 
of cycles shall be not less than 5 000, after reaching 
the same, the test shall be suspended. After completion 
of above ambient temperature cycle test the cylinder 
shall be destroyed (for example bursting) or made 
incapable of holding pressure. 


120° 


5t 


SECTION AT A-A 


KEY 

11mm Wide 
2 Wrap 

3 Liner 


Fic. 1 FLow TEST PROCEDURE 


11 


IS 16646 : 2017 


9.11.2 Criteria 


For the first cylinder the burst pressure shall be greater 
than or equal to 40 bar. 


The second cylinder shall withstand at least 1 000 
pressure cycles to 20 bar without leakage. If the 
cylinder leaks after 1 000 cycles, it shall be deemed to 
have passed the test, however if the cylinder bursts 
within 5 000 cycles, the cylinder shall be considered 
as failed the test. 


9.11.3 Parameters to Monitor and Record 


The following shall be monitored and recorded: 


a) Dimensions of flaws; 

b) Temperature of the cylinder; 

c) Number of cycles achieving upper cyclic 
pressure; 

d) Minimum and maximum cyclic pressures; 

e) Cycle frequency; 

f) Test medium used; and 

g) Mode of failure, if appropriate 


9.12 Drop Test 


Drop test shall be conducted on finished cylinders, 
including any foot ring and / or valve protection and 
any removable/fixed protective sleeve/cover. 


9.12.1 Procedure 


Test cylinders shall be filled with water to 50 percent 
capacity. The opening shall be sealed by fitting a plug, 
flush with the end of each cylinder. The surface for 
drop shall consist of a steel plate, not less than 10 mm 
thick, sufficiently flat so that the difference between 
any two points in diameter of 1 m on the surface is no 
more than 2 mm. 


The steel plate shall rest on a flat, smooth concrete bed, 
at least 100 mm thick. The plate shall be in full contact 


with the concrete so that it is fully supported and locked. 
The cylinders shall be dropped twice on to a flat surface 
from a height of 1.2 m, in each of the five different 
orientations as illustrated in Fig. 2. 


On completion of all 10 drops, cylinder shall be 
inspected for any cracks/leaks, 


One cylinder shall be subjected to a burst test and the 
other be subjected to ambient pressure cycle test. 


9.12.2 Criteria 


The valve shall remain fully protected after the test is 
performed. Outer protection casing shall not crack/fallout/ 
open up from joints. The cylinder shall not leak. The 
cylinder subject to burst test shall meet the requirements 
of the test. The cylinder subject to Ambient Pressure Cycle 
test shall meet the requirements of the test 


9.12.3 Parameters to Monitor and Record 


a) Visual appearance before and after the drop; 

b) Record position of damage if any, after the 
drop; 

c) Record location of leakage if any after the 
drop; 

d) Record parameters as specified in burst test; 
and 

e) Record parameters as specified in ambient 


pressure cycle test. 
9.13 High Velocity Impact (Gunfire) Test 
A holding fixture shall be made to hold cylinder in 
position. 


9.13.1 Procedure 


One cylinder shall be filled to 20 bar pressure, with air 
or nitrogen. The cylinder shall be positioned in such a 
way that the point of impact of the projectile shall be in 
the cylinder side wall at a nominal angle of 45° and 


1.2m 


Fic. 2 Drop Test Position 


12 


such that the bullet would also exit through the cylinder 
side wall. The bullet shall penetrate one wall of the 
cylinder at least. If this does not occur, the energy of the 
bullet shall be increased until penetration is achieved. 
Cylinders with diameter above 120 mm shall be impacted 
by a 7.62 mm (0.3 calibre) armour-piercing projectile 
(of length between 37 mm and 51 mm) with a nominal 
speed of about 850 m/s. Cylinders with diameter of 120 
mm and below shall be impacted by a 5.6 mm armour 
piercing (or similar) bullet with a nominal speed of 850 
m/s. The bullet shall be fired from a distance of not more 
than 45 m. The dimensions of the entrance and exit 
openings shall be measured and recorded. After the test 
the cylinder shall be rendered unserviceable. 


9.13.2 Criteria 


The cylinder shall remain in one piece and shall reveal 
no evidence of a fragmentation failure 


9.13.3 Parameter to Monitor and Record 


a) Type of projectile; 
b) Initial pressure in cylinder; 
c) Description of bullet; 
d) Description of failure; and 
e) Approximate size of the entrance and exit 
openings. 
9.14 Fire Resistance Test 
9.14.1 Procedure 


Cylinders shall be fitted with the valve intended for 
use. The cylinder shall be charged with LPG to its 
design capacity. A suitable fire shall be created with 
either wood, gas or hydrocarbon fuel. 


The cylinder shall be fire-resistant tested one each in 
the vertical and horizontal position as follows: 


Surface temperatures shall be monitored by 
thermocouples located along the bottom of the cylinder 
and spaced not more than 0.75 m apart and shielded 
from direct flame impingement with metallic shielding 
of a minimum 0.4 mm thickness. Thermocouple 
temperatures and the cylinder pressure shall be recorded 
at intervals of every 30 s or less during the test. 


A uniform fire source of 1.65 m length shall be used 
that is capable of enveloping the entire diameter of the 
cylinder, when in the horizontal position, and producing 
a temperature greater or equal to 590 °C, measured 
within 2 min on the bottom surface of the cylinder. 


The timing of the fire test shall start when the 
thermocouple temperature reaches 590°C and atleast 
one thermocouple must register a temperature greater 
or equal to 590°C for the remainder of the test. 


Any fuel may be used for the fire source provided it 


13 


IS 16646 : 2017 


supplies uniform heat sufficient to maintain the 
specified test temperatures until the cylinder is vented. 
The selection of a fuel should take into consideration 
pollution concerns. 


The cylinders shall be tested in both the vertical or 
horizontal position as follows: 


Vertical — One cylinder shall be placed in an upright 
position (valve uppermost), with the lowest part of the 
cylinder approximately 0.1 m from the top of the 
firewood, in the case of a wood fire, or 0.1 m from the 
surface of the liquid in a fuel-based fire. The relief 
device shall be shielded from direct flame impingement. 


Horizontal — One cylinder shall be placed in a 
horizontal position with the centre of the fire at the 
mid-point of the cylinder and with the lowest part of 
the cylinder approximately 0.1 m from the top of the 
firewood, in the case of a wood fire, or 0.1 m from the 
surface of the liquid in a fuel-based fire. The relief 
device shall be shielded from direct flame impingement. 


9.14.2 Criteria 


a) For cylinders intended to be fitted with a 
specified pressure-relief devices the cylinders 
shall vent through the pressure-relief devices. 
(This test shall be repeated if another design 
of pressure-relief device is specified and 
used). A leak through the cylinder wall is 
acceptable. 

b) The cylinder shall not burst during a period 

of 2 min from the start of the fire test. 

Cylinders may leak through the cylinder wall 

or other surfaces. 


9.15 Permeability Test 
9.15.1 Procedure 


The test cylinder shall be weighed empty, before and after 
the test and the difference noted to avoid errors due to 
moisture pick up. The cylinder shall be pre pressurized to 
20 bar with air or nitrogen and the valve and the junction 
of the non- metallic liner with the metallic bosses or rings 
shall be visually checked for leaks, example with soapy 
water (bubble test or by dipping in water tub). Any leaks 
shall be eliminated before proceeding with the test. The 
cylinder shall be depressurized. 


The cylinder shall be hydraulically cycled 1 000 times 
from zero to 20 bar, before being emptied and 
thoroughly dried and valve shall be refitted and the 
empty weight recorded. The cylinder shall then be filled 
with liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) to the maximum 
capacity of gas as defined in design specifications. The 
cylinder shall then be weighed again and the weight of 
the gas stored shall be recorded. The cylinder shall be 
stored in covered area away from sunlight at ambient 


IS 16646 : 2017 

temperature. The cylinder shall be periodically weighed 
(at least) 1* day, 7 day, 14" day, 21" day and 28" day. 
9.15.2 Criteria 


The maximum rate of weight loss shall not exceed 1 
mg/h/litre of water capacity. 


9.15.3 Parameters to Monitor and Record 


The following shall be monitored and recorded: 


a) Test gas used; 

b) Cycle test medium; 

c) Number of cycles achieving upper cyclic 
pressure; 

d) Cycle frequency; 

e) Environmental temperature and humidity 
twice a day; 

f) Cylinder weights; and 

g) Rate of weight loss. 


9.16 Torque Test 
9.16.1 Procedure 


The body of the cylinder shall be held in such a manner 
as to prevent it rotating except where the manufacturer 
specifies that the cylinder is to be held by the neck for 
valve insertion. In this case the manufacturer’s 
directions shall be used. 


The minimum design torque for valve tightening shall 
be 175 Nm. 


The cylinder shall be fitted with a corresponding valve 
and tightened to 150 percent of the maximum torque 
recommended in design parameters by the manufacturer 
of the cylinders or as recommended by the manufacturer 
of valves or as per the relevant material of Boss. 


The valve shall be removed after the first installation 
and the neck thread and Boss inspected using gauges 
corresponding to the agreed neck threads to ensure that 
it is within tolerance. 


The valve shall then be reinstalled as specified above. 


A test for leaks (Bubble test) in the cylinder neck area 
shall be conducted as follows: 


a) Pressurize the cylinder to 20 bar of pressure 
with air or nitrogen; 

b) Maintain pressure in the cylinder at 20 bar for 
at least 2 h; and 

c) Conducta bubble leak test for at least 10 min. 


9.16.2 Criteria 


The neck thread and Boss shall show no significant 
deformation and shall remain within drawing and gauge 
tolerance. Leakage greater than | bubble/2 min in the 
bubble leak test shall constitute a failure of the test. 


14 


9.16.3 Parameter to Monitor and Record 


The following shall be monitored and recorded: 


a) Type of valve. 
b) Valving procedure, 
c) Applied torque, 
d) Condition of threads after torque, and 
e) Results of bubble test. 
9.17 Leak Test 
9.17.1 Procedure 
a) Leak testing shall be conducted on the 
completed cylinder; 
b) The cylinder shall be pressurized to 20 bar 
using dry air or nitrogen or gas; and 
c) The test can be conducted by bubble test or 
measurement of trace gases using a mass 
spectrometer. 
9.17.2 Criteria 


No leakage shall be there. Leakage greater than 1 
bubble/2 min shall be constituted as failure. 


9.18 Pneumatic Cycle Test 
9.18.1 Procedure 


Prior to conducting this test cylinder shall be 
preconditioned by passing the test requirements of leak 
test (see 9.17), hydraulic proof test (see 9.4) and 
ambient pressure cycle test (see 9.7) except for the 
number of cycles is reduced to half. 


Cylinder shall be pressurized to 20 bar with air or 
nitrogen. The cylinder pressure shall be held at 20 bar 
for 72 h. The cylinder shall then be subjected to 1 000 
pneumatic pressure cycles (not more than 5 cycles per 
minute) between 10 percent of working pressure and 
the working pressure (20 bar). Unless otherwise 
specified by the manufacturer, care shall be taken to 
ensure that temperatures during filling and venting do 
not exceed the defined service conditions. 


After cycling, the cylinder pressure shall be held at 20 
bar for 72 h. The pressure shall be released by venting 
through the valve. 


The liner and liner/end boss interface (if accessible), 
shall be visually inspected on the internal surfaces for 
evidence of any deterioration, such as blistering or liner 
collapse, fatigue cracking or electrostatic discharge. 


After visual inspection, the cylinder shall be subjected 
to the ambient cycle test as per 9.7, except the number 
of cycles be reduced to half. 


9.18.2 Criteria 


The cylinder shall have successfully passed the leak 
test and it must not display excessive deterioration (such 


as fatigue cracking, blistering or electrostatic discharge) 
that would prevent it from completing its intended 
service life. 


A cylinder that demonstrates three successive 
pneumatic hold and cycle tests as provided above and 
meeting the requirements of the leak test and the 
ambient temperature pressure cycle test (except for the 
number of cycles is reduced by half) shall be deemed 
to have met the requirements of pneumatic cycle test. 


9.18.3 Parameter to Monitor and Record 


a) Temperature of cylinder; 

b) Number of cycles achieving upper cyclic 
pressure; 

c) Minimum and maximum cyclic pressure; 

d) Cycle frequency; 

e) Test medium used; 

f) Visual appearance of the liner after the 
pneumatic hold and cycle; 

g) Parameters as specified in ambient cycle test; 
and 

h) Mode of failure if appropriate. 


9.19 Leakage Test with Service Valve 


This test is to ensure there is no leakage after fixing 
service valve, through threads of metal boss or valve. 


9.19.1 Procedure 


After fixing the valve to required torque, the cylinder 
shall be pressurized to 12 bar using dry air or nitrogen 
or gas. The test can be conducted by bubble test or 


IS 16646 : 2017 


measurement of trace gases using a mass spectrometer. 
9.19.2 Test Criteria 


No leakage shall be there. Leakage greater than 1 
bubble/2 min shall be constituted as failure. Duration 
of test shall be 6 min. 


9.19.3 Parameter to monitor and record 


a) Cylinder Serial No.; 

b) Filled pressure; and 

c) Number of bubbles coming in 2 min. 
9.20 Spike Test 


9.20.1 Procedure 


The cylinder shall be filled with water to its 50 percent 
water capacity and be pressurized to a pressure of 20 bar. 


It shall be impacted on a steel spike, 10 mm diameter 
having a sharp point as per Fig. 3 from a height of 3 m 
in a horizontal position to ensure that pin completely 
punctures the cylinder wall. The point of impact shall 
be in the cylindrical part of the cylinder. 


9.20.2 Criteria 


The tested cylinder shall reveal no evidence of a 
fragmentation failure. 


9.20.3 Parameters to Monitor and Record 
The following shall be monitored and recorded: 


a) Description of the spike; 
b) Test pressure; 


All dimensions are in millimetres. 


Fic. 3 ILLUSTRATION OF SPIKE PROFILE 


15 


IS 16646 : 2017 


c) Description of failure; and 
d) Approximate size and location of the puncture 
opening. 
9.21 Lifting Test 
9.21.1 Procedure 


The cylinder shall be filled with water to its 100 percent 
water capacity and be raised by minimum 300 mm 
above from ground using single hook on valve 
protection ring for a period of 3 h. The test shall be 
repeated by placing hook on diametrically opposite 
position. 


9.21.2 Criteria 


After the test, the protective casing of the cylinder shall 
retain its mechanical intergrity without any deformation. 


9.22 Straightness 


The maximum deviation of the finished cylinder from 
a straight line shall not exceed 0.3 percent of length 
subject to aminimum of 3 mm across the parallel length 
(see detail 2 in Fig. 4). 


9.23 Verticality 


Deviation from vertical shall not exceed 10 mm/m of 
the cylinder length (see detail 1 in Fig. 4). 


1 = Measure of vertically of composite cylinder 
2 = Measure of straightness of composite cylinder 


Fic. 4 ILLUSTRATION OF DEVIATION OF 
CYLINDRICAL PART OF SHELL FROM A STRAIGHT LINE 
AND FROM VERTICAL 


10 BATCH INSPECTION AND TESTING 
REQUIREMENTS 


Production batch testing shall be conducted on finished 
cylinders representing normal production lot. The batch 
shall be considered as specified in 3.4. These tests are 
to ensure the compliance of the production lot with the 
design specifications. 


10.1 Liner Batch Test and Inspection 
10.1.1 Liner Material 


For each batch of liner material (see 3.3), liner material 
test is to be conducted as per 9.1. The materials used for 
manufacture of composite cylinders shall be of uniform 
and consistent quality. The composite cylinder 
manufacturer shall verify that each batch of material has 
the correct properties and is of satisfactory quality and 
maintain records, from which the batch of materials used 
for the manufacture of each cylinder can be identified. 


The manufacturer shall collect sufficient documentation 
from the suppliers of raw materials to be able to identify 
fully the batch of materials used in the manufacture of 
cylinders and to ensure that their properties meet the 
design requirements. 


10.1.2 Liner 


Following inspection and tests shall be carried out on 
every batch of liners from a given batch of liners as 
specified in Table 2 below: 


a) One liner shall be tested to confirm that the 
declared material has been used and to verify 
that the required mechanical minimum 
properties have been achieved and meet the 
minimum design requirements. On every test 
liner two tensile specimens shall be tested. The 
tensile strength and the elongation shall be 
tested in accordance with this standard. 


b) Acceptance of liners shall be made taking into 
account the following verifications: 

1) The process parameters during liner 
manufacturing shall be within the 
tolerances agreed during type approval; 

2) The material properties of the liner shall 
be within the tolerances required by the 
design requirements. 


Table 2 Testing of Liners 
(Clause 10.1.2) 


SI. No. Test/Inspection No./Extent of Test Per Batch 
i) Material Test 1 
ii) Thickness Test 1 
iii) Visual Inspection 5 Percent 
iv) Dimensional Check 5 Percent 
v) Weight 5 Percent 


The Inspector shall verify the material properties of 
the liner are within the tolerance required by design 
specifications as declared by the manufacturer. 


10.1.3 If any of the test results is not satisfactory, and 
if the inspector is satisfied that this was due to an error 
in performing the test, a re-test shall be authorized using 
the same liner or if that is not possible, then the test in 
question shall be repeated on a liner or test ring from 
the same batch, and if the results are satisfactory the 
batch shall be accepted. 


10.2 Composite Material Batch Test and Inspection 


One sample per lot of fibres shall be tested to verify 
tensile strength and shear strength. 


The inspector shall verify the specifications of material 
(resin, hardener, accelerator and glass fibre) used for 
the production lot and submitted, are matching with 
the design specifications as declared by the 
manufacturer. 


10.3 Testing and Inspection of Cylinder 
10.3.1 Non-Destructive Tests 


The inspection shall be carried out on a batch of finished 
cylinders with liners as follows: 


a) Visual inspection of internal and external 
surface finish — 100 percent, 

b) Dimensional check — 10 percent per batch, 

c) Weight check — 10 percent per batch, 

d) Water capacity check — 2 percent per batch. 
The water capacity check shall be done by 
weighing method. The tolerance for water 
capacity shall be +5/-0 percent for cylinders 
up to and including 13 litre water capacity and 
+3/-0 percent or 0.65 litre whichever is more 
for cylinder above 13 litre water capacity, 

e) Torque of valve — 10 percent per batch, 

f) Compliance of marking — 100 percent per 
batch, 

g) Hydraulic Proof Test (9.4) — on 100 percent 
cylinder, 

h) Leakage Test — on 100 percent cylinders, 

j) Leakage test with Service Valve — on 
100percent cylinders, and 

k) Cleanliness — on 100 percent cylinder — 


Internal and external surfaces shall be free 
from defects and residues from the 
manufacturing process which would adversely 
affect the safe working of the cylinder. 

NOTE — For (b), (c), (d) and (e) if one unacceptable cylinder 


is found then 100 percent of the cylinders in the batch shall be 
inspected. 


17 


IS 16646 : 2017 


10.3.2 Destructive Tests 


The following tests shall be carried out on a batch of 
finished cylinders: 


a) Hydraulic Burst test on one cylinder per batch, 


and 
b) 


Pressure Cycle test on minimum one cylinder 
per batch. 


NOTES 
1) At discretion of the Inspector, the cylinder subjected to 


pressure cycle test may be used for hydraulic burst test. 


2) All the cylinders after testing (used for test a & b) shall be 
destroyed, so that they are not mixed with production lot and 
pressurized. 


10.4 Batch Acceptance Certificate 


If the results of the checks and tests are satisfactory, 
test certificate for the batch of production shall be 
issued. 


NOTE — A sample of production batch testing certificate is 
given in Annex B 


10.5 Cylinder Failure During Type Approval or 
Batch Testing 


In case results are not satisfactory, proceed as described 
in 11. 


11 FAILURE TO MEET TEST REQUIREMENTS 


11.1 Failure of Liners 


If the test results on the liners are not satisfactory, and 
if the Inspector is satisfied that this was due to an error 
carrying out the test, a re-test maybe authorized using 
the same liner or another from the same batch. 


The test in question shall be repeated on 2 specimens, 
one from the same liner as for the first test and one 
from a new liner from the same batch and if both results 
are satisfactory the batch maybe accepted or the batch 
maybe retreated and re-tested according to 9.1 and if 
results are satisfactory the batch maybe accepted. 


11.2 Failure of Complete Cylinder 


11.2.1 In the event of failure to meet test requirements 
either during a production batch test or design 
qualification tests (Type approval tests) do not give 
satisfactory results, an investigation into the cause of 
failure and re-testing shall be carried out as follows: 


11.2.2 If there is evidence of a fault in carrying out a 
test or an error of measurement, a second test shall be 
performed on the same cylinder, if possible. If this is 
not possible, then a second test shall be performed on 
a cylinder selected at random from the batch. If the 
results of this test are satisfactory, the first test shall be 
ignored. 


IS 16646 : 2017 


11.2.3 Ifthe test has been carried out in a satisfactory 
manner either: 


a) the cause of failure shall be identified and the 
procedure detailed in 11.2.4 or 11.2.5 shall 
be followed; or 

b) the batch shall be rejected and made 


unserviceable. 


11.2.4 If the cause of failure is identified, the defective 
cylinders may be reclaimed (only for failure in test (a), 
(1) and (j) of 10.3.1 by an approved method or shall be 
rejected. All cylinders of the batch (of failed cylinder) 
shall be subjected to the test in which failure has been 
observed. If more than one cylinder fail in one or more 
tests, then entire batch shall be tested for all tests. The 
batch can be accepted if all cylinders pass in all tests. 


11.2.5 If a batch fails the second series of tests as 
mentioned in 11.2.4, the batch of cylinders shall be 
rendered unserviceable. The manufacturer shall ensure 
that the cylinders do not enter service. 


12 MARKINGS 


Each finished composite cylinder which satisfies the 
requirement of this standard, shall be permanently and 
legibly marked in accordance with requirements of Gas 
Cylinder Rules and the Statutory Authority. 


12.1 The markings can be made on the metal boss and 
handle(s) of the outer protective casing. The markings 
can be Laser Marked or embossed or other markings 
of permanent type as approved by the Statutory 
Authority. The size of the letters shall not be less than 
5 mm high and shall be clearly visible. 


12.2 Each cylinder complying with this standard shall 
have following marking: 


a) Name of manufacturer; 

b) Owner of the cylinder; 

c) Unique serial number of the cylinder; 

d) Month and year of manufacture of cylinder; 
e) Applicable standard; 

f) Capacity of the cylinder; 

g) Cylinder type and statutory authorities 


approval number; 


18 


h) Working pressure; 

j) Test pressure; 

k) The word “LPG”; 

m) Due date of re-testing; 

n) Date of last hydrostatic test; 

p) Tare weight of cylinder; 

q) Net weight of gas; 

r) Maximum permissible torque for valve 
tightening; 

s) Type of screw thread; 

t) Maximum operating temperature; and 

u) Service life of the cylinders in years. 


In case cylinder is not designed for vacuum the 
following word shall be marked clearly and legibly 
“Warning this cylinder must not be subjected to 
vacuum”. 


12.2.1 Minimum markings on the metal boss of the 
cylinder shall be as under: 


a) Name of manufacturer, 

b) Owner of the cylinder, 

c) Unique serial number and batch of the 
cylinder, 

d) Month and year of manufacture of cylinder, 

e) Inspector’s marking, 

f) Net weight of gas to be filled, 

g) The word “LPG”, and 

h) Maximum working pressure. 


13 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


13.1 Each cylinder may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


13.2 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the license for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to the 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


IS 16646 : 2017 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 3.8 and 3.9) 
TEST REPORT FOR EQUIVALENCY 


Verification Bodies Report On: 


The Testing of Liner Materials and/or Composite Materials to Prove Equivalency with Approved Materials from 
a Previous Type Approval 


Inspection Body 


The inspector’s mark 
Certificate No. 
Place Date 
Cylinders manufactured by 


Manufacturer’s mark 
Manufactured for 


Consigned to 


LINER MATERIALS 


Documentation for the liner and metal boss(es) shall include (but not be limited to) 


e Equivalent liners are manufactured from the same nominal raw materials, using the same process of 
manufacture and having the same physical structure and the same nominal physical properties as in an 
approved cylinder design. 

e The equivalent liner material shall be subjected to the material tests and the liner burst test and shall meet 
the minimum requirements and the criteria. 


DESIGN CRITERIA APPROVED DESIGN EQUIVALENT DESIGN 


Liner material including limits of chemical 
analysis 
Process of manufacture 


Physical structure and nominal physical 
properties 


Material tests in 9.1 or 9.2 
Liner burst test in 9.3 


COMPOSITE MATREIAL 


Documentation for composite overwrap shall include (but not be limited to) 


DESIGN CRITERIA APPROVED DESIGN EQUIVALENT DESIGN 


Fibre material, raw materials, process of 
manufacture physical structure 


WE HEREBY CERTIFY that each of the above liner materials and/or fibre materials are equivalent to liner 
materials and/or fibre material in a previously approved cylinder design according to the requirements of this 


standard. 


For and on behalf of the manufacturer 


For and on behalf of the Inspection Body 


Specimen test reports (continued) 


19 


IS 16646 : 2017 


1. Mechanical tests on liners 


Batch no. |Code Test piece dimensions |0.2 percent yield |Tensile strength | Elongation 
(mm) strength (MPa) (MPa) (Percentage) 


Certified by on behalf of Date 


(for manufacturer) 


Certified by Date 
(Inspection Body) 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 10.4) 
SPECIMEN TEST REPORTS 


Verification Bodies Report On: 


The Manufacture Of Composite Gas Cylinders With Non-Load Sharing Non-Metallic Liners 
Inspection Body 


The inspector’s mark 
Certificate No. 
Place Date 


Cylinders manufactured by 


Manufacturer’s mark 


Manufactured for 


Consigned to 


Quantity Overall size (mm) Outside diameter by 
Serial numbers to inclusive 

Standard 

Drawing No. 


Date of hydraulic pressure test 


Test pressure (bar) 


Water capacity (1) 


Gas 

Filling ratio (liquefied) (bar) 

Mass of container (kg) Minimum Maximum without valve 
Minimum Maximum with valve 


Each cylinder was produced by over-wrapping a seamless liner with resin-impregnated filament reinforcement. 
Liner material designated as was supplied by and the analysis was within the required limits. 


Each liner was produced by an approved process. The results of the mechanical tests have been found Satisfactory. 


20 


IS 16646 : 2017 


Overwrap was applied by wrapping under controlled tension. 
Glass/ Carbon /Aramid 


designated 


supplied by 


impregnated with resin designated 


manufactured by 


Identified by package number and cured after wrapping to the manufacturer’s standard. 

Filaments strand strength and reinforcement were verified and found satisfactory. 

Calculated stress levels on the reinforcement filaments satisfy design requirements. 

Each cylinder was subjected to a hydraulic proof pressure test at the test pressure stated above. 

The results of the batch pressure cycle and burst tests were satisfactory. 

Each cylinder has been marked as required by this standard. 

WE HEREBY CERTIFY that each of the above cylinders meets, in full, the requirements of this standard. 


For and on behalf of the manufacturer 


For and on behalf of the Inspection Body 


1. Mechanical Tests on Liners 


Batch no. |Code Test piece dimensions |0.2 % yield Tensile strength | Elongation (%) 
(mm) strength (MPa) (MPa) 
Certified by on behalf of Date 


(for manufacturer) 


Certified by Date 


(Inspection Body) 


21 


IS 16646 : 2017 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 


New Delhi 


Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


GSPC Gas Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


INOX India Ltd, Vadodara 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 


LINDE India Ltd, Kolkata 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), 
New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, RDCIS, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 


22 


Representative(s) 


Suri N. T. SHAHU (Chairman) 
SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri ANISH PATEL 
Suri K. R. SAHASRANAM (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
Suri VeD PRAKASH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


Suri Sumir Roy 
Suri A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
Suri RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KHaMKaR (Alternate 1) 
Sarı H. D. Kuatri (Alternate 2) 


Suri K. S. R. PRASAD 


Suri P. N. KANTH 
SHRI DEBASHISH CHAKRAVERTY (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RamBuat (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK V. PATWARDHAN 
Suri NIKHILE K. GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
Suri DEEPAK V. ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri S. GopaLalAH (Alternate) 


Suri SUNIL K. Dey 
Suri S. B. BormaL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
Suri Prapeep (Alternate) 


Suri K.K. THAKUR 
Suri A.K. Bera (Alternate) 


Suri S. MURALI 
Suri Arun Nayak (Alternate) 


Suet J. P. TIWARI 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Sarı A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. KOHLI 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
SHRI R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI Amit Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr ANJANA Deva (Alternate) 


SHRI M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Organization 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16646 : 2017 


Representative(s) 


SHRI PALLIPALAYAM GOWRISHANKAR 
SHRI SHAILLENDRA DEWANGAN (Alternate) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Sarı R. Benani (Alternate) 


Dr S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAN 
Sarı P. K. Maruur (Alternate) 


SHRI S. J. VISPUTE 
Suri A.S LatKe (Alternate) 


Suri A. RENGARAJAN Science ‘E’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Low Pressure Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16:2 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturer Association, Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Hindalco Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Ideal Engineers Hyderabad Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Pvt Ltd Gwalior 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum And Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 
Sahuwala Cylinders (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 
Shri Shakti Cylinders Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Salem/Delhi 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
The Supreme Industries Ltd, Halol, Gujarat 
Tata Iron and Steel Company Ltd, Jamshedpur 


Time Technoplast Ltd, Mumbai 


23 


Sarı P. N. Kanth (Convener) 
SHRI DEBASHISH CHAKRAVERTY (Alternate) 


SHRI ANISH PATEL 
Suri K. R. SAHASRANAM (Alternate) 


Suri. Sumir Roy 
Suri A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
Suri RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
SHRI SUDHIR JAIN (Alternate ) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suet DEEPAK KABRA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RamBuat (Alternate) 


SHRI AsHOK K. NIGAM 
Sarı Manu K. Nicam (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. THAKUR 
Suri A. K. Bera (Alternate) 


Suet J. P. TIWARI 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH 
Suri. P. K. Gupta 


Suri D. V. RAJASEKHAR 
Sarı Younus GEELANI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. PRABAKARAN 
Suet N. K. VisayAvarGIA (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 
SHRI PRADEEP KAMAT 


SHRI SUDIPTO SARKAR 
Dr A. N. Bacar (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVEEN Kumar JAIN 
SHRI VENKATESHWARAN N. (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (11060). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


