.

IS 12970

( Part

5/Set 6 ) : 1993 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

OTTTFifsrilwy

lndiati Standard

SEMICONDUCTORDEVICES-INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART 5 ANALOGUE lNTEGRATED CIRCUITS CHARACTERISTICS 6 Analogue Signal ESSENTIAL RATINGS AND Section Switching Circuits

UDC

621*3~049*77-037.33 : 621.316~5

Q BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHT 1IO002

June 1993

Price Gronp 3

Semiconductor

Devices and Integrated

Circuits Sectional Committee, CONTENTS

LTD 010

Page
1
SCOPE ...
e.. . . .

.. . .. . .. . .. . ... __. . .. __. ...
1..

. .. . .. . .-.
e..

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

REFERBNCES TBRMINOLOGY

--. ..

.. . ... ... .. . ...

. .. ._. ... .. .. . . .. . .. .

LETTERSYMBOLS .. . FUNCTIONALSPECIFICATIONS DESCRIPTION OF CIRCUIT

em.

... RATINGS ( LIMITING VALUES) RECOMMENDED OPERATINGCONDITIONS

.

.

.

. .

.

ELECTRICALCHARACTERISTICS MKHANICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND OTHER DATA -. .. . .. . APPLICATION DATA

.

.

.

. .

.

1 1 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 6 6

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. This standard is one of a series of standards on Integrated Section Section Section Section Section 1 2 3 4 5 circuits. Other sections of this part are:

General Operational amplifier Audio amplifier, video amplifier and multichannel R. F. and I. F. amplifiers Voltage and current regulator

amplifiers for telecommunication

This standard is based on IEC publication 748-3 ` Semiconductor devices integrated circuits: Part 3 Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). Analogue integrated circuits `, issued by the International In reporting the results of measurements made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ` Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) `.

IS 12970 ( Part 5/&c

6 ) : 1.993

Indian Standard

SEMICONDUCTOR
PART 5 ANALDGUE Section 1 SCOPE

DEVICES-INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
-ESSENTIAL Circuits RATINGS AND Signal Switching

INTEGRATED CIRCUITS CHARACTERISTICS 6 Analogue

This standard ( Part S/Section 6 ) gives ratings and characteristics that are required to specify integrated circuits in which certain terminals, designated switch output terminals, can be caused either to reproduce the signal at the designated switch input terminals, or to be isolated from them by application of suitable electrical control signal(s) to the control terminal(s). The integrated circuit package contains switching element(s) and the associated control circuit(s). The switching elements may be controlled by one or more inputs and the control input may be analogue (differential ) or digital. Examples of analogue switching circuits are as follows: 1) Single analogue switching circuits having one switching element controlled by one control circuit. analogue 2) Multiple-channel switching circuits: a) In which the switches are independent and each switching element is controlled by its own separate control circuit. b) In which a group of analogue switching circuit is controlled by a single control circuit. The circuit may contain one or more groups of switching elements. 3) Multiplexing or demultiplexing analogue switching circuits having one or more analogue signal input terminals that can be selectively connected by a switch control circuit to one or more analogue signal output terminals. It is possible that other types of analogue signal switching circuits will either be covered by lhis section or by others. Thir; standard switches. covers both bipolar and FET

package, available separately tion.

can be accessed separately via terminations, should be specified according to the relevant specifica-

2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard:
IS No.

Title

Electrotechnical voca1885 ( Part 7/Set 5 ) : 1971 bulary: Part 7 Semidevices, conductor Section 5 Integrated circuits and microelectronics for symbols Letter 3715 semiconductor devices: ( Part 1 ) : 1971 Part 1 General aspects (first revision) Dimensions of semicon5000 Series ductor devices Semiconductor devices 12970 - Intergated circuits: ( Part 1 ) : 1990 Part 1 General 3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard the terms and definitions given in IS 1885 (Part 7tSec 5 ) : 1971 and provisions of 3 of IS 12970 ( Part 1 ) : 1990 shall be applicable. 4 LETTER SYMBOLS For the purpose of this standard the letter symbols given in IS 3715 ( Part 1 ) : 1971 shall be applicable. 5 FUNCTIONAL 5.1 Block Diagram A block diagram or equivalent circuit informztion of the analogue signal switching circuit should be given. The block diagram should identify the function of each external connection, so that no ambiguity can arise, and can also show the terminal numbers. If the encapsulation has metallic parts, any connection to them from external terminals should be SPECIFICATIONS

This standard should not be used when the constituent parts of the circuit can be specified adequately by other existing sections of Publications on essential ratings and characteristics. For example, transistors that, while within the

IS 12970 ( Part 5/Set 6 ) : 1993 indicated. The connections with any associated external electrical elements should be stated, where necessary. complete As additional information, the electrical diagram can be reproduced, but not necessarily with indications of the values of the circuit components. The following terminals may be distinguished (see Fig. 1 ): a) Supply terminals, that is, terminals intended to be connected to the power supplies, b) Switch input and output terminals, that into or out of which is, terminals analogue signals are intended to be switched, c) Control input terminals, that is, terminals into which ( generally digital ) control signals are applied. These control signals are intended to switch the analogue signal paths ON and OFF, d) References terminals, and e) Blank terminals.
5.2 Functional Description

6.2 Details of Outline and Encapsulation 6.2.1 Where applicable reference to standard outlines and bases ( see IS 5000 series ), or outlines and base drawing showing dimension and tolerances should be given. 6.2.2 Method of Encapsulation
7 RATINGS ( LIMITING VALUES )

7.0 In satisfying the followmg clauses, if maximum and/or minimum values are quoted, the manufacturer shall indicate whether he refers to the absolute magnitude or to the algebraic value of the quantity. The ratings given shall cover the operation of the integrated circuit over the specified range of operating temperatures. Where such ratings are temperature-dependent, this dependence should be indicated. 7.1 Electrical Limiting Values 7.1.1 Power Supply Voltage(s) a) Maximum value(s) and polarities, b) Maximum ripple on the supply voltage(s) ( where appropriate ), c) Maximum values of transient of spurious signals from the supplies for a specified duration ( where appropriate ), d? Maximum values of the voltage between any supply terminal and case or reference terminal, and e) The sequence of the application of supply voltages ( where appropriate ).
7.1.2 Power Supply Current(s)

The function performed by the circuit shall be specified. Where appropriate, a function table should be included. 5.3 Electrical Compatibility It should be stated whether the device is electrically compatible with other devices or families of devices if it has digital control part. 6 DESCRIPTION OF CIRCUIT 6.1 Technology The technology used in manufacture should be stated, for example, semiconductor monolithic integrated circuit, thin film integrated circuit, hybrid integrated circuit, micro-assembly, etc.

a) Maximum value(s) ( where appropriate ), and b) Maximum value(s) for a specified duration ( external fault conditions ) ( where appropriate ).

SUPPLIES

SWITCH .' INPUTS I
0

SWITCH OUT PUTS

1
0

I

1
6 b
REFERENCE

I

0

CONTROL INPUTS

FIG. 1 BLOCK DIAGRAM OF ANALOGUE SIGNAL SWITCHING CIRCUIT 2

IS 12970 ( Part S/Set 6 ) : 1993 1.1.3 Input Voltages ( Switch Inputs and Control
Inputs )

values, with respect to the reference terminals ( and polarities, if appropriate ); b) Maximum value between input terminals ( where appropriate ); and c) Maximum value of two connected inputs with respect to a reference terminal ( where appropriate ). 7.X.4 Output Voltages ( Where Appropriate ) a) Maximum values with respect to the reference terminal, b) Maximum value between output terminals ( where appropriate ), and c) Maximum value for two connected ouputs with respect to the reference terminal ( where appropriate ). 7.1.5 Input
Currents ( Where Appropriate ) ( Switch Inputs and Control Inputs )

a) Maximum

or reference-point operating temperature range, and b) Maximum power dissipation for each accessible circuit ( including switching elements ) independently. 8 RECOMMENDED CONDITIONS OPERATING

8.0 The recommended operating conditions given in 8.2 to 8.7 apply over the operating temperature range given in 8.1. 8.1 Operating Temperature Range Recommended ambient temperature range. 8.2 Power Supplies 8.2.1 Polarity, nominal values and tolerances for voltages provided by the power supplies. 8.2.2 Polarity, nominal values and tolerances for currents provided by the power supplies ( where appropriate ). 8.2.3 Maximum value(s) of the impedance(s) the power supplies ( where appropriate ). 8.3 Switch Input Terminals of or reference-point

Maximum values. 7.1.6 Output Currents ( Where Appropriate;
Note ) See

Maximum

values.

NOTE - The switch output current may, by nature of the configuration, be equal to the switch input current.

Recommended range of voltages and/or currents of the input signal and/or, where applicable, bias conditions applied to the input terminals. 8.4 Switch-Output Terminals Recommended load impedance ( where appropriate ). Recommended bias conditions ( where appropriate ). 8.5 Control Input Terminals Recommended range of the voltage current(s) of the control signal and, appropriate, of the control signal, source dance, and/or bias conditions applied control input terminals. 8.6 External Value(s) elements circuit. and/or where impeto the

7.1.7 Impedances ( Where Appropriate ) Minimum value of load impedance. 7.1.8 Short-Circuit Duration ( Between Terminals,
or Between Terminal ) a Terminal and the Reference

Maximum value ( Where Appropriate 7.1.9 Inter-Terminal priate ) Maximum values. 7.2 Temperatures 9.2.1 Operating Temperatures
Voltages

).
Appro-

( Where

Elements ( Where Appropriate ) tolerance(s) for the external must be associated with the ( Where

and that

Minimum and maximum values or ambient reference-point temperature. 7.2.2 Siorage Temperatures Minimum and maximum values. 7.2.3 Terminal Temperature

of

8.7 Repetition Rate of Control Signals Appropriate ) Maximum value for specified value of: supply voltage(s), and characteristics of control signal(s).

Maximum value of terminal temperature and maximum duration for which it may be applied. `7.3 Power Dissipation a) Maximum total power dissipation as a function of temperature over the ambient
3

9 ELECTRICAL 9.1 Characteristics Point Temperature

CHARACTERISTICS at Ambient or Reference of 25C

JS 12970 ( Part qsec 6 ) : 1993 9.1.1 Supply Currents -

Maximum values for specified values of: -

-

load impedance ( where appropriate ), and approother input voltages ( where priate ).
( where appro-

-

supply voltage(s), load conditions ( where appropriate ), dynamic condition ( where appropriate ), for example, operating frequency, duty cycle ( see Note ), and input voltage ( where appropriate ) .

9.1.2.6 Control input capacitance priate )

Maximum value for specified values of: -

NOTE -- If the supply current of the circuit is highly dependent on the dynamic conditions ( for example, CMOS circuit ), information on this dependcncy should be given.

supply voltage(s), control input voltages, frequency of measurement, and other control voltages ( where priate ).

appio-

9.1.2 Characteristics of Control Inputs 9.1.2.1
Minimum

9.1.2.7
-

Input ofSset voltage ( where appropriate )

Input impedance ( where appropriate )
value for

Maximum value for specified vaiues of: supply voltage, output voltage or current ( as appropriate ), source resistance ( where appropriate ), and common-mode input voltage.

specified values of:

-

supply voltage(s), output voltage or current ( as appropriate ), load impedance ( where appropriate ), input signal amplitude, and frequency of measurement.

9.1.2.8 Input offset current ( where appropriate )

9.1.2.2 High-level input voltage(s) Least positive ( most negative ) value for specfied values of: supply \roltage(s), ,*_-.- I-.., - ~- ~,priate), other input voltages (wnere apprc. --.I illLU load impedance (where appropriate ).

Maximum value for specified values of: - supply voltage, - output voltage or current ( as appropriate ), - rnmmnn-mnde input voltage ( where ""IyIu"II-Lu"' appropriate )I, and - differential input voltage ( where appro? priate ).
9.1.2.9 DiSferential-input appropriate ) voltage range ( where

9.1.2.3 Low-level input voltage(s)

Most positive ( least negative ) value for specified values of: supply voltage(s), other input voltages ( where appropriate and load impedance ( where appropriate ). ),

Minimum value for specified values of: - supply voltage(s), - load impedance ( where appropriate ), - output voltage or current ( as appropriate ), and - reference voltage ( where appropriate ).
9.1.2.10 dc input voltage range or common input voltage range ( as appropriate ) mode

9.1.2.4 High level input current(s)

Maximum value(s) for specified values of: 9.1.2.5
Maximum

supply voltage(s), input voltage(s), load impedance ( where appropriate ), and other input voltages (where appropriate),
Low level input currents

Minimum value for specified values of: supply voltage(s), and output voltage or current priate ). ( where approinput

9.1.2.11 Average bias current ( d@erential ( where appropriate )

value(s) for specified values of:

-

supply voltage(s), input voltages,
4

Maximum value for specified values of: -- supply valtage(s), -- common-mode input voltage, and - differential input voltage.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard iMark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 9

Bureau of Indian Standards
BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Acf, IY86 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the baBi8 of comments. Standards are any reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed: it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the foilowing reference: Dot : No. LTD 010 ( 1234 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 1 37 85 61 37 86 62

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Andheri ( East )

53 38 43, 53 16 40 I 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 1 632 92 95, I 632 78 91, 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATT. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. KANPUR. J AIPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Prlnted

at

New

Indlo Prlntlw

Press. Khorla.India

