NAT Ta IS 15105 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


я ва хеее Езера AMAA 
SER: ferga, Gears 
ak wars — fiia агат 


( TET чт ат ) 


Design, Installation and Maintenance 
of Fixed Automatic Sprinkler 
Fire Extinguishing 
Systems — Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.220.10 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR чая, 9 serere TH MT, 4% ее - 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2021 Price Group 17 


Firefighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Firefighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A sprinkler system consists of water supply and one or more sprinkler installations, each installation further 
consisting of a set of installation control valves and a pipe array fitted with sprinkler heads. The sprinkler heads 
are fitted at specified locations at the roof or ceiling, and where necessary between racks, below shelves, inside 
ovens or stoves or below obstructions. 


A sprinkler has two functions to perform. It first detects a fire, and then provides an adequate distribution of water 
to control or extinguish (suppress) it. Each function is performed separately and one is independent of the other 
except to the extent in so far as early detection makes extinction easier because the fire has not grown large. The 
classic use of the sprinkler is in the hot gas layer which forms beneath the ceiling of an enclosure in which a fire 
is developing. Sprinkler protection minimizes not only fire damage, but also non-thermal damage, and allows for 
quick resumption of operations. 


The sprinklers operate at pre-determined temperatures to discharge water over the affected part of the area below, 
the flow of water through the alarm valve initiating a fire alarm. The operating temperature is generally selected 
to suit ambient temperature conditions. Sprinklers in the vicinity of the fire, that is, only those which become 
sufficiently heated, operate. It should not be assumed that the provision of sprinkler system entirely obviates the 
need for other means of fighting fires and it is important to consider the fire precautions in the premises as a whole. 


Structural fire resistance, egress components (that enable escape of occupants from a building), fire alarm systems, 
particular hazards needing other fire protection methods, provision of hose reels and fire hydrants and portable 
fire extinguishers, etc, including safe working and good handling methods, management supervision and good 
housekeeping all needs consideration. It is essential that sprinkler systems should be properly maintained to ensure 
operation when required. This routine is liable to be overlooked or given insufficient attention by supervisors. 
It is, however, neglected at peril to the lives of the occupants of the premises and at the risk of financial loss. 
The importance of proper maintenance cannot be too highly emphasized. When sprinkler systems are disabled, 
extra attention should be paid to fire precautions and the appropriate authorities informed. This aspect has been 
discussed in detail in the standard. 


This standard has been divided into various clauses and each one deals elaborately with various aspects of the 
sprinkler protection system. The pipe sizing and hydraulic calculations for various hazards are discussed in detail. 
The standard also suggests about the location where the system is required and where the systems can be excluded. 


This standard was first published in 2002 and provided for pre-calculated systems. Based on the advancements in 
the field world over, including innovations in the design and installation of automatic fire sprinkler systems, and 
the experience gained over the years in the country, this first revision of the Indian Standard has been brought out. 
In this revision, the following major changes have been made: 
a) Working of sprinkler systems has been elaborated. 
b) Pre-calculated systems have been retained only for small installations of light and ordinary hazard 
types. 
c) Emphasis has been laid on hydraulic calculations for high hazard systems, irrespective of their size, 
in line with the practices world over. 


d) Fire protection requirements using sprinkler systems for high rise buildings have been elaborated. 


e) Classification of commodities under storage has been enlarged to accommodate most of the substances 
which are stored and used in various process industries and also for plastic based products. 


f) Pumping capacity and the water requirements for the sprinkler system have been suitably modified 
based on the innovations in sprinkler design. 


g) Innovative types of sprinklers such as early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinklers and large 
drop sprinklers, have also been listed and guidance suggested for their specialist application purposes. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 15105 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 
OF FIXED AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER FIRE 
EXTINGUIGHING SYSTEMS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies minimum requirements 
for the design, installation and maintenance of fixed 
automatic sprinkler systems in various types of 
building occupancies including industrial and storage, 
and particular requirements for sprinkler systems, 
which are integral to measures for the protection of life 
and property. 


1.2 This standard covers only the types of sprinkler 
covered and detailed in 7. 


1.3 The requirements of this standard are also applicable 
to any addition, extension, repair or other modification 
to a sprinkler system. 


1.4 The requirements of this standard are not applicable 
to water spray or deluge systems, which are covered in 
IS 15325 and IS 15519. 


1.5 The requirements are not valid for certain specific 
applications like those on ships, in aircrafts, on vehicles 
and for below ground systems in the mining industry 
and the like. 


1.6 The water supply and pumping capacity 
requirements have been already specified in Table 7 
under 5.1 of SP 7 (Part 4) for building occupancies 
namely Group A to Group F and for few occupancies 
types under Group G, and Group H. The requirements 
for water supply and pumping capacity specified in 
13 and 12 respectively are applicable only to those 
occupancies that are not specifically covered in 
Table 7 of SP 7 (Part 4); which are covered in various 
clauses of this standard. All other requirements (that 
is, except pumping and water capacities as mentioned 
above) of this standard are applicable to all the 
9 building occupancies given in SP 7 (Part 4). 


1.7 Requirements for automatic sprinkler systems 
(like pumping and water supplies), and design and 
installation for all the building occupancies have been 
specified in detail in this standard (see 1.6). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions as in 
IS 7673, IS 8757 and the following shall apply. The 
definitions are divided under various headings for 
better understanding and greater clarity. 


3.1 General 


3.1.1 Automatic Sprinkler A fire suppression or 
control device that operates automatically when its 
heat activated element is heated to its thermal rating 
or above, allowing water to discharge over a specified 
area. All sprinkler heads (see IS 9972) shall have, 


а) a thermal sensing element that responds to heat; 


b) an orifice through which water is released under 
pressure; and 


с) a deflector that forms a spray pattern of water over 
the fire. 


3.1.2 Sprinkler Yoke — That part of the sprinkler which 
retains the heat responsive element in load bearing 
contact with the sprinkler head. 


NOTE — Reference is invited to 7.2 where additional details 
are available for all types of sprinklers. 


3.1.3. Sprinkler System — An integrated system 
of underground and overhead piping designed in 
accordance with good fire engineering practice. The 
system includes a dedicated water supply that caters to 
one or more systems. The portion of the system above 
ground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically 


IS 15105: 2021 


designed piping installed in a building to which 
sprinklers are attached in a systematic pattern. Each 
system has a control valve that includes a device for 
actuating an alarm when the system is in operation. The 
system is actuated by heat from a fire and discharges 
water over the fire area. 


3.1.4 Sprinkler Characteristics 


a) Thermal Sensitivity (of Thermal Element) — 
A measure of rapidity with which the thermal 
element operates as installed in а specific 
sprinkler or sprinkler assembly. One measure of 
thermal sensitivity is the RTI, that is, response 
time index as measured under prescribed test 
conditions. A numerical value that represents the 
sprinkler’s sensitivity to heat and is used to predict 
the response of a sprinkler in fire environments 
defined in terms of gas temperature and velocity 
versus time. It is represented in the following 
equation: 

RTI = т“ (и) 
where 


T is time constant of the heat responsive 
element, and и is the gas velocity. 


The thermal element R77 for standard response 
sprinklers is 80 (m/s)? or more. The thermal 
element RTI for quick/fast response sprinklers 
is 50 (m/s)? or less. 


b) Temperature rating — See 7.5. 
с) Orifice size (K-Factor) — See 7.3 and 7.4. 


3.2 Types of Sprinkler Systems 


3.2.1 Wet Pipe Systems — Sprinkler systems employing 
automatic sprinklers attached to a piping network 
always charged with water and connected to a water 
supply so that water discharges immediately from 
sprinklers opened by heat from a fire. 


3.2.2 Dry Pipe Systems — Sprinkler systems employing 
automatic sprinklers attached to a piping network 
containing air or nitrogen under pressure, the release 
from which permits the water pressure to open a valve 
known as dry pipe valve, and then water flows into 
the piping network and discharges from the opened 
sprinklers. 


3.2.3 Deluge System — Sprinkler systems employing 
open sprinklers that are attached to a piping network 
that 15 connected to a water supply through a valve 
that 15 opened by the operation of a detection system 
installed in the same areas as the sprinklers. When this 
valve opens, water flows into the piping network and 
discharges from all sprinklers connected thereto. 


3.2.4 Pre-action System — Sprinkler systems employing 
automatic sprinklers attached to a piping network that 


contains air or nitrogen that might or might not be 
under pressure, with a supplemented detection system 
installed in the same area as the sprinklers. Pre-action 
system can be combined with either dry or wet pipe 
system applications. 


3.2.5 Anti-freeze System — Wet pipe sprinkler systems 
employing automatic sprinklers attached to a piping 
network containing anti-freeze solution and that are 
connected to a water supply. The anti-freeze solution 
is discharged, followed by water, immediately upon 
operation of sprinklers opened by heat from a fire. 


3.2.6 High Rise System — Sprinkler system in which 
the highest sprinkler is more than 45 m above the lowest 
sprinkler or above the sprinkler pumps, whichever is 
the lower. 


3.2.7 Life Safety System — Sprinkler systems forming 
an integral part of measures required for the protection 
of Ше, especially where evacuating the building 
depends on the performance of the sprinkler system 
and sprinklers are required expressly for life safety 
purposes. 


3.3 Type of Sprinklers 


Тһе Various types of sprinklers are given below: 


3.3.1 According to the Release Mechanism 


a) Fusible element sprinklers — Opened under the 
influence of heat by melting of a component. 


b) Glass bulb sprinklers — Opened under the 
influence of heat by the bursting of glass bulb 
through pressure resulting from expansion of the 
fluid enclosed therein. 


3.3.2 According to the Type of Discharge 


a) Conventional sprinkler — А sprinkler that has 
components similar to a standard-spray sprinkler 
and has a spherical water distribution directed 
towards the ground over a definite protection 
area. These sprinklers shall discharge from 40 or 
more percent of the total water flow initially in an 
upward direction. 


b 


wm 


Spray sprinkler — Induces a paraboloid water 
distribution directed towards the ground over a 
definite protection area. These sprinklers shall 
discharge from 80 or more percent of the total 
water flow in a downward direction. 


3.3.3 According to the Mounting Pattern 


a) Pendent sprinkler (Non-storage type) — Sprinkler 
designed to be installed in such a way that the water 
stream is directed downward towards the deflector 
which in turn directs the water downwards toward 
the protected area. The sprinkler is designed to 
have the deflector oriented vertically below the 
pipe to which the sprinkler is connected. 


b) Upright sprinkler (Non-storage type) — Sprinkler 
designed to be installed in such a way that the water 
stream is directed upward against the deflector 
which in turn redirects the water downwards 
toward the protected area. The sprinkler is 
designed to have the deflector oriented vertically 
above the pipe to which the sprinkler is connected. 


с 


wa 


Sidewall sprinkler (Non-storage type) — Sprinkler 
having special deflector that are designed to 
discharge most of the water away from the 
nearby wall in a pattern resembling one quarter 
of a sphere, with a small portion of the discharge 
directed at the wall behind the sprinkler. 


d) Recessed sprinkler (Non-storage type) — 
Sprinkler in which all or part of the body, other 
than the shank thread, is mounted within a 
recessed housing with the plane of the orifice 
above the plane of the ceiling, or behind the plane 
of the wall on which the sprinkler is mounted. 


е 


— 


Flush sprinkler (Non-storage type) — Sprinkler in 
which essentially all of the body, other than the 
shank thread with the exception of the thermal 
sensing element, is mounted above the lower 
plane of the ceiling. 


f) Concealed sprinkler (Non-storage type) — A 
recessed sprinkler with a cover plate. 


a 


Sprinkler rosette (Escutcheon) — Plate covering 
the gap between the shank or body of a sprinkler 
projecting through a suspended ceiling and the 
ceiling, or wall. 


5 


3.3.4 According to Special Applications 


Sprinklers are classified according to their application 
in specific occupancies. Some parts of the world 
classify sprinklers as storage and non-storage sprinklers 
whereas, some other classify them as control mode 
specific application (CMSA type) sprinklers and control 
mode density area (CMDA type) sprinklers. At present, 
previous classifications are being used in this standard 
(with references to new classifications) and over a 
period of time, efforts will be made to identify the same 
with classifications adopted in rest of the world. 


a) Extended coverage (EC) sprinkler — A sprinkler 
where the area of coverage exceeds that given for 
a standard sprinkler based on the occupancy being 
protected. A sprinkler which extends the usual 
maximum area of protection at increased spacing 
and listed as a EC sprinkler. 

b) Extra-large orifice (ELO) sprinkler — A type of 
spray sprinkler which discharges at a hemispherical 
pattern, provide greater flows at lower pressures in 
comparison to standard or large orifice sprinklers. 

c) Large drop sprinklers — A type of spray sprinkler 
that is capable of producing characteristic large 
water droplets and is listed for its capability to 
provide fire control of specific high-challenge fire 
hazard. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


d) Early suppression fast response  (ESFR) 
Sprinklers — А type of fast response sprinkler 
that is listed for its capability to provide fire 
suppression of specific high-challenge fire hazards. 
Sprinkler that gives a downward parabolic pattern 
of water discharge with high momentum and mass 
flow directly below and adjacent to the sprinkler 
and a diminishing density with increasing distance 
from the sprinkler. 


e) Intermediate level or rack storage sprinkler — A 
sprinkler that is installed within a storage rack. 
A sprinkler equipped with integral shields to 
protect its operating elements from the discharge 
of the sprinklers installed at higher elevations. 
These sprinklers are typically K-5.6 (K-80), 
K-8.0 (K-115) or K-11.2 (K-160) non-storage 
ones equipped with an attached water shield over 
the top of the thermal sensing element. The water 
shield prevents wetting of the thermal sensing 
element by water from sprinklers at a higher 
elevation in the rack or at ceiling level. 

f) Cut-off or open sprinkler — A sprinkler protecting 
a door or window between two areas only one of 
which is protected by the sprinkler. 


g) Window sprinklers — Sprinklers specifically 
listed to provide appropriate fire rating for heat 
strengthened or tempered glass windows using 
closed sprinklers. 


3.3.5 According to Occupancies 


a) Storage automatic sprinkler — А closed head 
sprinkler with a nominal K-factor of 160 or larger 
having either a fast response or a standard response 
element and designated as ‘storage sprinkler’. 
These sprinklers protect storage-type occupancies 
and/or any other high heat release type fires. 

b) Non-storage type sprinklers — A sprinkler which 
protect non-storage type occupancies and or any 
other low to moderate heat release type fires such 
as manufacturing occupancies. 


3.4 Alarm Valve 


3.4.1 Water Flow Alarm Device — A device that 1s 
installed on a sprinkler system that detects a water flow 
when one or more sprinklers operate and provide alarm. 
It is connected to a fire alarm system to further initiate 
an alarm condition or 15 used electrically to initiate a 
fire pump or local audible or visual alarm. 


3.4.2 Alarm Test Valve — A valve through which water 
may be drawn to test the operation of the water motor 
fire alarm and/or of any associated electric fire alarm. 


3.4.3 Alarm Check Valve — A check valve, of the wet, 
dry or composite type, which is specifically designed to 
allow a means of alarm notification when water flows 
through it. Each type of sprinkler systems mentioned in 
3.2 have alarm check valves connected thereto. 


IS 15105: 2021 


3.5 Piping (See Fig. 1 and Fig. 2) 


3.5.1 Trunk Mains — A pipe connection to two or more 
water supply pipes to the installation main control 
valve set(s). 


3.5.2 Supply Pipe — A pipe connecting a water supply 
to a trunk main or the installation main control valve 
set(s), or a pipe supplying water to a private reservoir, 
suction tank or gravity tank. 


3.5.3 Main Distribution Pipe (Feed Main) — A pipe 
feeding a distribution pipe or more distribution pipes. 


3.5.4 Distribution Pipe (Cross Main) — Pipes supplying 
the branch lines, either directly or through riser nipples 
(sub-distribution pipe). The piping network of a 
tree-type sprinkler system that provides water to the 
branch lines. A pipe feeding either a range pipe directly 
or a single sprinkler on a non-terminal range pipe more 
than 300 mm long. Distribution pipe from a main 
distribution pipe, to a terminal branched pipe array 
(distribution pipe spur). 


3.5.5 Range (or Branch) Pipe — A pipe feeding 
sprinkler directly or via arm pipes of restricted length. 


мов PPE 
ance РР 
v. T < x RISER 
\/ i N ы 
“ 02910 pol qq 
V : N 
А Сте 
NC oce T" 
A | 


INSTALLATION CONTROL 
VALVE SET (ALARM VALVE 
& STOP VALVE) 


3.5.6 Arm Pipe — A pipe less than 300 mm long, other 
than the last section of a range pipe, feeding a single 
sprinkler. 


3.5.7 Riser — A vertical pipe feeding a distribution or 
range pipe. 


3.5.8 Drop — A vertical pipe feeding a distribution or 
range pipe. 


3.5.9 Terminal Range Configuration — A pipe array 
with only one water supply route from a distribution 


pipe. 


3.5.10 Terminal Main Configuration — A pipe array 
with only one water supply route to each range pipe. 


3.5.11 System Riser — The above ground horizontal or 
vertical pipe between the water supply and the mains 
that contain a control valve and water flow alarm 
device. 


3.5.12 Pipe Array— Pipes feeding a group of sprinklers. 
Pipe arrays can be looped, gridded or branched. 


3.5.13 End-centre Array — Pipe array with range pipes 
on both sides of a distribution pipe. 


SPRINKLER 
HEAD 
pire P—dq piP 
4 V 
V 
М Y, 
V 
V c / 
Ха 

ARM PIPE DRAIN VALVE 
HORIZONTAL WITH PLUG 


Fic. 1 MAIN ELEMENTS OF A SPRINKLER INSTALLATION 


КЕҮ 
1 2-END-SIDE ARRAY, WITH CENTRAL FEED 
2 3-END-SIDE ARRAY, WITH END FEED 
3 3-END-CENTRE ARRAY, WITH CENTRAL FEED 
4 2-END-CENTRE ARRAY, WITH END FEED 


Fic. 2 RANGE PIPE ARRAYS IN GROUP OF SPRINKLERS 


IS 15105 : 2021 


IS 15105: 2021 


3.5.14 End-side Array — Pipe array with range pipes 
on one side only of a distribution pipe. 


3.5.15 Zone — Sub-division of an installation with 
a specific flow alarm and fitted with a monitored 
subsidiary stop. 


3.6 Hydraulics of the System 


3.6.1 Hydraulically Designed System — A calculated 
sprinkler system in which pipe sizes are selected on a 
pressure loss basis to provide a prescribed water density, 
іп Ipm/m_”, or a prescribed minimum discharge pressure 
or flow per sprinkler, distributed with a reasonable 
degree of uniformity over a prescribed area. 


3.6.2 Fully Hydraulically Calculated — A term applied 
to pipe work sized as specified in 10.5 or an installation 
in which all the pipe work downstream of the main 
installation control valve set is sized. 


3.6.3 Assumed Maximum Area of Operation 
(Hydraulically Most Favourable Location) — The 
location in a sprinkler array of an AMAO of specified 
shape at which the water flow is the maximum for a 
specific pressure. 


3.6.44 Assumed Maximum | Area of Operation, 
Hydraulically Most Unfavourable Location — The 
location in a sprinkler array of an AMAO of specified 
shape at which the water supply pressure is the 
maximum needed to give the specified design density. 


3.6.5 Design or Demand Area — The design or demand 
area is a theoretical area of the sprinkler operation 
within a protected building іп m?, representing the 
worst case area where a fire could burn. 


3.6.6 Design Density — Тһе design density is a 
measurement of how much litres of water per square 
metre of floor area (Ipm/m?) should be applied to the 
design area. The minimum density of discharge, in 
mm/min of water, for which a sprinkler installation is 
designed, determined from the discharge of a specified 
group of sprinklers, in lpm, divided by the area covered, 
їп m’. 


3.6.7 Pre-calculated — A term applied to pipework 
sized as specified in 10.4 or an installation in which pipe 
downstream of the design point is sized by calculations. 

NOTE — This term is only for the extension of old 


pre-caleulated systems. All new systems shall be fully 
calculated, see 10.3.1(b). 


3.6.8 Design Point — Point on a distribution pipe 
of a pre-calculated installation, downstream of 
which pipework is sized from tables and upstream 
of which pipework is sized by hydraulic calculation 
(see also Fig. 11 and Fig. 12). 


3.6.9 “А” Gauge — Pressure gauge connected to a town 
main connection, between the supply pipe stop valve 
and the non-return valve. 


3.6.10 В" Gauge — Pressure gauge connected to and 
on the same level as an alarm valve, indicating the 
pressure on the upstream side of the valve. 


3.6.11 'C' Gauge — Pressure gauge connected to and 
on the same level as an alarm valve, indicating the 
pressure on the downstream side of the valve. 


3.7 Layouts 


3.7.1 Standard Sprinkler Layout — A rectilinear lay out 
with the sprinkler aligned perpendicular to the run of 
the ranges (see Fig. 3A). 


3.7.2 Staggered Sprinkler Layout — An off-set lay out 
with the sprinklers displaced one half pitch along the 
range or branch pipe relative to the next range or ranges 
(see Fig. 3B). 


3.7.3 Looped Layout — Sprinkler system in which 
multiple cross mains are tied together so as to provide 
more than one path for water to flow to an operating 
sprinkler and branch lines are not tied together 
(see Fig. 3C). 


3.7.4 Gridded Layout — Sprinkler systems in which 
parallel cross mains are connected by multiple branch 
lines. An operating sprinkler will receive water from 
both ends of its branch line, while the other branch lines 
help transfer water between cross mains (see Fig. 3D). 


3.8 Building 


3.8.1 Ceiling Height — Distance between the floor and 
underside of the ceiling above. 


3.8.2 Flat Ceiling — A continuous ceiling in a single 
plane. 


3.8.3 Horizontal Ceiling — A ceiling with a slope not 
exceeding 1 in 6 (9?). 


3.8.4 Sloped Ceiling — A ceiling with a slope exceeding 
1 in 6 (99). 


3.8.5 Smooth Ceiling — A continuous ceiling free from 
significant irregularities, lumps or indentations. 


3.8.6 Compartment — A space completely enclosed by 
walls and ceiling. 


3.8.7 Drop-out Ceiling — A suspended ceiling system 
which is installed below the sprinklers. 


3.8.8 Obstructed Construction — Panel construction 
and other construction where beams, trusses and other 
building members impede the heat flow or water 
distribution in a manner that materially affects the 
ability of sprinklers to control or suppress a fire. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


KEY: 
S DISTANCE BETWEEN SPRINKLERS 
D DISTANCE BETWEEN SPRINKLERS 


3A RECTANGULAR MATRIX 


WATER SUPPLY 


ЗС LOOPED LAYOUT 


3B STAGGERED LAYOUT 


WATER SUPPLY 


3D GRIDDED LAYOUT 


Fic. 3 SPRINKLER NETWORK LAYOUT 


3.8.9 Unobstructed Construction — Construction 
where beams, trusses and other building members do 
not impede the heat flow or water distribution in a 
manner that materially affects the ability of sprinklers 
to control or suppress a fire. 


3.9 Storage (See Fig. 4) 


3.9.1 Bin Box Storage — A storage arrangement that 
typically consists of solid shelves vertically located 
no more than 900 mm apart in combination with solid 
full height wooden or metal vertical barriers that are 
horizontally located no more than 1 200 mm apart. 


3.9.2 Cartoned Storage — A method of storage 
consisting of corrugated cardboard or paperboard 
containers fully enclosing the commodity. 


3.9.3 Clearance Storage — The distance from the top 
of the storage to the deflectors of ceiling sprinklers 
above. 


3.9.4 Exposed Plastic Commodities Storage — Those 
plastics not in packaging or coverings that absorb water 
or otherwise appreciably retard the burning hazard of 
the commodity. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


4A FREE- STANDING OR 4B PALLETIZED RACK 
BLOCK STACKING STORAGE (ST 1) (BEAM PALLET RACKING) (ST 4) 


4C POST- PALLET STORAGE 4D POST- PALLET STORAGE 4E SOLID OR SLATTED SHELVES (ST 5 
IN SINGLE ROW (ST 2) IN MULTIPLE ROWS (ST 3) и 


Fic. 4 STORAGE ILLUSTRATION 


3.9.5 Flue Space — Тһе spaces between rows of 
storage. Flue spaces that are less than a net 75 mm 
wide are not considered flue spaces for fire protection 
purposes. In addition, any space between rows of 
storage that exceeds 600 mm horizontally is considered 
an aisle for fire protection design purposes. 


a) Longitudinal — The space between rows of 
storage perpendicular to the direction of loading 
with a width not exceeding 600 mm between 
storage. 


b) Transverse — The space between rows of storage 
parallel to the direction of loading. 


3.9.6 High Piled Storage — Solid piled, freestanding, 
palletized, rack storage and shelved storage where the 
height exceeds 4 m. 


3.9.7 Open Top Containers — These are containers 
having at least one side and open on top. Containers that 
have five sides will collect and hold up water that has 
been discharged from operating ceiling-level sprinklers 
thus delaying the water delivery down through the flue 
spaces where it is needed to either suppress or control 
the fire. 


3.9.8 Palletized Storage — A storage arrangement 
whereof commodities are stored on pallets. Pallet loads 
are placed one on top of another with the bottom load 
located directly on the floor. 


3.9.9 Rack — Any combination of vertical, horizontal 
and diagonal structural members that support stored 
materials or commodities. 


a) Storage in racks that use combinations of vertical, 
horizontal and diagonal members, with or without 
solid shelves, to support stored material. Racks 
may be fixed-in-place or portable. Loading may 
be either conducted manually by using lift trucks, 
stacker cranes, or hand placement, or automatically 
by using machine-controlled storage and retrieval 
systems. 


b 


ме 


Single-row racks have no longitudinal flue spaces, 
are up to 1.8 m deep and double-row racks are two 
single-row racks placed back-to-back separated 
by a longitudinal flue space, have aisles over 
0.6 m wide. 


с 


ме 


Multiple-row racks are racks greater than 
3.6 m wide, or single-row or double-row racks 
separated by aisles 0.6 m wide or less having an 
overall width, including flues, greater than 3.6 m. 
Multiple-row racks can be drive-in, drive-through, 
flow-through, push-back or double-deep standard 
racks. The rack depth is the determinant. 


3.9.10 Shelf Storage — Storage on structures up to and 
including 750 mm in depth and separated by aisles at 
least 750 mm wide. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


3.9.11 Solid Piled Storage — On-floor storage, without 
pallets or other material handling devices. Storage of 
commodities stacked one over the other leaving no 
horizontal spaces between unit loads. 


3.9.12 Slatted Shelf Rack — A rack where shelves are 
fixed in place with a series of narrow individual solid 
supports used as the shelf material and spaced apart 
with regular openings. 


3.9.13 Solid Shelf Rack — A rack where shelves 
are fixed in place with a solid, slatted or wire mesh 
barrier used as the shelf material and having limited 
or no openings (less than 70 percent open), in the shelf 
area. Solid shelving within storage racks can promote 
horizontal fire spread and negatively impact the amount 
of sprinkler water that can reach the entire vertical 
height of the rack. 


The area of a solid shelf is defined by minimum net 
clear flue space width of 75 mm at all four edges of the 
shelf. A net clear flue space width is the gross width 
of the flue space minus the width of any obstruction 
(such as a rack upright). 

NOTE — For example, 125 mm flues that have 50 mm wide 


horizontal rack members within the space would be acceptable 
because the net flue space width is 75 mm. 


3.9.14 Unexpanded Plastics — Unexpanded plastics 
are high-density materials that may be blown into 
different shapes such as drums, containers, electronics 
housings, etc. 


4 REQUIREMENTS REGARDING 


DOCUMENTATION 


4.1 Drawings shall be drawn up in accordance with 
the following requirements, see also IS 962. Where 
acceptable to the approving authorities, digital copies 
of drawings are also permissible. 


a) Drawings shall be clear, contain all required 
details including scale and point of compass and 
shall be dated. 


Drawings of new installation shall show the entire 
compound; all buildings therein, with their door 
and window openings, and the boundary walls. 
Buildings under construction and future extension 
envisaged shall be indicated by the dotted lines. 


b 


wm 


с 


— 


Drawings of extensions to approved existing 
installations need not show the rest of the 
compound but sufficient details shall be given 
of the existing installations in correlation to the 
extension, to enable the authorities concerned to 
check the plans and offer comments. 


d 


— 


In case of storied buildings, drawings submitted 
shall include plans of each storey together with 
sectional elevations. 


e) Drawings shall be on white paper or ammonia 
paper or ferro prussiate paper. 


IS 15105: 2021 


f) Drawings shall generally be prepared in 
accordance with SP 46, shall not exceed 
850 х 1200 mm in size and shall be drawn to a 
scale of 1 : 500 or 1 : 1 000. In the case of very 
large compounds with more than one building, it 
is advisable to submit separate drawing for each 
risk with a key plan showing the relative situation 
of the various buildings, etc, in the compound. 


4.2 Drawings shall also depict the following details 
with illustration: 

a) Pucca walls to be shown by double lines, doors 

and windows being clearly marked. 

b) Iron or other non-masonry walls to be shown by a 

thin line and nature of construction indicated. 

c) Fire walls to be indicated by the sign 
‘FIRE WALL at each end of the wall alongside 
or across them at regular intervals and marked in 
distinctive colours. 

Fire doors and/or shutters (see IS 3614) to be 
marked as follows: 


1) Single fire door and/or shutter — ‘SFD’; and 
2) Double fire door and/or shutter — ‘DFD’. 
Skylights to be marked ‘Sky Lights’ or ‘SL’. 
Boiler to be shown by a rectangular figure marked 
‘BOILER’. 


Sprinkler mains to be shown by a blue line; the 
diameter, length and number of pipes being 
marked alongside and specials and reducers to be 
clearly indicated as‘ — mm, diameter, lengths 
of metre each’. 


d 


М7 


е 


f) 


wn 


a 


в 


h) Sprinkler pumps to be clearly marked апа Ше 


capacity and head to be indicated in each case. 

j) Pump(s) suction piping to be shown dotted and 
diameter to be indicated. 

k) Fire service water tanks and reservoirs to be 
shown to scale. 

m) Sprinkler trunk mains to be shown by a blue line, 
the sizes being marked alongside. 

n) Fire alarm bells to be shown by a blue line, the 
sizes being marked ‘F. A. B’. 

p) Sprinklered blocks to be marked ‘S’. 

q) Electric cable(s) for the fire pump(s) to be shown 
in green line(s). 

r) Material specifications of equipment and 
components of the installation, indicating the 
name of manufacturers and the Indian Standard 
specifications, if any. 


5 


— 


Inthecase ofinternal appliances, details ofthe areas 
of the various compartments, their occupation and 
the quantities and types of appliances proposed. 


In the case of sprinkler and hydrant (see IS 908) 
installations, fully dimensioned plans in duplicate 
shall be submitted. 


t 


— 


10 


4.3 In addition to the above, the following details would 
be necessary in the case of sprinkler installation: 


a) Drawings showing layout of the entire sprinkler 
system, incorporating material specifications, 
different sizes of mains, etc. 


b 


— 


In case of storied blocks, floor area of each floor 
showing particulars. Separate sprinkler layout 
drawing shall be submitted for each floor. 


с 


ме 


Each sprinkler layout drawing shall indicate 
the details of sprinklers used like number of 
sprinklers, type, temperature rating, K-factor and 
sprinkler identification number, etc. 


d 


wa 


Number of sprinklers on each installation control 
valve set. 


e) Height of highest sprinkler on each installation 
control valve set; the type(s) of installation(s) 
and the nominal diameter(s) of the main control 
valves. 


f) Number or reference of each installation main 
control valve set and its accessibility. 


g) Layout of pump house showing clearly the suction, 
delivery and priming (if any) апа freeboard 
arrangements. 


h) Details of water storage tanks giving particulars of 
compartmentation and common sump, details of 
inflow and levels for tappings for suction, inflow, 
overflow and free board levels. 

j) Substation location in relation to other blocks if 
the pump is electrically driven. 

k) Route of cable from substation to fire pump house. 

m) Schematic circuit line diagram showing electric 
feed to fire pump. 

n) A statement that the system will comply with this 
specification including details of any deviations 
from its recommendations with the reasons for the 
deviations. 


wm 


A list of the components suitable for sprinkler 
use, included in the system each identified 
by manufacturer’s name and model/reference 
number. 


р 


ma 


Hydraulic calculations to show that system is 
fully balanced particularly if in-rack automatic 
sprinkler system is provided. 


q 


4.4 Installation Layout Drawings 


4.4.1 General 


The scale shall be not less than 1 : 100. Layout drawing 
shall include the following information: 

a) North point indication. 

b) The class or classes of installation according to 


hazard class including stock category and design 
storage height. 


с) Constructional details of floors, ceiling, roofs and 
exterior walls and walls separating sprinklered 
and non-sprinklered areas. 


d 


М7 


Sectional elevations of each floor of each building 
showing the distance of sprinklered from ceiling, 
structural features, etc which affect the sprinkler 
layout or the water distribution from the sprinklers. 


е 


<~ 


The location and size of concealed roof or ceiling 
voids, offices and other enclosures sealed at a 
level lower than the roof of ceiling proper. 


Indication of trunking, staging, platforms, 

machinery, fluorescent light fittings, heaters, 

suspended open cell ceilings, etc, which may 

adversely affect the sprinkler distribution. 

g) The sprinkler types(s) and temperature ratings(s). 

h) The location and type of main control valves and 
location of alarm motors and gongs. 

j) The location and details of any water flow and air 
or water pressure, alarm switches. 

k) The location and size of any tail-end air valves, 
subsidiary stop valves and drain valves. 

m) The drainage slope of the pipework. 

n) The location and specification of any orifice plate. 

p) A schedule listing the numbers of sprinklers, 

medium and high-velocity sprayers, еіс and the 

area of protection. 


q) A key to the symbols used. 


4.4.2 Pre-calculated Pipework 


For pre-calculated pipework the following details shall 
be given on, or with, the drawings: 


a) Identification of the design points of each array on 
the layout drawing. 


b) A summary of the pressure losses between the 
control valve and the design points at the following 
design rates or flow: 


In a light-hazard 225 litre/min 


installation 


In an ordinary-hazard 1 000 litre/min 


installation 
In a high hazard The flow 
installation corresponding to 
the appropriate 
design density 
NOTES 


1 Pre-calculated pipework is applicable only to the extensions 
of old systems with such pipework. [Pre-calculated pipework 
is only for the extension of old pre-calculated systems, 
see 10.3.1(a)]. 

2 For light and  ordinary-hazard installations with 
pre-calculated pipe work, the pressure needed at the design 
point is not specified. Instead the friction loss in the pipe work 
between the control valve and the design points is limited to 


11 


IS 15105 : 2021 


a predetermined value, incorporated in the value specified 
for pressure at the control valves. Static head is added to this 
pressure to give the value defining the minimum actual water 
supply running pressure. 


4.4.3 Hydraulically Calculated Pipe Work 


For hydraulically calculated pipe work, the following 
shall be given, with detailed calculations, either 
as purpose designed work sheets or as a computer 
print-out: 
a) For each design area of operation: 

1) Area identification. 

2) Hazard class. 

3) Specified density of discharge (in mm/min). 

4) Assumed area of maximum operation (AMAO) 

(in m?). 
5) Number of sprinklers in the AMAO. 
6) Maximum area covered per sprinkler (іп m?). 


7) Detailed and dimensioned working drawings 
showing the following: 

i) Node or pipe reference scheme used 

to identify pipes, junctions, sprinkler 

heads and fittings which need hydraulic 


consideration. 

ii) Position of the hydraulically most 
favourable AMAO. 

iii) Position of the hydraulically most 
unfavourable AMAO. 

iv) Number of sprinklers upon which the 
design density is based. 


v) Height above datum of each point of 
identified pressure value. 


b) For each operating sprinkler: 
1) Sprinkler node or reference number. 
2) Sprinkler nominal K-factor. 
3) Flow through the sprinkler (in l/min). 


4) Inlet pressure to the sprinkler or sprinkler 
assembly (in bar). 
c) For each hydraulically significant pipe; 
1) Pipe node or other reference. 
2) Pipe nominal bore (in mm). 
3) Hazen-Williams constant (c or K-factor) for 
the pipe. 
4) Flow through pipe (in l/min). 
5) 
6 
7) 


Nominal fluid velocity (in m/s). 


wm 


Length of pipe (in m). 

Numbers, types and equivalent lengths of 
fittings. 

8 
9) 
10) 


— 


Static head change in pipe (in m). 
Pressures at inlet and outlet of pipe in bar. 
Friction loss in pipe (in bar). 


IS 15105: 2021 


11) Indication of flow direction. 


NOTE — A line diagram of the pipe layout should be prepared 
showing the following: 
i) Node or pipe reference numbers. 


i 


“24 


Distribution pipes. 
ш) Range pipes. 
iv) Sprinkler heads under consideration. 
v) Four hydraulically most unfavorably placed heads. 
vi) Flow through, and pressure at the end of each 
hydraulically significant pipe. 


4.5 Water Supply Drawings 


The drawings shall show water supplies and pipework 
therefrom up to the installation control valves. The 
drawings shall be on an indicated scale of not less 
than 1: 100. A key to the symbols shall be included. 
The position and type of stop and check valves and 
any pressure reducing valve, water meter, water lock, 
orifice plate and any connection supplying water for 
other services shall be indicated. 


4.6 Hydraulic Calculation 


4.6.1 Pre-calculated Installations 


An hydraulic calculation (with relevant flow tests) shall 
show that each trunk main together with any branch 
main, from each water supply to a main installation 
control valve set, water supply test and drain valve 
and control valve ‘C’ gauge (that is, including the 
installation control valves) is capable of providing the 
required pressure and flow at the installation control 
valve test and drain valve. 
NOTE — Pre-calculated pipework is applicable only 
to the extensions of old systems with such pipework. 
[This term is only for the extension of old pre-calculated 
systems, see 10.3.1(b)]. 


4.6.2 Fully Hydraulically Calculated Installations 


Where the pipe work is fully hydraulically calculated 
the following additional details shall be given: 


a) A modified pressure-flow characteristic graph 
indicating the usable pressure at any flow up to the 
maximum installation demand. 

b) Demand  pressure-flow characteristic graph 
for each installation for the hydraulically most 
unfavourable (and if required, the most favourable) 
AMAO with pressure taken as at the control 
valve “С” pressure gauge. 


5 CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPANCIES 


5.1 General 


As the water supply, pumping capacity and other 
features of the sprinkler installations depends not only 
on the size of the risk, but also on its fire growth and 
spread potentialities, the risks are to be categorized 
under the following classes for the purpose of design 
of the installation: 


12 


a) Light hazard class, 

b) Ordinary (or Moderate) hazard class, 
c) High hazard class, and 

d) Storage hazards. 


5.2 Light Hazard 


5.2.1 Light hazard occupancies shall be understood 
as those with low fire loads and with materials 
within having low rates of heat release. Light hazard 
occupancies are of non-industrial type. 


5.2.2 No single compartment greater than 126 m? are 
allowable within light hazard occupancies and such 
compartments shall be fire separated by walls having 
30 min rating and doors. 


NOTE — Otherwise the sprinkler system shall be designed as 
per ordinary hazard occupancy. 


5.3 Ordinary (Moderate) Hazard 


5.3.1 Occupancies where combustible materials with 
a medium fire load and medium combustibility are 
processed or manufactured. 


5.3.2 Also those occupancies not complying with 5.2.2 
shall be treated as moderate hazard occupancy. 


5.3.3 Materials may be stored in moderate hazard 
occupancies but the same shall be governed by 8.1.2(b). 


5.4 High Hazard 


5.4.1 High hazard, process, covers occupancies where 
the materials concerned have a high fire load and high 
combustibility and are capable of developing a quickly 
spreading or intense fire. 


5.4.2 Certain high hazard occupancies shall need to 
be protected by water spray systems and attention is 
drawn to IS 15325 in this regard. 


5.5 Storage Hazards 


5.5.1 High hazard storage covers the storage of goods 
where the height of storage exceeds the height limits 
given in 8.1.2. The overall fire hazard of stored goods is 
a function of the combustibility of the materials being 
stored, including their packaging, and of the storage 
configuration. 


5.5.2 Commodities are also categorized under four 
headings and sprinkler protection requires to be 
designed according to the category. 


5.6 List of Occupancies under Different Classes 


The list provided hereunder under each class is not 
very exhaustive. For categorization of any risk not 
listed, reference to the authorities concerned with 
full particulars is essential prior to the design of the 
installation. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


5.6.1 Light Hazard Occupancies [see 5.2.2] 36. Motor garages 


Places of worship having assembly (like temples, 37. Paint shops 
churches), educational institutions, hospitals (excluding 38. Paper mills 
kitchens, stores, utilities), hotels (excluding kitchens, 39 
stores, utilities), libraries, museums, nursing homes, 
office buildings (excluding store rooms), prisons, 
residential and apartments [see 5.2.2 and 11.8.2.7]. 41. Printing presses 


42. Restaurants and cafes 


. Photographic film factories 
40. Plywood factories 


5.6.2 Ordinary Hazard Occupancies [see 5.3.2] | 
. . 43. Rope factories 
Such occupancies apart from others, also includes 


manufacturing units as listed below: 44. Rubber and plastics (other than foam plastics) 


45. Shopping malls and multiplex occupancies 


1. Abattoirs . 
2. Abrasive wheel and powder ОЗЕР о 
3. Aircraft factories (excluding hangers) oie ӨШЕДІ юн . 
: А Ери 48. Synthetic fibres/yarn factories 
4. Airport terminal buildings | 
Р 49. Tanneries 
5. Bakeries Eei 
6. Biscuit factories E 2 i ез 4 T А i 
7. Book-binders and publishers а а а caw mills) 
; 52. Theatres 
8. Breweries 53. Tob factoti 
9. Boot and shoe units и к d 5 and 
10. Cables 25. к ipe 
11. Candles к 1. г ч 5 
12. Cardboard factories ыы L 
: А : 57. Wax factories 
13. Carpentry апа furniture [not involving 
foam/foam plastics] 5.6.3 High Hazard Occupancies 
14. Carpets Occupancies housing or manufacturing (as the case 
15. Car parking areas within building or basement may be) the following: 


16. Cement factories 1. Aircraft hangers 
17. Ceramics factories 2. Bitumen and wax coated paper 
18. Chemicals 3. Celluloid goods cellulose nitrate 
19. Cinematographic and TV production broadcasting 4. Cigarette filter 
studios 5. Distilleries 
20. Cloth processors 6. Duplicating/stencil paper explosives 
2]. Confectioneries 7. Fire works 
22. Dairies 8. Floor cloth and linoleum 
23. Dehydrated vegetable factories 9. Foam plastics and foam rubber 
24. Departmental stores/retail shops 10. Hessian cloth/tar felt 
25. Electronic equipment and assembly 11. Match factories 
26. Engineering workshops 12. Oil mills 
27. Fibreboard factories 13. Paint, colour and varnish factories 
28. Flax, jute and hemp mills 14. Resin, rosin, turpentine and lamp black 
29. Flour mills 15. Rubber substitutes making units 
30. Food and beverages 16. Saw mills 
31. Glass factories 17. Surgical cotton, mattress and pillow makers 
32. Hosiery and garment 18. Tar distillation units 
33. Jewellery 19. Wood wool manufacturers 


34. Laboratories 5.7 Storage Occupancies 


35. Metro stations and associated occupancies within 


thereof Storage risks (stacked, high-piled or racked) are 


categorized under four classes as per classifications 


13 


IS 15105: 2021 


below. The list is not very exhaustive; and for materials 
other than what is stated, specialist literature may be 
referred. 


a) Category-I 
1. Adhesive (non-flammable) 


2. Alcohol < 20 percent by volume in glass or 
plastic bottles 


3. Beer 


4. Bottles — Glass and plastic containing 
non-flammable liquids 


. Cement — bagged 

. Ceramics 

. Coffee — packaged, cartoned 
. Crockery 


NO со чо tA 


. Electrical and mechanical appliances — 
Metallic 


10. Fertilizers — Phosphate based 
11. Foods, tinned in cardboard boxes and trays 


12. Foods, tinned wrapped іп unexpanded 
plastic film 


13. Footwear other than plastic 
14. Glass fibre 
15. Glassware 
16. Grain in sacks 
17. Groceries 
18. Hardware items 
19. Meat-chilled or frozen 
20. Metal goods 
21. Paints water based 
22. Paper sheets stored horizontally 
23. Wine 
b) Category-II 


1. Alcohol > 20 percent by volume in glass 
bottles 


2. Asphalt paper in horizontal rolls 

3. Batteries, dry cell 

4. Batteries, wet cell 

5. Beer containers in plastic or wooden crates 

6. Books 

7. Cardboard (all types) — Stored flat 

8. Cardboard, except corrugated rolls stored 
horizontally 

9. Cardboard cartons — Empty light weight 
boxes 


10. Carpets without foam backing 


14 


. Cartons, waxed (flats) 
. Cellulose baled (not cellulose nitrate or 


cellulose acetate) 


. Cellulose pulp 

. Cereals boxed 

. Charcoal excluding impregnated charcoal 
. Cheese — packaged, cartoned 

. Chewing gum — packaged, cartoned 

. Chocolates — packaged, cartoned 

. Cloth, wool or cotton 

. Cocoa products — packaged, cartoned 
. Coconut matting 

. Cork and cork-baled 

. Cotton - baled 

. Electrical cable or wire 

. Fertilizer — nitrate based 

. Fibreboard 


. Flammable liquids in non-combustible 


containers 


. Flax 

. Flour in sacks or paper bags 

. Foodstuffs (in sacks, frozen, packaged) 
. Footware — plastic 


. Furniture, upholstered with natural fibres 


and materials but excluding plastics 


. Furniture, wooden 

. Furs - flat in boxes 

. Grain In sacks 

. Hemp 

. Hides 

. Jute 

. Knitware 

. Laminated board 

. Leather goods 

. Linen 

. Mattresses other than expanded plastic 
. Milk powder in bags or sacks 

. Pallets, plastic or wood 

. Paper (sheets stored vertically) 

. Paper (like newspaper), rolls stored 


horizontally 


. Paper, pulp — Rolled or baled 
. Paper waste — Baled 


. Pharmaceuticals — Glass bottles 


51. 
52. 


53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 


66. 
67. 


68. 


Photographic films 


Plastics (non-foamed, other than cellulose 
nitrate) 


Pillows feathers or down 

Rags loose or baled 

Roof felt in rolls horizontal storage 
Rope — natural or synthetic fibre 
Soap, water soluble 

Spiritous liquors cased glass bottles 
String — natural or synthetic fibre 
Sugar in bags or sacks 

Textiles 

Timber, sawn (not in ventilated stacks) 
Timber, unsawn 

Tobacco — Leaf and finished goods 


Vegetable fibres — hay, straw, hemp, cotton, 
etc 


Wood 


Wood, chipboard, plywood stored flat, not in 
ventilated stacks 


Wood pulp Baled 


c) Category – Ш 
1. Adhesive (flammable) 


NO ANN tA RA U 


. Cardboard, 


. Alcohol > 20 percent by volume in plastic 


bottles 


. Asphalt paper in vertical rolls 

. Butter — Whipped and spread 

. Candles 

. Candy - packaged and cartoned 
. Canvas, tar impregnated 

. Carbon black 


. Cardboard, except corrugated rolls stored 


vertically 


corrugated rolls stored 


horizontally 


. Cardboard cartons empty heavy weight 


made up boxes 


. Carpet tiles 

. Carpets with foam backing 
. Cartons, waxed (made up) 
. Cloth, synthetic 


. Electrical and mechanical appliances — other 


than metallic 


. Esparto — loose or baled 


. Fibreglass insulation 


19. 
20. 
21. 
22; 
23. 
24. 


25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29; 
30. 
31. 


32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


Firelighters 

Flammable liquids in combustible containers 
Linoleum 

Matches 

Paper tissue rolls horizontally stored 


Paper (like 
vertically 


newspaper), rolls stored 


Paper, bitumen and wax coated 

Paper, waste 

Pharmaceuticals — plastic bottles 
Photographic paper 

Plastic furniture 

Plastic materials other than what is stated in 
Category-II and expanded-polyurethane and 
polystyrene 

Resins excluding flammable liquids 

Roof felt in rolls vertical storage 

Rubber goods including tyres and tubes 
Timber, sawn (in ventilated stacks) 

Wicker work 


Wood veneer sheets 


d) Category-IV 


1. Ammunitions 


N 


. Cardboard, 


corrugated (in rolls stored 


vertically) 


. Diapers 

. Expanded polystyrene packagings 
. Foamed rubber 

. Foamed upholstery 

. Liquor bottles other than beer 

. Paints — Oil based and Nail polish 
. Paper tissue rolls vertically stored 
. Tyres, stored horizontally 

. Wax, paraffin 

. Wood veneer sheets 

. Wood wool baled 


6 PLANNING STAGE 


6.1 Initial Considerations 


6.1.1 Consultation 


Where a sprinkler system or an extension or alteration 
to a sprinkler system is being considered for new or 
existing building, the authorities concerned shall be 
consulted at an early stage: 


IS 15105: 2021 


6.1.2 Outline Design 


Consideration should be given to any benefits that 
might be gained by changes in building design, work 
procedures, etc, when preparing the outline design. 
In planning site layout and building design, particular 
consideration should be given to the following: 

a) Occupancy hazard class and goods category 
which determine the water discharge density and 
water supply pressure and flow; 

b) Siting of any main water supply connection(s); 

c) Siting of any water supply tank(s) or reservoir; 

d) Siting of any pump house; 

e) Maximum quantity of water available from 
the supply source compared with the system 
requirements; 

f) Location of sprinkler installation control valves, 
together with the access thereto, indication of their 
position, and the disposal of drainage and water 
supply test water; 


a 


Source and means of supply of electric power, etc; 
and 


5 


1) Protection of valve sets, pipework and sprinklers 
against accidental damage. 


6.1.3 It is important to consider building design in 
the context of fire protection, for example, choice 
of materials, support of sprinkler pipework having 
regard to the load imposed on structure by the weight 
of sprinkler pipework and the contained water, need 
for inbuilt drainage (which is strongly advised for 
computer areas) or raising of base of stacked goods 
above the floor where water damage may be severe, 
etc, when storage of goods is involved it may be 
appropriate to consider the height of the building and 
of material stacks, and the height and type of any 
storage rack which may have a considerable bearing 
on fire protection costs. The design of double entry 
storage racks may be influenced by the need to mount 
sprinklers therein. Where sprinklers are fitted in racks 
additional rack structural members may be needed to 
prevent impact damage to the sprinkler head and pipe 
work. 


6.1.4 Interaction with Other Fire Protection Measures 


Account shall be taken of possible interaction between 
sprinkler systems and other fire protection measures. 
Examples of possible adverse interactions between 
sprinkler protection and other fire protection measures 
are: 


a) Water damage to an inadequately shielded fire 
alarm control panel in a sprinkler protected area 
with consequent possible failure of the fire alarm 
system. 


b) Operation or failure of smoke detectors in zones 
adjacent to one in which water discharge has taken 


place because of the water spray mist travelling to 
adjacent zones. 


с) Such possible interactions need careful 


considerations. 
6.2 Extent of Sprinkler Protection 


6.2.1 Building to be Sprinkler Protected 


The sprinkler system shall provide protection to all 
parts not specified as exceptions (see 6.2.2) in one of 
the following: 


a) Building under consideration; 


b) Any building communicating directly or indirectly 
with the building under consideration; 


c) Where there are unprotected buildings within 9 m 
of protected building the exposure hazard can be 
reduced by using cut-off sprinklers over unsealed 
openings and drenchers over exposed walls (such 
as glass walls which are combustible) in the 
protected building; and 


d 


М7 


Consideration should be given to Ше protection of 
load bearing steel structure. 


6.2.2 Exceptions (Buildings and Parts of Buildings not 
Sprinkler-Protected) 


Obligations sprinkler protection shall not be provided 
in the following parts of a building or plant: 


a) Grain silos or grain bins inside buildings forming 
part of corn mill, distillery, maltings or oil mills; 


b) Ovens, hovels and kilns in pottery, earthenware, 
brick, tile and glass works; 


c) Areas, rooms or places where the water discharged 
from a sprinkler may pose a fire or explosion or 
toxic hazard; and 


d) Sprinklers should not be fitted over salt baths, 
metal melt pans or frying ranges, or in positions 
where water may discharge into them or indirectly 
drain into them nor should water pipes be fitted in 
these positions. 


6.2.3 Optional Exceptions 


Generally sprinkler protection shall be considered for, 
but need not be provided in, the following parts of a 
building or plant: 


a) Stairs, spaces below stair headings (but not rooms 
above a stair) and lift wells. Any part not provided 
with sprinkler protection shall be fire separated 
by walls. Fire doors not less than 120 min in fire 
resistance, shall be provided in the openings of 
such walls; 


b 


— 


Washrooms, toilets and WCs (but not cloak rooms) 
of area less than 5 m?; 

с) ш paper making machines, the undersides of 
screens or of shields erected over the wet and 
(where there 15 по other fire hazard); and 


d) Server rooms and Ше like, where alternate 
protection by other automatic extinguishing 
systems, (for example, gas, powder, water spray, 
water mist). 


6.2.4 Sprinklers shall not be required in electrical 
equipment rooms where all of the following conditions 
are met: 


a) Room is dedicated to electrical equipment only; 
b) Only dry-type electrical equipment is used; 


c) Equipment is installed in a 120 min fire-rated 
enclosure including protection for penetration in 
walls; 


d) Cable coating is done in trays or trenches to 
prevent flame spread; and 


e) Storage is not permitted in the room. 


6.2.5 Communicating Buildings 


Sprinkler protection shall be considered for, but need 
not be provided in the following communicating 
buildings or structures: 


а) A building or storey segregated from the 
sprinklered building by walls of not less than 
240 min fire resistance in which each opening is 
protected by two (arranged in series) fire doors 
or fire shutters each of not less than 120 min fire 
resistance; 


b 


wm 


Canopies of non-combustible construction, not 
extending beyond 2.3 m from the building wall. 
Any such canopy not provided with sprinkler 
protection shall be fitted with cut-off sprinklers 
under the canopy over each opening between it 
and the spinklered building. Any opening 2.5 m 
or less in width shall be provided with a cut-off 
sprinkler, positioned centrally over the opening. 
Openings exceeding 2.5 m in width shall be 
provided with cut-off sprinklers over the opening, 
not more than 2.5 m apart and with a sprinkler not 
more than 1.25 m, from each side; 


с 


ме 


Exterior loading docks and platforms either of the 
non-combustible construction or with the space 
beneath closed off against accumulation of debris; 


d 


М7 


Stairs, washrooms and WCs external to Ше 
sprinkler-protected building, in which all openings 
to the sprinkler-protected building are protected 
by doors of not less than 60 min fire resistance or 
cut-off sprinklers; and 


Staircases, washrooms, toilets and WCs external or 
internal to the sprinkler-protected building which 
form a means of communication between the 
sprinklered building and non-sprinklered building. 
In any such part not provided with sprinkler 
protection all openings into the communicating 
area from the sprinklered and from the 
non-sprinklered building shall be protected by 
fire doors of not less than 120 min fire resistance 
rating. 


e 


wm 


17 


IS 15105 : 2021 


6.3 Storage in Open or Open Sided Shed 


The distance between combustible materials stored in 
the open or in an open-sided shed and the sprinklered 
building shall be no less than 10 m or 1.5 times the 
height of the stored material whichever is greater 
unless there is a 120 min rated fire wall in between or a 
suitable drencher system to protect the openings of the 
protected building facing the open storage. 


6.4 Protection of Concealed Spaces 


a) If the height of the concealed space between main 
roof and suspended ceiling exceeds 800 mm, 
measured between the underside of the roof and 
the top of the suspended ceiling or between the 
floor and the underside of the raised floor, these 
spaces shall be sprinkler protected. 


b 


— 


If the height of the concealed space at roof and 
suspended ceiling 15 800 mm or less but contain 
combustible materials or are constructed with 
combustible materials, such spaces shall also be 
sprinkler protected. Only listed sprinklers for 
concealed combustible spaces shall be used. 
NOTE — Electrical cables with voltage less than 250 V, 


single phase, with a maximum of 15 cables, are exempted. 


с 


ме 


The protection іп Ше concealed space shall be 
designed to light hazard when the main hazard 
class is pre dominantly light hazard, and ordinary 
hazard in case of all other occupancies. 


6.5 Height Difference Between the Highest and 
Lowest Sprinklers 


a) The height difference between the highest and 
lowest sprinkler on an installation (that is, 
connected to a single installation control valve) 
shall not exceed 45 m. 

Where the height difference between the highest 
and lowest sprinkler in a system or building 
exceeds 45 m, requirements of Annex B shall be 
applied. 


b 


wm 


7SPRINKLERS-GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 General 


Sprinklers shall not be re conditioned or repaired. 
Sprinklers removed for any reason or used 
and/or defective sprinklers shall be replaced by 
new ones. Sprinklers shall not be painted except by 
the manufacturer for identification purposes. They 
shall not be altered in any respect nor have any type 
of ornamentation or coating. Powder and corrosive 
protection coatings on the frames and deflectors are 
acceptable only during manufacturing of the sprinkler 
in line with the approvals and listings for that sprinkler. 


7.2 Types of Sprinklers and their Application 


Sprinklers shall be selected for use according to the 
occupancy and its configuration. All types of sprinklers 


IS 15105: 2021 


shall be positioned and installed as per various 
provisions in this standard. Following are the various 
types of sprinklers that are covered as per this standard: 


a) Standard pendent and upright sprinklers; 
b) Sidewall spray sprinklers; 

c) Extended coverage (EC) sprinklers; 

d) Open sprinklers; 

e) Intermediate or rack sprinklers; 


f) Early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinklers; 
and 


g) Large drop (LD) sprinklers. 


7.2.1 Standard Pendent and Upright Sprinklers 
(Conventional, Non-storage Type) 


These are designed to produce a spherical type of 
discharge with a proportion of water being thrown 
upwards the ceiling. These are usually built with a 
universal type deflector enabling the sprinklers to be 
installed either upright or pendent. It is also possible 
to designate them for upright or pendent for certain 
applications. 


7.2.2 Standard Pendent and Upright Sprinklers (Spray 
Type, Non-storage Type) 


These are designed to produce а hemispherical 
discharge and nearly no water is directed towards the 
ceiling. These are built both ways that is upright or 
pendent. These shall not be used in high hazard, high 
piled storage risks and also in case of ordinary/high 
hazard class risks where there is exposed structural 
steel work or where the roof or ceiling or its supporting 
structure is of combustible material. 


7.2.3 Ceiling or Flush and Concealed Type of Sprinklers 
(Non-storage Type) 

These are designed for use with the concealed pipework 
and are installed pendent with plate or base flush to 
the ceiling with the heat sensitive element below the 
ceiling line. These shall be installed only in light or 
ordinary hazard risks and not for the high hazard class. 


Common applications are hotels, boardrooms, offices, 
retail stores, etc, where the aesthetic appearance is of 
value. The deflectors are normally integral with the 
assembly and retracted types of deflectors are also 
acceptable if approved for the purpose while listing. 


7.2.4 Sidewall Spray Sprinklers (Non-storage Type) 
These are designed to produce a downward paraboloid 
discharge and the special deflector fitted to the 
sprinkler causes most of the water to be discharged 
on the opposing wall and floor with a little of water 
discharging on the wall behind the sprinkler. These 
shall not be installed in high hazard applications or 
above suspended ceilings. 


18 


These are not substitutes for standard sprinklers but 
may be used in areas as indicated below; and in offices, 
hotels, halls, lobbies, corridors, conveyor housings, etc. 
Sidewall sprinklers are also available with extended 
discharge types: 

a) Corridors/passages/ramp entry and exits. 

b) Cable ducts. 

c) Columns and structural members in ordinary 
hazard (OH) and high hazard (HH) storage 
facilities. 

d) Light hazard (LH) and ordinary hazard (OH) 
without storage. 

Where sidewall sprinklers are used for general 
protection purposes they may only be installed under 
flat ceilings, unless approved for protection otherwise. 
Sidewall sprinklers shall not be installed in HH 
installations or OH storage areas or above suspended 
ceilings for general protection purposes. 


7.2.5 Extended | Coverage 
Non-storage Type) 


Sprinklers (Special, 


These types of sprinklers shall be used as follows: 


a) Unobstructed construction consisting of flat or 
smooth ceiling with slope not exceeding | in 
6 (9°). 

b) Unobstructed or non-combustible obstructed 
construction if specifically approved for such use. 


c) Under smooth or flat ceilings with slope not 
exceeding | in 6 (9°) if specifically approved for 
such use. 


The usage of extended coverage sidewall sprinklers 
(non-storage type) should be restricted to rooms with 
low fire loadings, such as hotel bedrooms, dwelling 
units and individual office; unless specifically listed for 
higher hazards. 


7.2.6 Open or Cut-off Sprinklers (Non-storage Type) 


Sprinklers where the thermal sensing element and 
the orifice cap have been removed. Normally used in 
deluge systems where all the sprinklers work in tandem 
to protect specific hazards or locations. 


7.2.7 Early Suppression Fast Response (ESFR) 
Sprinklers (Storage) 


These types of sprinklers work on suppression mode 
and shall be used as follows: 


a) High challenge storage hazards where storage 
and ceiling heights are high like 12 m and 14 m, 
respectively unless listed specifically otherwise. 
Normally, provision of ESFR sprinklers are not 
backed up by the intermediate or rack sprinklers 
unless listed otherwise; and 


b) They are used only in wet systems unless 
specifically approved for use in other types of 
systems. 


7.2.8 Large Drop Sprinklers (Storage) 


These types of sprinklers work on control mode and 
shall be used as follows: 


a) These sprinklers are used for high challenge fires 
like storage similar to ESFR sprinklers at heights 
10.5 m and 12 m, respectively for storage and 
ceiling heights. These sprinklers shall need the 
backup intermediate or rack sprinklers unless 
listed otherwise. 


b) Permissible for installation in wet, dry or 
pre-action systems. 


7.2.9 Intermediate or Rack Sprinklers (Storage Type) 


These are standard sprinklers only and used in 
conjunction with ceiling sprinklers for storage 
application in racks when height of storage exceeds 
4m. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


7.3 Sprinklers and Hazard Classes 


Sprinkler types, pattern, hazard class, height and 
K-factor, etc shall be as per Table 1. 


7.4 Sprinkler Size and K-Factor 


Sprinklers shall have a nominal orifice sizes of 10 mm, 
15 mm, 20 mm or 25 mm as shown in Table 1. The 
K-factor of the sprinkler shall be as per the following 
equation: 
K-Q/(Py* 

where 

K= K-factor, 

О = Flow through the sprinkler orifice, in Ipm, and 


P= Pressure at the entry point of the sprinkler, in 
bar. 


The desired ‘K’ factors for the sprinklers are shown in 
Table 2. 


Table 1 Types of Sprinkler 
( Clauses 7.3 and 7.4) 


SI No. Hazard Class Height of Building K-Factor Sprinkler 
m 
Pattern Response 
(1) Q) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Light Up to 9 57 or 80 Pendent or upright, sidewall type Quick or standard 
More than 9 but within 15 115 Pendent or upright, sidewall type Quick or standard 
ii) Moderate Up to 9 80 or 115 Pendent or upright Quick or standard 
More than 9 but within 15 115 Pendent or upright Quick or standard 
iii) High Up to 9 115 or 160 Pendent or upright Quick or standard 
More than 9 but within 15 160 and above Pendent or upright Quick or standard 
iv) High storage (see Note) Up to 13.7 200 to 400 Pendent or upright ESFR types 
v) In-rack sprinklers Not applicable 80 or higher Pendent or upright Quick or standard 


NOTE - See also Annex C. 


Table 2 Tolerance, Nominal Size and Discharge of Sprinklers 
( Clause 7.4 ) 


SI No. Nominal K-Factor Tolerance Range Nominal Orifice Size 
mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) 57 56-64 10 
п) 80 76-84 15 
iii) 115 107 — 118 20 
iv) 160 159—166 20 
у) 200 195-209 20 
уі) 240 231-254 20 
уп) 280 272-301 25 
уш) 320 311—343 25 
іх) 360 349-387 25 
х) 400 390-430 25 


19 


18 15105: 2021 


7.5 Temperature Rating and Colour Coding 


Sprinklers shall have one of the temperature ratings 
given in Table 3 and shall be correspondingly colour 
coded. 


7.6 Sprinkler Sensitivity Rating 


Sensitivity rating of sprinklers shall be according to the 
type of their pattern as per Table 4. 


7.7 Selection of Temperature Rating for Sprinkler 


7.7.1 The temperature rating of a sprinkler shall not 
be less than 30 °C greater than the highest anticipated 
ceiling temperature of the location (site) of the 
installation. 

NOTE — If the local conditions in occupancies calls for 


continuous air conditioning round the clock throughout the 
year, relaxation may be considered. 


7.7.2 In high hazard installations protecting high piled 
storage with or without intermediate sprinklers, the roof 
or ceiling sprinklers (except ESFR sprinklers) shall 
have a temperature rating of 141 °C unless specifically 
listed otherwise. Under glazed roof or where there 
are roofing sheets of PVC or similar plastic material, 
the sprinkler rating shall be either 79 °C to 100 °C, or 
141 °C for high piled storage. The temperature rating 


of the roof or ceiling sprinklers within 3 m of the plan 
area of the boundary of either an oven or a hot process 
ventilating hood, fitted with sprinklers shall be the same 
as the oven or hood sprinklers, or 141 °C, whichever 
is lower. Considering the temperature sensitivity of 
sprinklers, they shall be located at least 750 mm to 
2 000 mm (depending upon the ambient temperature 
inside) away from hot sources in the blocks concerned. 


7.8 Mixing of Different Types of Sprinklers 
Different types of sprinklers shall not be used for 
protecting the same hazard area unless otherwise 
deemed necessary. Also, the following shall be avoided: 
a) Different types of sprinklers normal 
pendent/upright, extended discharge type, 
side wall, large drop, ESFR, etc (like storage, 
non-storage, and special protection sprinklers). 
b) Sprinklers having different K-factors. 
с) Sprinklers having different orientation. 
d) Sprinklers having different nominal temperature 
ratings. 
е) Sprinklers having different nominal RTI values. 
f) Sprinklers having different linear and/or area 
spacing requirements (for example, extended 
coverage and non-extended coverage sprinklers). 


Table 3 Temperature Ratings of Sprinklers 
( Clause 7.5) 


SI No. Fusible Link Type Glass Bulb Type 
Temperature Rating Colour of Yoke Arm or Temperature Rating Colour of Bulb 
°С Operating Element °C 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

1) 68/74 Natural 57 Orange 
ii) 93/100 White 68 Red 
iii) 141 Blue 79 Yellow 
iv) 182 Yellow 93 Green 
v) 227 Red 121/141 Blue 
vi) = = 182 Mauve 
vii) - - 204/260 Black 


Table 4 Sensitivity Rating of Sprinklers 
( Clause 7.6) 


SI No. Sprinkler Pattern Sensitivity rating 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Conventional, spray and those for K-Factor < 160 Standard or Fast response 
ii) Ceiling or flush, sidewall (upright or pendent) Fast 
iii) ESFR, LD or EC Fast 
iv) Recessed, concealed types (including sidewall types) Unrated 


20 


7.9 Protection to the Sprinklers 


a) Any sprinkler, other than ceiling or flush sprinkler, 
installed in a position at risk of accidental damage 
shall be fitted with a metal guard certified and 
approved for use with the sprinkler installed. It is 
particularly important for intermediate sprinklers 
in storage racks. 


b 


wm 


Sprinklers installed in a rack or under a perforated 
shelf, platform and the like, where water from 
higher sprinklers including roof/ceiling sprinklers 
may cause wetting in close proximity to the 
bulb or fusible element shall be fitted with metal 
water shields listed and approved for use with the 
sprinkler installed. The shield shall not be directly 
attached to an upright sprinkler deflector or yoke 
assembly at site, unless it forms an integral part 
of the sprinkler while manufacturing. Such 
shield shall form little or no obstructions to the 
sprinkler spray pattern. Certified/approved water 
shields (according to the size of various types of 
sprinklers) can also be used to provide cover for 
the sprinklers subject to approval of authorities 
concerned. 


с 


— 


Sprinkler rosettes shall be provided for the 
concealed sprinklers, which shall be of metal or 
thermo-set plastics and shall be suitable for the 
sprinkler service. No part of the cover plate shall 
be used to support ceilings or other structures and 
shall project from the ceiling below the top of the 
visible portion ofthe heat sensitive element. It shall 
be ensured that the cover plates are not painted at 
site. All coloured or coated cover plates need to 
be painted or coated by the original manufacture. 
Cover plates, coated or painted at site shall need to 
be replaced. 


d 


М7 


Sprinklers installed in areas where corrosive 
vapours are prevalent shall have corrosion 
resistant coatings suitable to sprinkler service. 
Frequent coating with good quality petroleum 
jelly is recommended. The coating shall however 
not be applied on the fusible links or the body of 
the glass bulb. 


e) Sprinkler shall be installed only with spanners or 
wrenches recommended by the manufacturer. 


7.10 Spare Sprinklers to be Kept in Stock 


A stock of spare sprinklers shall be maintained in the 
premises so that prompt replacement is possible after 
the operation/damage of sprinkler heads. The spares 
shall be kept in an easily accessible location under 
conditions where the temperature does not exceed 
38 °C. 

The guidelines as in Table 5 shall be followed in respect 
of stocking spare sprinkler heads in protected buildings. 


Spanners or wrenches for the sprinklers shall also be 
kept along with the spare sprinklers in readiness. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


Table 5 Guidelines for Stocking Spare Sprinklers 
( Clause 7.10 ) 


SI Хо. Hazard All State Capitals and Other 
Class Within 200 km thereof Locations 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Light 5 sprinklers of each type 15 
ii) Ordinary 15 sprinklers of each type 25 
iii) High and 30 sprinklers of each type 50 
Storage 


NOTE — When there is more than one installation within a complex, 
the above quantity shall also be increased in proportion. Each type 
of sprinkler used in the installation, such as conventional or spray or 
ceiling/flush or sidewall sprinklers and appropriate temperatures shall 
be stocked as per the above requirements. 


8 DESIGN AREA AND DENSITY OF 
APPLICATION 


8.1 The design density and the assumed maximum 
area of operation for various types of hazards are as 
specified below: 


8.1.1 Light Hazard 


The density of water discharge and design area of 
operation shall be a minimum of 2.25 lpm/m? over a 
maximum area of 84 m’. Even if the area concerned 
is less than 84 т>, then density applicable shall not be 
reduced. 


8.1.2 Ordinary Hazard 


The density of water discharge and design area of 
operation shall be minimum of 5 Ipm/m? at over a 
maximum area of 360 т>. Even if the area concerned 
is less than 360 т>, then density applicable shall not be 
reduced. 


Materials can be stored in ordinary hazard occupancies 
and protected at the same density of water and area of 
operation when the following conditions are complied 
with: 
a) Maximum storage heights shown in Table 6 shall 
not be exceeded. 
b) Maximum storage areas shall be 50 m? for any 
single block, with no less than 2.4 m clearance 
around the block. 


NOTE — If the conditions are not met, entire occupancy shall 
be treated as high hazard. 


Table 6 Maximum Storage Heights Permissible in 
Ordinary Hazard Occupancies 


[ Clause 8.1.2 (a) ] 


SI No. Storage Maximum Storage Height 
Category m 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Category I 4.00 
ii) Category II 3.00 
iii) Category III 2.10 
iv) Category IV 1.25 


IS 15105: 2021 


8.1.3 High Hazard 


The density of water discharge and design area of 
operation shall be minimum of 12.2 Ipm/m? over а 
maximum area of 260 m". If area concerned is less than 
260 m’, then density applicable shall not be reduced. 


8.1.4 Storage Hazard 


Density of water application for storage areas is 
determined by the flow and pressure requirements 
based on the type of sprinkler selected (see Annex C). 
Density of application is normally high, in the range of 
25-50 Ipm/m'. 


8.1.5 Buildings Like Residential, Hotels and the Like 


For buildings where the occupancy is divided into 
several rooms it is difficult to locate most demanding 
design area as per 8.1. Hence, room area plus 
communicating space like corridor/passage which 
constitutes hydraulically most demanding shall be 
deemed as design area (see 8.8). 


8.2 Special Sprinklers 


For extended coverage (EC) sprinklers, the minimum 
design area shall be that corresponding to the hazard 
classification, or the area protected by five sprinklers 
whichever is greater. Extended coverage sprinklers 
shall be designed according to their listing. 


For large drop sprinklers, design area shall be a 
rectangular area having a dimension parallel to the 
branch lines at least 1.2 times the square root of the 
area of sprinkler operation used, which shall permit the 
inclusion of sprinklers on both sides of the cross main. 


For ESFR sprinklers, the design area shall be a 
rectangular area that consists of the most hydraulically 
demanding area of 12 sprinklers, and consisting of 
4 sprinklers on each of adjoining branch lines. 


For intermediate sprinklers, it shall be assumed that 
3 sprinklers are operating simultaneously at the most 
hydraulically remote position on each level of in-rack 
sprinklers, up to a maximum of three levels: 


a) Where rack aisles are 2.4 m or more in width 
only one rack needs to be assumed as involved. 
Where rack aisles are less than 2.4 m but greater 
than or equal to 1.2 m in width, two racks shall be 
assumed to be involved. 

b) Where rack aisles are less than 1.2 m in width, 
three racks shall be assumed to be involved. 

C) It is not necessary to assume simultaneous 
operation of neither more than three rows of 
sprinklers in the vertical plane nor more than three 
rows of sprinklers in the horizontal plane. 


8.3 Adjustment in Area of Operation (Design Area) 


a) ш case of sloping roofs, area of operation 
(design area) shall be increased by 30 percent 


22 


without increasing the density of application 
when the slope angle exceeds 1 in 6 (9?) for all 
non-storage applications in case of all types of 
sprinklers except sidewall and ESFR sprinklers. 
b) In case of dry pipe systems and double lock 
pre-action systems, area of sprinkler operation 
(design area) shall be increased by 30 percent 
without increasing the density of application. 


с 


— 


Where high temperature sprinklers are used 
for high hazard occupancies, area of operation 
(design area) shall be reduced by 25 percent 
without revising the density of application subject 
to minimum area of 185 т. 


d) Where area of operation (design area) are required 
to be adjusted for more than one of conditions 
stated in (a), (b) and (c) above, adjustments 
shall be compounded based on area of operation 
(design area) as per 8.1. 


e 


МУ 


Concealed spaces whether combustible ог 
non-combustible shall be considered on the same 
basis as above with regard to design area and 
design density unless such spaces are less than 
5 m? in area. 


8.4 Communicating Hazards 


Where two differential hazards are not separated by 
fire walls, required sprinkler protection for the more 
demanding design basis shall extend 6 m beyond its 
perimeter. 


8.5 Water Curtain Sprinklers 


Sprinklers in a water curtain shall be suitably designed 
to provide a discharge of at least 35 Ірт for every linear 
metre of openings (intended to be protected) and it 
shall be ensured that each sprinkler discharges at least 
55-80 Ipm at 1.4 bar pressure depending upon spacing 
between nozzles which shall not exceed 2.5 m. 


Water supply required for curtain sprinklers shall be 
added to the main installation requirements as stated 
in 13. 


NOTES 

1 Water curtain sprinklers are with open type nozzles; and 
generally there is no restriction of usage (location) as they 
only provide a blanket effect and protect particular areas where 
separation is required. 

2 The number of sprinklers required to operate can be obtained 
from the length of wall also. Say, for a 20 m long wall, total 
flow required can be 700 Ipm (20 * 35 Ірт). Assuming each 
sprinkler discharges 60/80 Ipm, 12 number of sprinklers may 
be required; each spaced at say 1.7 m (20 m/12). 


8.6 Exposure Protection 


a) Piping shall be suitably designed to provide a 
minimum of 0.5 bar pressure at any sprinkler 
when all the sprinklers facing the exposure 
operating together. 


b) It is also advisable to provide sprinklers at a 
minimum of 0.5 bar pressure for the entire 
exposed load bearing columns from diagonally 
opposite sides of the columns. 


с 


ме 


Water supply required for exposure protection 
sprinklers shall be added to the main installation 
requirements as stated in 13. 


d 


М7 


A single line of sprinklers is permitted to protect а 
maximum of two stories of wall area or two levels 
of vertically aligned windows where architectural 
features are sufficiently flush to allow rundown. 


Where window sills or similar features result 
in recesses or projections exceeding 25 mm in 
depth, separate sprinklers shall be provided for 
each window on each level, regardless of whether 
protection is being provided for windows or 
complete walls. 


е 


— 


For protection systems of glass walls, sprinklers 
shall be located (150 mm to 300 mm) from the wall 
surface and within 150 mm of the top of the wall, 
with maximum spacing of 2.4 m or as indicated in 
the sprinkler listing for exposure protection use. 


a 


For protection of window and similar openings, 
listed window sprinklers shall be positioned 
within 50 mm of the top of the window sash. 


5 


8.7 Sprinklers Provided іп Ducts 


Such sprinklers shall be so designed to provide a 
discharge pressure of at least 0.5 bar at each sprinkler 
when all operate together. 

NOTE — Return air ducts and plenums shall be provided 


with sprinklers. Supply air ducts need not be provided with 
sprinklers. 


8.8 Buildings like Residential, Hotels 


Sprinkler installation for the above type of buildings 
where the occupancy is divided into several room 
(see 8.1.5) shall be as per the following: 


a) All the rooms shall be enclosed with walls having 
a fire resistance of 30 min except the external wall 
leading outside which shall have a rating of at 
least 60 min. 


b) If the area of the most demanding largest room 
is less than what is stated in 8.1, then minimum 
area specified therein shall be considered for 
determining design density. 


c) Door openings shall be protected with fire doors 
of at least 30 min fire rating. 


d) Where all the rooms are opening to a corridor, 
design area for the room with largest demand shall 
include at least 2 sprinklers from the corridor for 
light hazard and 5 sprinklers for ordinary hazard 
occupancies. 


e) Where the design area in such buildings involves 
service chutes, at least 3 sprinklers in chutes shall 


23 


IS 15105 : 2021 


be included in the design area, considering a 
discharge of at least 55 — 80 Ipm per sprinkler. 


f) Sprinklers used in hotel guest rooms and adjoining 
corridors as well as all dwelling units in apartment 
buildings shall be listed quick response or listed 
residential sprinklers. 


8.9 Window Sprinklers 


a) These sprinklers can be used as interior protection 
of windows or glazing in a sprinklered or 
non-sprinklered building for providing exposure 
protection. These shall be installed as per the 
manufacturer's installation manual subject to 
listing conditions. 

b) Window sprinklers shall be permitted to cover 

more than 20 m? of window area per level. 


c) The starting pressure shall be calculated based on 
the application rate over 2 m? of window area. 


d) The maximum spacing between window sprinklers 
shall not exceed 2.4 m unless listed for a greater 
distance. 

е) Up to 1.5 m width of windows, sprinklers with 

K-factors of 40 shall be used for each window 

and installed at a distance of 200 mm from the 

windows. For more than 1.5 m and up to 3 m 

width, 2 sprinklers with K-factors of 40 shall be 

used for each window and installed at a distance of 

250 mm from the windows. 


8.10 Reference shall be made to Annex G of SP 7 
(Part 4) for exhaustive requirements to protect 
commercial cooking equipment by automatic sprinkler 
installation. 


9 DESIGN APPROACH 
LOCATION AND INSTALLATION 


SPACING, 


9.1 General Requirements 


a) Entire block or building concerned shall be 
sprinklered as per the provisions given here under. 
No occupancy shall be allowed partial protection 
with sprinklers unless such portions of the 
building are exempted under the clause ‘allowed 
exceptions’ or segregated from non-sprinklered 
portions by fire walls and fire doors with at least 
120 min rating. 


b 


wm 


Sprinklers shall be so located that protection 
area for each sprinkler as specified below is not 
breached. In no case, protection area shall not 
exceed the requirement indicated. 


с 


— 


Sprinklers can be omitted from areas within the 
protected building as specified under 'allowed 
exceptions’. 

d) All the measurements between sprinklers or of 
areas covered by groups of individual sprinklers 


shall be taken in the horizontal plane. Not with 


15 15105: 2021 


standing the above provisions, Ше hydraulic 

calculations shall show the dimensions of true 

lengths measured along the slope of the pipe. 
e) Sprinklers shall be installed upright or pendent 
as required under the circumstances, with the 
deflector parallel to the slope of the roof, ceiling or 
pitch line of stairs. Where the slope of the roof is 
greater than 1 in 3, a line of sprinklers shall be fitted 
at the apex unless there is a row of sprinklers at 
not more than 750 mm distant radially therefrom. 


Components of the system like valves, gauges, etc, 
shall be accessible round the clock for inspection, 
test and maintenance. 


9.2 Other Limitations (Size of the Installation) 


a) For sprinkler systems based on area protection 
limitation, detailed design shall be carried out 
based on maximum floor area on any one floor 
to be protected by sprinklers supplied by any one 
sprinkler system riser or combined system riser 
with limitations in as shown in Table 7 under one 
installation control valve [see B-2.6(c)]. 

b) In case of multiple hazard or mixed occupancy 
like high hazard with ordinary hazard, respective 
limits shall prevail that is, area occupied for high 
hazard occupancy shall not exceed 3 720 m? and 
total area shall not exceed 4 830 m? on one or 
more floors for a single system and so on. 
c) Detached occupancies (falling under differential 
hazards) communicating with each other shall 
also fall to be treated under area limitations as 
stated above. 
d) Detached occupancies shall always be provided 
with separate systems subject to area limitations 
as above. In case, where the number of sprinklers 
is less than 50, such occupancies may be allowed 
to be supplied by system from the adjoining 
building. However, one system shall not feed 
more than two buildings. 


Table 7 Maximum Area to be Covered by 
Sprinklers 
[ Clause 9.2(a) ] 


SI No. Hazard Type Floor Area 
(2) 
Light 
Ordinary 
High 
Storage 


ii) 
iii) 
ту) 
NOTES 
1 Floor area of a mezzanine floor shall not be included in the above 
area restriction if situated within the boundary of the building. 
2 Attention is drawn to 4 of SP 7 (Part 4) regarding requirements 
for floor and basement compartmentations respectively. 


24 


9.3 Installation Philosophy 


Following are the parameters that define the sprinkler 
spacing, location and distribution and these changes 
according to the type of application and sprinklers used 
in protection: 


a) Minimum and maximum area of coverage for 
each sprinkler; 


Maximum linear distance between sprinkler; 
Minimum linear distance between sprinklers; 


Maximum linear distance from sprinkler to walls; 


Minimum linear distance from sprinkler to walls; 
Deflector position and orientation with regard to 
roof; 

Obstruction to sprinkler discharge or affecting 
their pattern (umbrella or inner core); 


g) 


h) Clearance to storage below in case of storage 
hazards; 


j) Location near skylight and special structure; and 


k) Network layout standard, staggered, gridded, 
looped, etc. 


9.4 Determination of Area of Coverage for Each 
Sprinkler 


9.4.1 Sprinklers Other than Sidewall Type 
The area shall be the product of, 


a) largest spacing between sprinklers along branch 
lines OR twice the largest distance between the 
extreme sprinklers in branch lines and the walls 
whichever is higher; and 

b) largest distance between sprinklers in two 

adjoining branch lines OR twice the largest 

distance between sprinklers in the branch lines 
and the wall. 

NOTE — For small rooms or enclosures, protection area shall 

be calculated by the total area of the room divided by number 

of sprinklers provided within. 


9.4.2 Sidewall Sprinklers 
The area shall be the product of, 


a) largest spacing between sprinklers along the wall 
OR twice the largest distance between the extreme 
sprinklers to the end of wall whichever is higher; 
and 

b) distance between two opposite walls if sprinklers 

are installed only on one wall OR distance between 

sprinkler and middle of the room if sprinklers are 
installed on both walls. 


9.5 Maximum Distance Between Sprinklers 


Maximum distance between sprinklers shall be based 
on centre to centre distance between sprinklers in a 
range pipe or those in adjoining range pipe. Maximum 
distance shall be measured along the slope of the 
ceiling. 


9.6 Minimum Distance Between Sprinklers 


Aminimum distance between sprinklers in compulsory, 
to prevent an operating sprinkler from wetting the 
adjoining sprinkler and thus prevent skipping of 
sprinklers. 


9.7 Maximum Distance from Sprinkler to the Walls 


The distance between the boundary (walls) and 
sprinklers when measured along the range pipe shall 
not be more than 0.5 times the spacing between the 
sprinklers and when measured perpendicular to the 
range pipe shall not be more than 0.5 times the spacing 
between the range pipes. 


However, where the external walls are combustible or 
built with metallic or otherwise; or open sided and also 
in case of open joisted ceilings or where the roof has 
the rafters exposed, the distance between the boundary 
and the sprinklers shall not exceed 1.5 m. 


Distance shall be measured perpendicular to the wall. 


9.8 Minimum Distance from Sprinkler to the Walls 


Minimum distance shall be maintained as mentioned 
under the respective clauses for each type of sprinkler. 


9.9 Deflector Location and Orientation 
Obstructions to sprinkler installation can arise due to, 


a) presence of structural members like columns, 
beams, girders, joists, etc and 


b) due to other constructions like dwarf walls, 
machinery parts, etc. 


Obstructions may prevent sufficient coverage or may 
interfere with discharge pattern of the sprinklers. There 
could be continuous obstruction below the sprinklers 
also. Hence, location and orientation of the sprinkler 
deflectors assumes significance towards ensuring 
optimum protection. 


9.10 Installation Due to Peculiar Constructional 
Features 


9.10.1 Columns 


As far as possible, the sprinklers shall be located away 
from the columns. Where a roof or ceiling sprinkler 
is less than 0.6 m from the face of a column, another 
sprinkler shall be located not more than 2 m from the 
opposite side of the column. 


9.10.2 Girders 


Where the top flange of a girder is not more than 
200 mm in width, sprinklers shall be either positioned 
either not less than 1.2 m from the side of the girder 
or directly above the girder with the deflector not less 
than 150 mm from the top face of the girder. Where the 
top flange of the girder is more than 200 mm in width, 
sprinklers shall be positioned not less than 1.2 m from 
the side of the girder. 


25 


IS 15105 : 2021 


9.10.3 Roof Trusses 


Where the roof truss members are not more than 
100 mm wide, sprinklers shall be positioned either not 
less than 0.3 m from the side of the truss or equidistant 
from each side of the truss with the deflector not less 
than 150 mm above any truss member. Where the truss 
members more than 100 mm but less than 200 mm 
wide, sprinklers shall be positioned either not less than 
0.6 m from the side of the truss or equidistant from each 
side of the truss with the deflector not less than 150 mm 
above any truss member. Where the truss members are 
more than 200 mm wide, sprinklers shall be positioned 
not less than 0.6 m from the sides of the truss. 


9.10.4 Beams and Bays 


Where narrow bays are formed between beams spaced 
at not more than 1.5 m between centres, the following 
spacing shall be used: 


a) One row of sprinklers shall be installed in 
the centre of each 3“ bay, with another row 
underneath the centre line of the beam separating 
the two unprotected bays. 

b) Maximum distance between sprinklers in the 

other direction, that is along the bay shall be in 

accordance with the rules for the hazard class 
involved. 


с 


— 


Sprinklers shall be installed at a distance no greater 
than 1 m from walls parallel to the beams and no 
greater than 1.5 m from walls perpendicular to the 
beams. 


d 


— 


Sprinklers installed inside bays shall be placed 
such that the deflectors are between 75 mm and 
150 mm below the underside of the ceiling. 


9.10.5 Concealed Space 


Concealed spaces less than 5 m? in area shall not require 
sprinkler protection. 


a) Roof Space — Spaces between roofs and 
ceilings (including those at the apexes and sides 
of buildings) more than 0.8 m deep measured 
between the highest point under the roof and the 
top of the ceiling shall be sprinkler protected. 


b) Intermediate Floor Space — Concealed spaces 
between floors and ceilings shall be sprinklered 
where they are: 

1) more than 0.8 m deep; 
2) not wholly of 
construction; or 


non-combustible 


3) containing combustible materials. 


9.10.6 Space Under Lowest Floor 


Sprinklers shall be installed in all spaces below the 
lowest floors in a building where the floor is combustible 
and: 


a) the space is accessible for storage purpose 
and/or entrance of unauthorized persons and/or 
accumulation of waste and debris and/or is not 
sealed against liquid spillage; 


IS 15105: 2021 


b) the space contains utility piping and installation 
such as air, steam, wiring, shafting, conveyors, 
etc; and 


c) flammable liquids are stored in the floor above. 


NOTE — In all cases, sprinklers installed above and below 
ceilings and also floor voids shall be of same type. 


9.10.7 Vertical Change in Ceiling Elevation (Applicable 
only to Pendent and Upright Sprinkler for Standard 
and Extended Coverage) 


Where there is a vertical change in ceiling elevation less 
than 900 mm, sprinklers shall be spaced as though there 
were no change in elevation provided the obstruction 
tules are observed while locating the sprinklers on the 
upper ceiling (see Fig. 5). 

Where there is a vertical change in ceiling elevation 
more than 900 mm, the change in elevation shall be 


treated as wall and sprinklers spaced accordingly. 
(see Fig. 6). 


9.11 Escalators and Staircase Wells 


9.11.1 Staircase wells shall be fully sprinklered 
including beneath the stairways if they are of 
combustible construction. For non-combustible 
staircases, sprinklers shall be provided at the landings 
at the top and bottom of the wells. Sprinklers shall be 
installed in the following areas for escalators: 


a) In the passenger carrying space; 
b) Below the ceiling below escalator; 


c) Between the ceiling below the escalator and the 
passenger carrying space; 


d) In the escalator boot; and 


e) In the motor areas. 


9.11.2 The number of sprinklers shall be increased 
around the ceiling opening formed by escalators, stairs, 
etc. Sprinklers shall be neither more than 2 m nor less 
than 1.5 m away from each other and located at 150 mm 
to 300 mm from such openings. If, owing to the design 
of the structure, for example, girders, the minimum 
distance of 1.5 m cannot be maintained, smaller spacing 
may be used provided adjacent sprinklers do not wet 
each other. 


9.11.3 The horizontal distance between the sprinklers 
and the opening in the ceiling shall not exceed 
0.5 m. These sprinklers shall be capable of providing 
the minimum flow rate per sprinkler in the rest of the 
ceiling protection. 


9.11.4 Vertical openings larger than 6 m (horizontal 
distance) or 100 m? area (whichever is greater) as seen 
at malls, atrium buildings and the like shall need no 
protection if adjoining levels and spaces are already 
protected with sprinklers. 


9.12 Obstruction Below Sprinklers 


9.12.1 Sprinklers shall be fitted under the following 
types of obstructions which are; either more than 0.8 m 
wide and less than 150 mm from the adjacent wall or 
partitions; or more than 1 m in width. 


9.12.2 Internal overhead platforms, heating panels, 
galleries, walkways, staging other than in film or 
television studios and stairs and stairways. 


X LESS THAN 900mm 
S NORMAL SPACING 


Fic. 5 VERTICAL CHANGE IN CEILING ELEVATION LESS THAN 900 mm 


26 


IS 15105 : 2021 


I-4—— 15 S max. —— 


VERTICAL PLANE TREATED AS 
WALL FOR SPRINKLER SPACING 


"X MORE THAN 900mm, 5 SHALL BE AS SHOWN ABOVE 


FIG. 6 VERTICAL CHANGE IN LING ELEVATION MORE THAN 900 mm 


9.12.3 Sprinklers shall be fitted below the ducts under 
the following circumstances: 


a) Rectangular and more than 0.8 m wide and less 
than 150 mm from the adjacent walls or partitions; 
b) Circular and more than 1 m in diameter and less 
than 150 mm from the adjacent walls or partitions; 
c) Rectangular and more than 1 m in width; and 


d) Circular and more than 1 m in diameter; 


9.12.4 Sprinklers are not required under movable 
obstructions, such as conference tables and the like. 


9.12.5 Hoods Over Paper Making Machines 


Sprinklers shall be fitted under the hoods or shields over 
the dry ends of above machines, if there is an enclosure. 


9.12.6 Worktables 


Sprinklers shall be fitted under the worktables where 
there is a power source or where combustible process 
waste may accumulate (in industrial and storage 
applications only). 


NOTE — Sprinklers installed under obstructions shall be of 
same type as of ceiling. 


9.13 Exterior Docks, Platforms and Canopies 


Sprinklers shall be fitted under the exterior docks and 
platforms of combustible construction unless such 
spaces are sealed against accumulation of debris and 
waste. 


Canopies that are non-combustible and less than 2 m 
from the wall of the building need not be protected with 
sprinklers provided cut-off sprinklers are fitted at the 
door openings leading to the canopies. However, under 


27 


other circumstances, the underside of the canopies shall 
be fitted with sprinklers. 


9.14 Unless other specifically provided, a clear space 
of 0.5 m shall be maintained below the deflector of 
the sprinkler heads in all cases except high piled 
combustible storage areas/jute storage and above open 
suspended ceilings where the clear space required as 
above shall be 1 m. 


9.15 Vertical Shafts and Chutes 


In shafts, sprinklers shall be installed at each alternate 
floor level and at the top of any trapped section. At 
least one sprinkler shall be installed at the top of all 
shafts except where the shaft is incombustible and 
inaccessible. 


9.16 Suspended Ceilings 


The use of suspended ceiling material below the 
sprinklers 1s not allowed unless the material has been 
shown not to impair sprinkler protection. Where 
sprinklers are fitted below suspended ceilings, the 
ceiling material shall be of a type, which has been 
shown to be stable under fire conditions. 


Following clauses are applicable to each type of 
sprinkler application with regard to design spacing, 
location and distribution of sprinklers. 


9.17 Standard Pendent and Upright Sprinklers 


9.17.1 Protection area shall not exceed the following: 


a) Light hazard 21 m? 
b) Ordinary hazard : 12? 
с) High hazard 9ш? 


18 15105: 2021 


9.17.2 Тһе maximum distance between Ше sprinklers 
shall be as follows: 


a) Light hazard 4.5m 
b) Ordinary hazard : 4.5m 
c) High hazard 3.75 т 


9.17.3 The minimum distance between sprinklers for 
all hazards shall be 1.8 m without exception. In case 
of intermediate sprinklers, protecting commodities in 
racks, distances lower than 1.8 m may be considered, 
if necessary. 


9.17.4 Maximum distance from walls shall be as 
follows: 


a) The distance between the boundary (walls) and 
sprinklers when measured along the range pipe 
shall not be more than 0.5 times the spacing 
between the sprinklers and when measured 
perpendicular to the range pipe shall not be more 
than 0.5 times the spacing between the range 
pipes. 

However, where the external walls are combustible 
or built with metallic or otherwise or open sided; 
and in case of open joisted ceilings or where the 
roof has the rafters exposed, the distance between 
the boundary and the sprinklers shall not exceed 
1.5 m. 


Distance shall be measured perpendicular to the 
wall. 


b 


wm 


с 


ме 


9.17.5 Minimum distance from walls 


The sprinklers shall be located at a minimum distance 
of 100 mm from the wall. 


MMMM LL 


CEILING 


V 


B 
TN 
к= 


9.17.6 Sprinkler deflector location and orientation іп 
relation to building structure. 


a) Roofs and Ceilings (without Obstructions) — For 
conventional and spray type of sprinklers, the 
sprinklers shall be installed in such a way that the 
deflectors are at distances as shown in Table 8. 


b) Roofs and Ceilings (with Obstructions): 


1) No specific rules provision is defined to 
overcome different types of obstructions. 
However, the guidance in Table 9 shall be 
adopted to overcome the difficulties faced by 
obstructions to discharge (see Fig. 7). 


2 


МУ 


Sprinklers shall be located so as to minimize 
obstructions to discharge or away from those 
directly underneath. Where not possible, 
additional sprinklers shall be introduced to 
provide adequate coverage to the hazard. 


Table 8 Sprinkler Location Below Ceilings 
| Clause 9.17.6(a) | 


SI Type of Ceiling Distance 
No. mm 
Minimum Maximum Preferred 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Combustible, 75 300 150 
asbestos cement 
sheets, wired glass 
and other types of 
frangible elements 
ii) Combustible with 75 150 - 
exposed rafters 
and/or open joists 
iii) Non-combustible, 15 450 300 


either plane or 
arched or sloping 


OBSTRUCTION 


ELEVATION VIEW 


Ес. 7 POSITIONING OF SPRINKLER TO AVOID OBSTRUCTIONS TO DISCHARGE 


28 


Table 9 Sprinkler Location іп Relation to 
Obstructions (see Fig. 7) 


[ Clause 9.17.6 (b) (1) ] 


SINo Distance (A) Between Sprinklers Distance 
and the Obstruction on Side (B) Between 
Deflector Above 
the Bottom of 
Obstruction 
mm m 

(1) 0) (3) 

1) Less than 300 0 

ii) More than 300 but less than 450 65 

iii) More than 450 but less than 600 90 

iv) More than 600 but less than 750 140 

v) More than 750 but less than 900 190 

vi) More than 900 but less than 1 150 240 

vii) Моге than 1 100 but less than 1 200 300 
viii) More than 1 200 but less than 1 400 350 

ix) More than 1 400 but less than 1 500 415 

x) More than! 500 but less than 1 700 450 

хі) More than 1 700 but less than 1 800 500 

xi) Моге than 1 800 but less than 2 000 600 
xii) Моге than 2 000 but less than 2 100 750 

xiv) More than 2 100 875 


9.18 Standard Sidewall Sprinkler 


9.18.1 Protection Area 


Protection area shall not exceed the following: 


a) Light hazard 11 m? 
(combustible ceiling) 

b) Light hazard 18 m? 
(non-combustible ceiling) 

c) Ordinary hazard 7.5 m? 
(combustible ceiling) 

d) Ordinary hazard 9m? 


(non-combustible ceiling) 


9.18.2 Maximum Distance Between the Sprinklers 


a) Maximum distance between the sprinklers shall 
be measured along the slope of the ceiling. 


b) Spacing between sprinklers shall not exceed 
4.3 m for light hazard occupancies and 3 m in case 
of ordinary hazard occupancies. 


c) Sidewall sprinklers shall not be installed 
back-to-back without being separated by а 
continuous lintel or soffit. 


d) Sidewall sprinklers shall be permitted to be 
installed on opposing or adjacent walls, provided 
no sprinkler is located within the maximum 
protection area of another sprinkler. 


29 


IS 15105 : 2021 


e) When sidewall sprinklers are installed on two 
opposite walls or sides of bays, maximum width 
of the room or bay shall be permitted to be up to 
7.3 m for light hazard occupancies and 6.1 m for 
ordinary hazard occupancies. 


9.18.3 Minimum Distance Between Sprinklers 


Sprinklers shall be spaced not less than 1.8 m 
centre-to-centre. The distance from the wall to the 
sprinkler shall be measured perpendicular to the wall. 


9.18.4 Maximum Distance from Walls 


The distance from sprinklers to the end walls shall 
not exceed one half of the allowable distance between 
sprinklers. 


9.18.5 Minimum Distance from Walls 


Sprinklers shall be located at a minimum of 100 mm 
from an end wall. The distance from the wall to the 
sprinkler shall be measured perpendicular to the wall. 


9.18.6 Sprinkler Deflector Location and Orientation 


a) Sprinklers shall be so located to minimize 
obstructions (to discharge) either on parallel or 
perpendicular sides thereof. If required, additional 
sprinklers shall be provided to obviate the 
obstructions. 


b 


wm 


Sprinklers shall be located at least 1.2 m away 
from any lighting, fan and similar fixtures either 
in front of or in the same wall where the sprinklers 
are mounted. For any obstruction (to discharge) 
including lighting, fan and the like beyond 1.2 m, 
location of sprinkler shall be as given in Table 10 
and Table 11; see Fig. 8 and Fig. 9, respectively. 


с 


— 


Clearance between the top of storage if any to the 
deflector shall not be less than 450 mm. 


Side wall sprinklers in rooms shall neither be 


installed above the grills of air conditioner nor 
within 450 mm thereof on the same wall. 


d 


wm 


е 


— 


Distance between sprinklers and the ceiling shall 
not exceed 150 mm. If specifically approved for 
use and listed so, the distances between ceilings 
and the sprinklers can be increased up to 450 mm. 
Vertical side wall sprinkler deflectors shall be 
located not more than 150 mm or less than 
100 mm from the wall from which they are 
projecting. 


МУ 


Horizontal sidewall sprinkler shall be located not 
more than 100 mm and are allowed to be located 
with their deflectors less than 100 mm from the 
wall on which they are mounted. 


h) Deflectors of the sprinklers shall be aligned 
parallel to the ceilings or roofs. 


в 


1) When installed under a sloped ceiling (1 in 6), 
sidewall sprinklers shall be located at the high 
point of slope and positioned so as to discharge 
down the slope. 


IS 15105: 2021 


k) Where soffits used for the installation of sidewall 
sprinklers exceed 200 mm in width or projection 
from the wall, additional sprinklers shall be 
installed below the soffit. 


m) When soffits used are within 200 mm in width 


or projection from the wall, additional sprinklers 
shall not be required subject to the deflector of the 
sprinklers falling within prescribed distance as 
contained in (е) above. 


Table 10 Sprinkler Location in Relation to 
Obstructions (Facing Across the Wall) (see Fig. 8) 


| Clause 9.18.6 (b) | 


SINo. Distance (A) Between Distance (B) Between 
Sprinklers and the Deflector Above the 
Obstruction on Side Bottom of Obstruction 
mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 1 200 Not allowed 

ii) More than 1 200 25 
but less than 1 500 

iii) More than 1 500 50 
but less than 1 650 

iv) More than 1 650 80 
but less than 1 800 

v) More than 1 800 100 
but less than 1 950 

vi) More than 1 950 150 
but less than 2 100 

vii) More than 2 100 180 
but less than 2 250 

viii) More than 2 250 230 
but less than 2 400 

ix) More than 2 400 280 
but less than 2 550 

х) Моге Шап 2 550 350 


9.19 Extended Sidewall Sprinklers 


9.19.1 Protection Area 


Protection area shall not be less than the value 
prescribed in the listing and in any case, shall not 
exceed the values as below: 


a) Light hazard (unobstructed : 37.2 m? 
smooth and flat ceiling) 


b) Ordinary hazard (unobstructed : 37.2 m? 
smooth and flat ceiling) 


9.19.2 Maximum Distance Between the Sprinklers 


a) Maximum distance between the sprinklers shall 


be measured along the slope of the ceiling. 


30 


b) Spacing between sprinklers shall not exceed 8.5 m 
for light hazard occupancies and 7.3 m in case of 
ordinary hazard occupancies. 

с) Sidewall sprinklers shall not Бе installed 
back-to-back without being separated by a 
continuous lintel or soffit. 

d) Sidewall sprinklers shall be permitted to be 
installed on opposing or adjacent walls, provided 
no sprinkler is located within the maximum 
protection area of another sprinkler. 


Table 11 Sprinkler Location in Relation to 
Obstructions (Along the Same Wall) (see Fig. 9) 


[ Clause 9.18.6 (b) | 


SI No. Distance (A) Between Distance (B) Between 


Sprinklers and the Deflector Above the 
Obstruction on Side Bottom of Obstruction 
mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) 100 to 150 25 
ii) More than 150 but less 50 
than 300 
iii) More than 300 but less 80 
than 450 
іу) Моге than 450 but less 115 
than 600 
v) More than 600 but less 150 
than 750 
vi) More than 750 but less 180 
than 900 
vii) More than 900 but less 200 
than 1 050 
vii) Моге than 1 050 but less 230 
than 1 200 
ix) More than 1 200 but less 250 
than 1 350 
х) More than 1 350 but less 300 
than 1 500 
xi) More than 1 500 but less 330 
than 1 650 
xii) More than 1 650 but less 350 
than 1 800 
xii) Моге than 1 800 but less 380 
than 1 950 
xiv) Моге than 1 950 but less 430 
than 2 100 
xv) More than 2 100 but less 450 
than 2 250 


9.19.3 Minimum Distance Between Sprinklers 


Sprinklers shall be spaced not less than 1.8 m centre to 
centre. The distance from the wall to the sprinkler shall 
be measures perpendicular to the wall. 


15 15105: 2021 


4 


ELEVATION VIEW 


8 SPRINKLER FACING OBSTRUCTION ACROSS 


| С) SPRINKLER 


В 


4 


OBSTRUCTION Б 


А | 


ELEVATION VIEW 


ER FACING OBSTRUCTION ALONG SAME WALL 


IS 15105: 2021 


9.19.4 Maximum Distance from Walls 


The distance from sprinklers to the end walls shall 
not exceed one half of the allowable distance between 
sprinklers. 


9.19.5 Minimum Distance from Walls 


Sprinklers shall be located a minimum of 100 mm from 
an end wall. The distance from the wall to the sprinkler 
shall be measured perpendicular to the wall. 


9.19.6 Sprinkler Deflector Location and Orientation 


a) Sprinklers shall be so located to minimize 
obstructions (to discharge) either on parallel or 
perpendicular sides thereof. If required additional 
sprinklers shall be provided to obviate the 
obstructions. 


b 


wm 


Sprinklers shall be located at least 2.4 m away 
from any lighting, fan and similar fixtures either 
in front of or in the same wall where the sprinklers 
are mounted. For any obstruction (to discharge) 
including lighting, fan and the like beyond 2.4 m, 
location of sprinkler shall be as per the Tables 12 
and 13 (see also Fig. 8 and Fig. 9). 


Clearance between the top of storage if any to the 
deflector shall not less than 450 mm. 


с 


ме 


а 


М7 


Side wall sprinklers in rooms shall neither Бе 
installed above the grills of air conditioner nor 
within 450 mm thereof on the same wall. 


е 


— 


Side wall sprinklers shall be located not more than 
150 mm or less than 100 mm from the ceilings. 


If specifically approved for use and listed so, the 
distances between ceilings and the sprinklers can 
be increased up to 450 mm. 

Vertical side wall sprinkler deflectors shall be 
located not more than 150 mm or less than 
100 mm from the wall from which they are 
projecting. 


a 


в 


һ 


— 


Horizontal sidewall sprinkler shall be located not 
more than 100 mm and are allowed to be located 
with their deflectors less than 100 mm from the 
wall on which they are mounted. 


1) Deflectors of the sprinklers shall be aligned 
parallel to the ceilings or roofs. 


k) When installed under a sloped ceiling (1 in 6), 
sidewall sprinklers shall be located at the high 
point of slope and positioned so as to discharge 
down the slope. 


Where soffits used for the installation of sidewall 
sprinklers exceed 200 mm in width or projection 
from the wall, additional sprinklers shall be 
installed below the soffit. 


When soffits used are within 200 mm in width 
or projection from the wall, additional sprinklers 
shall not be required subject to the deflector of the 
sprinklers falling within prescribed distance as 
contained in (e). 


m 


— 


n 


wm 


32 


Table 12 Deflector Orientation Due to Obstructions 
Perpendicular to the Sprinkler (see Fig. 8) 


[ Clause 9.19.6 (5) | 


SINo. Distance (A) Between Distance (B) Between 
Sprinklers and the Deflector Above the Bottom 
Obstruction on Side of Obstruction 
mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) < 2400 Not allowed 
ii) 2 400 to less than 3 000 25 
iii) 3 000 to less than 3 300 50 
iv) 3 300 to less than 3 600 75 
v) 3 600 to less than 3 900 100 
vi) 3 900 to less than 4 200 150 
vii) 4 200 to less than 4 500 175 
уш) 4 500 10 1е55 Шап 4 800 225 
іх) 4 800 їо 1е55 Шап 5 100 275 
х) >5100 350 


Table 13 Deflector Orientation Пие to Obstructions 
Parallel to the Sprinkler (see Fig. 9) 


[ Clause 9.19.6 (b) | 


SINo. Distance (A) Between Distance (B) Between 
Sprinklers and the Deflector Above the 
Obstruction on Side Bottom of Obstruction 
mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) < 450 Not allowed 
ii) 450 to less than 900 25 
iii) 900 to less than 1 200 75 
iv) 1 200 to less than 1 350 125 
v) 1 350 to less than 1 800 175 
vi) 1 800 to less than 1 950 225 
vii) 1 950 to less than 2 100 275 
уш) 2 100 to less than 2 250 350 


9.20 Extended Coverage (EC) Sprinklers (Upright 
and Pendent) 


9.20.1 These sprinklers shall not be used for the 
protection of buildings with combustible construction. 


9.20.2 Protection Area and Maximum Spacing for EC 
Sprinklers 

Protection area shall not be less than the value prescribed 
in the listing and in any case, shall not exceed the 
values shown in the Table 14. Also, maximum spacing 


between sprinklers for various areas are shown in the 
Table 14. 


9.20.3 Minimum Distance Between Sprinklers 


Sprinklers shall not be located less than 2.4 m 
centre-to-centre. 


Table 14 Protection Area апа Maximum 
Spacing (EC Sprinklers) 


| Clauses 9.20.2, 9.20.4 апа 10.1 (е) | 


SI No. Hazard Protection Maximum 
Classification Area Spacing 
т? т 

() (2) (3) 4) 
1) Light 37.20 6.00 
30.00 5.50 

24.00 5.00 

ii) Ordinary 37.20 6.00 
30.00 5.50 

24.00 5.00 

18.20 4.30 

13.40 3.70 

iii) High 18.20 4.25 
13.40 4.60 

iv) High-piled 18.20 4.25 
storage 13.40 4.60 


9.20.4 Maximum Distance from Walls 


a) The distance from sprinkler to walls shall not 
exceed one half of the allowable distance as per 
values shown in Table 14: 


b) The distance from wall to sprinkler shall be 
measured perpendicular to the wall. 


9.20.5 Minimum Distance from Walls 


Sprinklers shall be located a minimum of 100 mm from 
a wall. 


9.20.6 Sprinkler Deflector Location and Orientation 


a) Distance between the sprinkler deflector and 
ceiling shall be minimum of 25 mm and maximum 
of 300 mm throughout the area of coverage 
of sprinkler protection for buildings having 
construction without any obstructions. 

b) The above shall not be applicable to those 

sprinklers which are recessed, concealed or flush 

with ceiling. 

Various provisions under 9.10 shall be applicable 

to EC sprinklers also for location and orientation 

of deflectors with respect to possible obstructions 
due to structural elements. 

d) Sprinkler location with respect to obstructions 

(to discharge) for upright and pendent sprinklers 

shall comply with the provisions Table 15 

(see also Figs. 5, 6 and 7). 


The clearance between the deflector and the top of 
storage (in case of storage block) shall not be less 
than 450 mm. 


Deflectors of sprinklers shall be aligned parallel to 
the ceilings or roofs. 


е) 


33 


IS 15105 : 2021 


Table 15 Position of Sprinkler Deflector to Avoid 
Obstruction to Discharge for EC Sprinklers 


| Clause 9.20.6 (d) | 


SI Distance (A) Between Maximum Allowable Distance 
No. Sprinklers and the of (B) Deflector Above the 
Obstruction on Side Bottom of Obstruction 
mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Less than 300 0 
ii) More than 300 and 0 
less than 450 
11) More than 450 and 25 
less than 600 
iv) More than 600 and 25 
less than 750 
v) More than 750 and 25 
less than 900 
vi) More than 900 and 80 
less than 1 050 
vii) More than 1 050 and 80 
less than 1 200 
vii) More than 1 200 and 125 
less than 1 350 
ix) More than 1 350 and 175 
less than 1 500 
x) Моге than 1 500 and 175 
less than 1 650 
xi) More than 1 650 and 175 
less than 1 800 
хі) Моге than 1 800 and 225 
less than 1 950 
xii) More than 1 950 and 275 
less than 2 100 
xiv) More than 2 100 and 350 
less than 2 250 
xv) More than 2 250 and 350 
less than 2 400 
xvi) More than 2 400 and 375 
less than 2 550 
xvii) More than 2 550 and 425 
less than 2 700 
xvii) More than 2 700 and 475 
1е55 Шап 2 850 
xix) More than 2 850 апа 525 


less than 3 000 
9.21 Large Drop Sprinklers 


9.21.1 Protection Area 


a) Protection area of coverage shall be as indicated 


below: 

1) Building with non-combustible 12m? 
construction 

2) Buildings with combustible 9m? 
construction 

3) Rack Storage 9m? 


IS 15105: 2021 


b) Maximum protection area shall not exceed 
12.9 т? and minimum allowable protection shall 
not be less than 7.5 т. 


9.21.2 Maximum Distance Between Sprinklers 


The maximum distance between sprinklers shall be as 
follows: 


a) Building with non-combustible : 3.7m 
construction 

b) Buildings with combustible :3.0m 
construction 

c) Rack Storage :3.0 та 


9.21.3 Minimum Distance Between Sprinklers 


Sprinklers shall be spaced not less than 2.4 m 
centre-to-centre. 


9.21.4 Maximum Distance from Walls 


The distance from sprinklers to walls shall not exceed 
one-half of the allowable distance as stated in 9.21.2 
above. 


9.21.5 Minimum Distance from Walls 


Sprinklers shall be located at a minimum of 100 mm 
from a wall. 


9.21.6 Deflector Location and Orientation 


a) Distance between the sprinkler deflector and 
ceiling shall be minimum of 150 mm апа 
maximum of 300 mm throughout the area of 
coverage of sprinkler protection for buildings 
having construction without any obstructions. 


b) Deflectors of sprinklers shall be aligned parallel to 
the ceilings or roofs. 


c) Sprinklers shall be so located as to minimize 
obstructions to discharge and where it is not 
possible, additional sprinklers shall need to be 
provided to ensure adequate coverage over the 
entire area. 


d) Sprinkler location with respect to obstructions 
(to discharge) shall comply with the provisions in 
the following Table 16 (see also Fig. 7). 


e) Various provisions under 9.10 shall be applicable 
to large drop sprinklers also for location and 
orientation of deflectors with respect to possible 
obstructions due to structural elements. 


f) Where there are obstructions having width of 
less than 600 mm below the deflectors and the 
distance between the deflector and the bottom of 
obstruction is less than 600 mm, sprinklers shall 
be so located that the obstructions are centered 
between adjacent sprinklers. 


g) Where conditions stated in (f) are not complied, 
additional sprinklers shall need to be provided 
below the obstructions. 


34 


h) At least 900 mm clearance shall be maintained 
between the deflector and the top of the storage. 


Table 16 Position of Sprinkler Deflector to Avoid 
Obstruction to Discharge for LD Sprinklers 
(see Fig. 7) 


[ Clauses 9.21.6 (4) and 9.22.6 (с) | 


SI Distance (A) Between Maximum 
No. Sprinklers and the Allowable Distance 
Obstruction on Side (B) of Deflector 
Above the Bottom of 
Obstruction 
mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Less than 300 0 
ii) More than 300 less than 450 40 
11) Моге than 450 less than 600 75 
iv) More than 600 less than 750 140 
v) More than 750 less than 900 200 
vi) More than 900 less than 1 100 250 
vii) More than 1 100 less than 1 200 375 
viii) More than 1 200 less than 1 400 450 
ix) More than 1 400 less than 1 500 450 
x) More than 1 500 less than 1 700 550 
xi) More than 1 700 less than 1 800 650 
xii) | »1 800mm 750 


9.22 Early Suppression Fast Response (ESFR) 
Sprinklers 


9.22.1 Protection Area 


a) Protection area of coverage shall be as indicated 


below: 
1) Building with combustible 9m? 
construction (unobstructed) 
2) Building with 9 т? 


non-combustible construction 
NOTE — ESFR sprinklers are permissible in buildings 
with combustible construction with/without obstructions. 


b) Minimum protection area shall not be less than 
5.9 m’. 


с) Where sprinklers need to be relocated due to 
obstructions from building elements, maximum 
protection area shall not be more than 10 m°. 


9.22.2 Maximum Distance Between Sprinklers 


a) Maximum distance between sprinklers shall be as 
follows: 
1) For buildings having ceiling/roof : 3.7 m 
height up to 9 m 
2) For buildings having ceiling/roof :3 т 
height more than 9 m and up to 13.7 m 


b) Having no regard to Ше heights as stated above, 
sprinklers shall be permitted to be shifted by 
0.3 іп to avoid obstructions due to structural 
elements, provided the protection area does not 
exceed 10 m’. 


9.22.3 Minimum Distance Between Sprinklers 


Sprinklers shall be spaced not less than 2.4 m 
centre-to-centre. 


9.22.4 Maximum Distance from Walls 


The distance from sprinklers to walls shall not exceed 
one-half of the allowable distance as stated in 9.22.2. 


9.22.5 Minimum Distance from Walls 


Sprinklers shall be located a minimum of 100 mm from 
a wall. 


9.22.6 Deflector Orientation and Location 


a) Deflector orientation with 
ceiling/roof shall be as follows: 


1) Pendent sprinklers with K-factor of 200 and 
240 shall be positioned so that the deflectors 
are a maximum of 350 mm and a minimum of 
150 mm below the ceiling. 


Pendent sprinklers with K-factor of 320 and 
360 shall be positioned so that the deflectors 
are a maximum of 450 mm and a minimum of 
150 mm below the ceiling. 

Upright sprinklers with K-factor of 200 and 
240 shall be positioned so that the deflectors 
are a maximum of 300 mm and a minimum of 
75 mm below the ceiling. 


respect to the 


2 


— 


3 


— 


b 


ma 


Deflectors of sprinklers shall be aligned parallel 
to the ceilings or roofs when slopes of the ceiling 
exceed | in 6 (9°). 


Sprinklers shall be so located as to minimize 
obstructions to discharge and where it is not 
possible; sprinkler location with respect to 
obstructions (to discharge) shall comply with the 
provisions in Table 16 (see also Fig. 7). 

Sprinklers shall be fitted below the ducts, pipes, 


conveyors and the like under the following 
circumstances: 


с 


ме 


а 


М7 


1) rectangular апа тоге than 0.8 т wide апа 
less than 150 mm from Ше adjacent walls or 
partitions. 

2) circular and more than | m in diameter and 
less than 150 mm from the adjacent walls or 
partitions. 

3) rectangular and more than | m in width. 

4) circular and more than | m in diameter. 


At least 900 mm clearance shall be maintained 
between the deflector and the top of the storage. 


е 


— 


35 


IS 15105 : 2021 


9.22.7 Where draught or smoke curtains are fitted at 
the ceiling level, forming bays, the draught or smoke 
curtain shall be treated as a boundary and sprinklers 
shall be located accordingly. 


9.22.8 Where ESFR sprinkler protection adjoins 
areas protected by standard sprinklers, the following 
measures shall be complied with: 


a) Where ESFR and the adjacent standard sprinklers 
are at the same ceiling height or where ESFR 
sprinklers are installed at a greater ceiling height 
than standard sprinklers, smoke curtains shall 
be installed at the ceiling separating ESFR and 
standard sprinklers. The smoke curtains shall 
be at least 600 mm deep and shall be located at 
the mid-point between the ESFR and standard 
sprinklers. The smoke curtain shall be made of 
non-combustible material. 


b 


— 


An aisle 1.2 m wide, free of all stored goods, shall 
be maintained between ESFR protected areas and 
those protected by standard sprinklers. The centre 
of the aisle shall coincide with the mid-point 
between the ESFR and standard sprinklers. 


9.22.9 Range pipes shall not exceed 100 mm in size. 


9.22.10 Other Important Requirements for ESFR 
Installation 


a) ESFR sprinkler installations shall be accepted only 
for buildings where the slope of the roof is less 
than or equal to 9?. Where the roof slope exceeds 
9°, ESFR sprinklers shall be used below a firmly 
secured false ceiling, only if the latter has a slope 
of less than 9? and is built with non-combustible 
construction. Concealed space shall be protected 
with standard sprinklers if required (see 9.10.5). 


b 


— 


ESFR sprinkler installation shall be used only on 
wet-pipe systems. 

c) Annex C shall be used for the protection of high 
challenge storage areas by ESFR sprinklers. 


9.23 Intermediate 
(see Fig. 10A and 10B) 


a) The area protected by a single system of sprinklers 
shall not exceed 3 700 m? of floor area occupied 
by the racks, including aisles, regardless of the 
number of levels of in-rack sprinklers. 


or  In-rack  Sprinklers 


b 


ma 


For high hazard storage in racks, shelves, etc, 
and protection by rows of intermediate sprinklers 
is mandatory, if storage heights are beyond 4 m. 
The requirements for the above provisions are as 
under: 


The location of sprinklers shall be such that 
they are not obstructed by racks or structural 
steel work and as far as possible, they are in the 
path of longitudinal flue space. The discharge of 


с 


— 


IS 15105: 2021 


OT 


ens 


SPRINKLER ROW 
LONGITUDINAL FLUE 
TRANSVERSE FLUE 


TIERS 
AISLE 


10A FOR CATEGORY | 8 II MATERIALS 


SA да 
sine 


SPRINKLER ROW 
LONGITUDINAL FLUE 
TRANSVERSE FLUE 


TIERS 
AISLE 


10B FOR CATEGORY III & IV MATERIALS 


Fic. 10 ТҮРСІЛІ. DEPICTION OF IN-RACK SPRINKLERS 


water shall Бе able to penetrate Ше goods stored 
in the racks. The clearance between the sprinkler 
deflectors and the stored goods shall not be less 
than 150 mm anywhere. The numbers of rows 
are determined by the height of the racks and/or 
shelves. 


The horizontal spacing (longitudinal) 
between sprinklers shall not exceed 3.5 m for 
category I/II goods and 1.8 т for category ШЛУ 
goods. Laterally for every 3 m width of the racks 
(including two racks when stored back-to-back), 
there shall be one sprinkler. 


d) 


е 


— 


The vertical spacing between sprinklers shall not 
exceed 3 m. If the top tier of the racks is within 
3 m of the roof sprinklers, top tier need not be 
protected with intermediate sprinklers. 


The location of intermediate sprinklers shall be 
such that the product of the horizontal and vertical 
spacing between sprinklers is not more than 
9 m? for category ІЛІ storage goods and 5 m? for 
category III/IV storage goods. 


wa 


The design density for the roof or ceiling sprinklers 
shall be a minimum of 10 Ipm/m? over an area 
of operation of 260 m? in case of intermediate 
sprinkler protection. 


в 


һ 


wm 


Where more than 50 intermediate level sprinklers 
are installed in the racks, they shall not be fed from 
the same control valve set as the roof or ceiling 
sprinklers. 


j) In-rack sprinklers and the associated ceiling 
sprinklers shall always be fully calculated. 


k) For the purposes of hydraulic calculation, it 
shall be assumed that 3 sprinklers are operating 
simultaneously at the most hydraulically remote 
position on each level of in-rack sprinklers, up 
to a maximum of three levels. Where rack aisles 
are 2.4 m or more in width only one rack need be 
assumed to be involved. Where rack aisles are less 
than 2.4 m but greater than or equal to 1.2 m in 
width, two racks shall be assumed to be involved. 
Where rack aisles are less than 1.2 m in width, 
three racks shall be assumed to be involved. 
NOTE — It is not necessary to assume simultaneous operation 
of more than three rows of sprinklers in the vertical plane nor 


more than three rows of sprinklers in the horizontal plane. 
m) The minimum and maximum pressures at any 
operating sprinkler shall be as per 10.5.7 and 


10.5.8. 


9.24 Sprinkler Protection for Specific Areas and 
Hazards 
9.24.1 Film and Television Production Studios 


Sprinklers shall be fitted under solid or slotted platforms 
(except those used for temporary platforms, etc, for sets 


37 


IS 15105 : 2021 


but including those for lighting and other equipment) 1f 
these are more than 0.8 m wide and also for walkways, 
connecting stairs including those used for lighting 
and other equipment. Sprinklers shall also be fitted in 
concealed spaces or cavities more than 100 mm deep 
between combustible linings and walls/roofs. 


9.24.2 Theatres and Similar Premises 


In addition to the sprinklers in the roof or ceiling, 
sprinklers shall be fitted under the grid, the flies, the 
stage and any other obstruction to the discharge from 
the roof or ceiling sprinklers. Care shall be exercised 
in siting the sprinklers and associated pipework in 
case where moving sets are involved and also where 
personnel have to work in the close proximity of the 
sprinklers. 


9.24.3 Electronic Data 
Exchanges and Similar Areas 


Processing, Telephone 


Sprinkler protection shall comply with various 
provisions contained in IS 12456. 


Pre-action sprinkler installation is recommended for 
above type of risks keeping in mind the effect of water 
discharge on such risks. See also Annex D. 


9.24.4 Lifts, Hoistways and Machine Rooms 


a) Side wall sprinklers shall be installed at the bottom 
of each lift hoist way at not more than 600 mm 
above the floor of the pit. However, for enclosed 
non-combustible lift shafts that do not contain 
combustible hydraulic liquids, sprinklers shall not 
be required. 


b 


— 


For lift machine room at the top of the hoist way, 
temperature rating shall not be less than 57? and 
not more than 107? and sprinklers shall be either 
pendent or upright or sidewall type. 


Sprinklers shall be installed at the top and bottom 
of lift hoist ways where lift use polyurethane 
coated steel belts or similar combustible belt 
material. 

NOTE — The sprinklers in the pit are intended to protect 
against fires caused by debris, which can accumulate over 
time. Ideally, the sprinklers should be located near the side 
of the pit below the lift doors, where most debris accumulate. 
However, care should be taken that the sprinkler location does 
not interfere with the lift toe guard, which extends below the 
face of the door opening. 


9.24.5 Closets and Pantries 


Sprinklers shall be provided inside closets and 
pantries, normally and found in residential and hotel 
occupancies, under following conditions: 


с 


ме 


а) Area contained is more than 2.5 т. 
b) Short dimension is more than | m. 


c) Walls and ceilings within are surfaced with 
combustible materials. 


IS 15105: 2021 


9.24.6 Duct Protection 


a) Ducts shall have one sprinkler located at the top 
of each vertical riser and also at the mid-point of 
each offset. 

b) Sprinklers shall not be required in vertical riser 
located outside the building at more than 7.5 m 
from the hood outlet. 

c) Horizontal exhaust ducts shall have sprinklers 
located every 3 m, starting from 1.5 m from the 
duct entrance. 

d) Sprinklers in exhaust ducts shall be protected 
against freezing. 


е 


ме 


Sprinklers inside Ше ducts shall be accessible for 
inspection, testing and maintenance. 

NOTE — Reference is invited to 6.2.3 and 6.2.4 regarding 
sprinkler protection for certain specific areas like electric 
panels, DG sets, battery room, UPS units, etc when situated 
within a sprinklered occupancy. 


10 PHILOSOPHY OF PIPE 
DESIGN 


SIZING AND 


10.1 General Requirements 


a) The nominal size of supply trunk mains and 
branch mains shall be not less than the size of 
any installation main distribution pipe, at its main 
installation control valve, supplied by the trunk 
main. 


b 


wm 


Individual sprinklers shall not be connected 
directly to distribution and main distribution pipes, 
except in the case of light-hazard installations 
where sprinkler may be connected directly to 
pipes not exceeding 50 mm nominal bore. 


с 


ме 


Іп ordinary ог high-hazard installations arm pipes 
or drop pipes not exceeding 32 mm nominal bore 
shall be used to connect individual sprinklers 
where these are fed from pipes larger than 65 mm 
nominal bore. 


d 


— 


In occupancies like offices, residences, hotels, etc 
which are normally divided into several rooms 
separated by corridors, minimum 32 mm pipes 
shall be used to cater sprinklers inside rooms. 


е 


wa 


Where upright or pendent conventional or spray 

sprinklers are fitted within 400 mm of the pipe 

axis alongside a pipe of nominal size greater than 

65 mm, the deflector shall be not more than the 

appropriate distance given in Table 14 above the 

lower edge of the pipe. 

f) Minimum pipe size for installation in any hazard 
shall be 25 mm nominal bore. 

g) Range pipe size shall not exceed 50 mm nominal 
bore. 

h) Number of sprinklers in a range pipe shall not 

exceed 6 (9 in case of range pipes having 50 mm 

diameter) (see Table 20). 


38 


j) Range pipes shall only be connected to the top of 
distribution pipes. 


10.2 Protection of Concealed Space 


10.2.1 Where there are concealed spaces above 
ceilings or below floors, and where the space below the 
ceiling or above the floor is classified as ordinary or 
high-hazard for which protection is specified in 10.2.2, 
the concealed spaces shall be protected as follows: 


a) If the height of the concealed space at roof and 
floor is no greater than 0.8 m, the spaces shall be 
sprinkler protected only if they contain combustible 
materials or are constructed with combustible 
materials. Electrical cables with voltage less than 
250 V, single phase, with a maximum of 15 cables 
per tray, are allowed. 


b 


wm 


Otherwise the requirements shall be as specified 
for ordinary hazard. 


10.2.2 The feed to the concealed space above or below 
the working space shall be arranged and sized as 
follows: 


a) Light Hazard — The concealed space above or 
below shall be protected by a separate pipe from 
the installation valve. 


b 


— 


Ordinary Hazard — If the concealed space 
above working space is fed individually from the 
pipework below, the range and distribution pipes 
in the installation shall be sized by taking the room 
and concealed space sprinklers cumulatively. 
Alternatively, if two feed pipes are used, one 
for the concealed space and one for the room 
sprinklers, the common feed pipe shall have a 
nominal bore of not less than 65 mm. 


с 


— 


The concealed space below working space shall 
be fed by two feed pipes, one for the concealed 
space and one for the sprinklers in working space, 
the common feed pipe shall have a nominal bore 
of not less than 65 mm. 


10.3 Pipe Sizing 


10.3.1 Pipe sizes shall be determined using one of the 
following methods: 


a) Pre-calculated system (except where gridded 
or looped layouts are used) is applicable only 
where light and ordinary occupancies where the 
aggregate floor plate area (in one or more floors 
combined) is 5 000 т? ог less. See also notes under 
4.4.2. 


b) Fully calculated system. 


wm 


NOTE — Where manual calculations are tedious for large 
system and where complicated systems having numerous 
junction points and range pipes with differing layouts, 
the advantages of computer and software programs in 
design/validating should be considered. 


10.3.2 Pipe sizes for Ше occupancies not covered under 
item 10.3.1 shall be determined by a fully calculated 
system such as by employing computer tools or 
software program. 


a) Light and ordinary occupancies where Ше 
aggregate floor plate area (in one or more floors 
combined) exceeds 5 000 те. 

b) High hazard occupancies, 

c) Storage occupancies, and 

а) АП occupancies where conventional апа 


special sprinklers are used like ESFR, LD, EC, 
intermediate, etc. 


10.3.3 Minimum pressures for various applications 
shall be as stipulated in 10.5.7 and also in Annex C; but 
maximum pressure in the installation shall not exceed 
7 bar. 


10.4 Pre-calculated Pipe Sizing 


10.4.1 General 


a) Pipe sizes shall be determined partly from 
the appropriate tables and partly by hydraulic 
calculation. Pipe diameters shall not increase in 
the direction of flow of water to any sprinkler. 


b 


wm 


The size of all pipes upstream of each design point 
shall be calculated as specified in 10.4.3 (e) for 
light hazard and 10.4.4 (b) for ordinary hazard. 


Risers and drops connecting distribution pipes to 
ranges, and pipes connecting single sprinklers, 
other than arm pipes, shall be considered as 
distribution pipes and sized accordingly. 


с 


ме 


10.4.2 Design Points апа their Locations 


a) The design point shall be at the point of connection 
of a horizontal distribution pipe to one of the 
following: 

1) arange pipe caters to one or more sprinklers; 

2) ariser or drop connecting ranges to distribution 
pipes; and 

3) a pipe feeding a single sprinkler. 

b) The maximum number of sprinklers downstream 
of each design point shall be as specified in 
Tables 17 and 18 for light and ordinary hazard 
occupancies, respectively. See also Fig. 11 and 
Fig. 12, respectively. 


Table 17 Light Hazard - Location of Design Point 
[ Clause 10.4.2 (b) ] 


Hazard Number of Location of Design 
Class Sprinkler in a Point Downstream of 
Range Pipe п® Sprinkler where n is 
a) 2) (3) 
h <3 3 
Light 
Я >4 4 


IS 15105 : 2021 


Table 18 Ordinary Hazard – Location 
of Design Point 


[ Clause 10.4.2 (b) ] 


SI Hazard Number of Location of Type of 
No. Class Sprinklers Design Point on Range 
ona a Distribution Pipe 
Distribution Pipe Junction to — Layout 
Pipe a Range holding 
п“ Sprinkler 
where n is 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Ordinary >16 17 Two end - 
side 
ii) Ordinary >18 19 All others 


c) In light hazard installations the design point shall 
be downstream of the sprinkler identified in col 3 
of Table 17. 


In ordinary hazard installations the design point 
shall be downstream of the junction of distribution 
pipes and range pipes in accordance with col 4 of 
Table 18. 


e) Where the number of sprinklers on one array, in a 
room or on a single distribution pipe, is less than 
or equal to the number of sprinklers for which 
the distribution pipes are designed (see col 3 of 
Table 18), the design point shall be downstream of 
the point of connection to the distribution pipe of 
the range or the array hydraulically nearest to the 
control valve set. 


d 


— 


f) Different types of layouts are shown in Fig. 3. 
10.4.3 Light Hazard Installation 


a) The size of range pipes, and terminal distribution 
pipes downstream of the design point shall be at 
least 25 mm with a maximum of 3 sprinklers on 
range pipes (see Fig. 11). 

b) If there are only two sprinklers in a room, 25 mm 
pipe shall not be installed between the 3" and 
4" sprinkler. 


All pipe work between the control valve set and 
the design point at each extremity of an array shall 
be sized by hydraulic calculation using the values 
in Table 19. 


d) If there are more than two sprinklers on a range 
pipe, the pressure loss between the 2-sprinkler 
point and the distribution pipe shall be determined 
by using the pressure loss given in col 3 of 
Table 19. The pressure loss in the distribution pipe 
between this connection and the control valve sets 
shall be determined by the pressure loss per metre 
given in col 4 of Table 19. 


с 


— 


e 


ме 


The pipe diameters between Ше design point in 
the most remote area of the installation and the 
control valve set shall be calculated to ensure that 
the total pressure loss due to friction with a flow of 
225 litre/min does not exceed 0.7 bar. 


IS 15105: 2021 


11 3 4 


10 


KEY: 
1 2-SUPPLY POINT 
2 3-SUPPLY POINT 


3, 4, 5, 6,7, 8, 9, 10 2-SUPPLY POINT 
11 SUPPLY POINT 


Fic. 11 DESIGN POINT — LIGHT HAZARD INSTALLATION 


40 


IS 15105 : 2021 


KEY : 
1, 2, 3, 5, 6 AND 7 - DESIGN POINTS 
4 - CONTROL VALVE SET 


Fic. 12 DESIGN POINT — ORDINARY HAZARD INSTALLATION (TYPICAL) 


41 


18 15105: 2021 


In buildings with more than one floor, ог where there аге 
a number of different levels, for example, platforms or 
mezzanines, the 0.7 bar loss in pressure from the design 
point may be increased by an amount equivalent to the 
static pressure due to the height difference between the 
highest sprinkler point in the building and the remote 
area design point on the floor concerned. 


Table 19 Pressure Loss for Design Flow Rates in 
Light Hazard Installations 


[ Clause 10.4.3 (с) and (d) | 


SINo. Pipe Diameter Loss of Pressure in Pipe 
mm milli bar/metre 
Flow is Flow is 
100 Ipm 225 Ipm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 25 44 200 
ii) 32 12 52 
iii) 40 5:5 25 
iv) 50 1.7 8 
v) 65 0.45 2 


10.4.4 Ordinary Hazard Installation 


a) The size of range pipes downstream of the 
design point shall be as specified in Table 20 
(see Fig. 12). For distribution pipes, see Table 21. 


b) The pipe diameters between the design point in 
the most remote area of the installation and the 
control valve set shall be calculated to ensure that 
the total pressure loss due to friction with a flow of 
1 000 litre/min does not exceed 0.5 bar. 


In buildings with more than one floor, or where there 
are a number of different levels, for example, platforms 
or lean-to's, the 0.5 bar loss in pressure from the design 
point may be increased by an amount equivalent to the 
static pressure due to the height difference between the 
highest sprinkler point in the building and the remote 
area design point on the floor concerned. 


10.4.5 Pressure and Flow Requirements for 
Pre-calculated Systems (Light and Ordinary Hazard 
Installations 


a) The water supply shall be capable of providing 
not less than the appropriate flows and pressures 
specified in Table 22 at each installation control 
valves. The pressure loss due to friction and static 
head between the water supply and each control 
valve set shall be calculated separately. 


b) Orifice plates, if required, shall be used to balance 
the pressures at each design point in the network 
in case of bigger network and also where the 
network is distributed through upper floors. 


42 


Table 20 Sizing of Range Pipes in Ordinary Hazard 
Installations 


[ Clauses 10.1 (h) and 10.4.4 (a) ] 


SI Range Pipes Typeof Diameter Maximum 
No. Layout Number of 
Sprinklers 
mm Fed 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Ranges at 2 end-side 25 1 
remote end of layouts 32 2 
all distribution 
pipes — last two 
ranges 
i)  Lastthreeranges 3 end-side 25 2 
layouts 32 3 
ii) Last range All other 25 2 
layouts 32 3 
40 4 
50 9 
iv) All other ranges All Pipes 25 3 
32 4 
40 6 
50 9 


Table 21 Sizing of Distribution Pipes in Ordinary 
Hazard installations 


| Clause 10.4.4 (a) | 


SI Distribution Typeof Diameter Maximum 
No. Pipes Layout Number of 
Sprinklers 
mm Fed 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) At extremities 2 end-side 32 2 
of the | layouts 40 4 
installation 
50 8 
65 16 
ii) Last three All others 32 3 
ranges 40 6 
50 9 
65 18 
iii) Between design All To be calculated as per 
points and the 10.4.4 (b) 
installation 
valves 


Table 22 Pressure апа Flow Requirements for 
Pre-calculated LH and OH Systems 


| Clause 10.4.5 (a) | 


SI Hazard Flow Pressureat Maximum Pressure at 


No. Class Installation Demand Installation 
Valve Flow Valve 
Ipm bar Ipm bar 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 


IS 15105 : 2021 


3) The specified design density, in Ipm/m?. 

4) The assumed maximum area of operation 
(area of operation), in m°. 

5) The number of sprinklers in the area of 
operation. 

6 


7) The maximum area covered per sprinkler, 
1 2 
in m’. 


wm 


The sprinkler nominal orifice size, in mm. 


i) Light 225 2.2 + static = = 
losses if any 


ii) Ordinary 1800 2.02 + static 2 100 1.5 + static 
losses if any losses if any 


10.4.6 Documents to be Submitted for Pre-calculated 


Pipework 


For pre-calculated pipework the following details 
shall be submitted along with layout drawings of the 
sprinkler installation: 


a) Identification of the design point of each array on 
the layout drawing (see Fig. 11 and Fig. 12 for 
example). 


b) Summary of the pressure losses between the 
control valve set and the design points at the 
following design rates of flow: 


1) Inan LH installation — 225 litre/min 
2) In an OH installation — 1 000 litre/min 


The calculation as specified in 10.4.1, showing 
that: 


In LH and OH installations, for each run of 
distribution pipework, P,- P, is no more than the 
appropriate value specified in 10.4.3 or 10.4.4 
respectively, where, P, is the frictional pressure 
loss in the distribution pipework between the 
design point and the control valve “С” gauge, in 
bar, and P, is the static pressure between the level 
of the highest design point on the floor concerned 
and the level of the highest design point in the top 
storey, in bar. 


с 


wa 


10.5 Fully Calculated Systems 


10.5.1 For fully calculated pipe work, the following 
details shall be submitted, with detailed sheets or as a 
computer printout: 


a) The program name and version number. 
b) The date of the worksheet or print-out. 


c) The actual internal diameters of all pipes used in 
the calculation. 


d) For each design area of operation: 
1) The area identification. 
2) The hazard class. 


8 


— 


Detailed and dimensioned working drawings 
showing the following: 


1) Node or pipe reference scheme used to 
identify pipes and, junctions. 

ii) Sprinkler heads and fittings which need 
hydraulic consideration. 


ш) Position of the hydraulically most 
favourable area of operation. 


iv) Number of sprinklers upon which the 
design density 1s based. 


v) Height above datum of each point of 
identified pressure value. 


е 


— 


For each operating sprinkler: 

1) The sprinkler node or reference number. 
2) The nominal K-factor. 

3) The flow through the sprinkler, іп Ipm. 


4) The inlet pressure to the sprinkler or sprinkler 
assembly, in bar. 


f) For each hydraulically significant pipe: 
1) Pipe node or other reference number. 
2) Nominal bore, in mm. 

3) The Hazen-Williams constant. 
4) Flow, in litre/min. 
5) Velocity, in m/s. 
6) Length, in m. 
7) Numbers, types and equivalent length in 
metres of fittings and components. 
8) Static head change, in m. 
9) Pressures at inlet and outlet, in bar. 
10) Friction loss, in bar. 
11) Indication of flow direction. 


g) A pressure/flow characteristic graph indicating the 
available pressure at any flow up to the maximum 
flow demand. 


h) The demand pressure/flow characteristic graph 
for each installation for the hydraulically most 
unfavourable (and if required the most favourable) 
area of operation with pressure taken as at the 
control valve “С” pressure gauge (see IS 3624). 


43 


IS 15105: 2021 


10.5.2 Calculation of Pressure Losses in Pipework 


a) Calculations of pipe friction loss shall be not 
less than those derived from the Hazen-Williams 
formula: 

(6.05x10°)x Lxo'* 
P, = (С'® хр”) 


where 

P, = pressure loss in pipe (bar), 

О = flow through the pipe (Ipm), 

D = nominal internal diameter of the pipe 
(mm), 


C = constant for the type and condition of pipe 
(see Table 23), and 


L= equivalent length of pipe and fittings (m). 


Values of C for different types of pipe is as 
shown in the Table 23. 


b) Static pressure difference is expressed as: 


Р.- 0.0989 
where 


P, — static pressure difference (bar), and 
H — the vertical distance between the points 
(m). 
Attention is drawn to 10.3.3 with regard to pressure 
limitations within the sprinkler installation. 


Table 23 C-Values for Various Types of Pipe 
[ Clause 10.5.2 (a) ] 


SI No. Type of Pipe C-Value 

(1) 0) (3) 
1) Сазї ігоп 100 
ii) Ductile iron 110 
ii) Mild steel, galvanized steel 120 
iv) Spun cement, cement lined cast iron 130 
v) Stainless steel, reinforced glass fibre, concrete 140 
vi) Plastic (all types) 150 


10.5.3 Velocity in the Pipework 
The maximum allowable velocity is as follows: 


a) 6 m/s - through any valve, flow monitoring device 
or/and strainer. 

b) 10 m/s at any other point in the system. 
NOTE — Above should be under the stabilized flow condition 
atthe demanding point with total number of sprinklers assumed 
to be simultaneously in operation. 


10.5.4 Pressure Loss Through Fittings and Valves 


а) The pressure loss due to friction in valves, and 
in fittings where the direction of water flow 18 
changed through 45? or more, shall be calculated 


44 


using the formula specified in 10.5.2. The 
appropriate equivalent length shall be as indicated 
in Tables 24 and 25. 


The equivalent length for sizes smaller than 
50 mm 15 provided in the Table 25 and for 50 mm 
or more are provided in Table 24. 


b) Accuracy of Calculations — > Hydraulic 
calculations shall be carried out in the units and 
with the accuracy given in Table 26. 

c) The calculations shall balance as follows: 

1) The algebraic sum of pressure loss shall 
equal 0+1 mBar; where water flows join at 


a junction, the calculation shall balance to 
+ | mBar. 


2 


— 


The algebraic sum of water flow at a junction 
shall be equal 0 + 0.1 Ipm. 


10.5.5 Design Area and Adjustment of Design Area for 
Various Types of Sprinklers Used in the Network 


Attention is drawn to 8.2 and 8.3 in design density of 
application, 8. 
10.5.6 Other Requirements 


a) For sloped ceiling applications, design area for 
density application shall be based on projected 
horizontal area. 


b 


wm 


Each sprinkler in the design area and the remainder 
of the fully calculated system shall discharge at a 
flow rate at least equal to the stipulated minimum 
water application rate multiplied by the design 
area. 


c) Where sprinklers are required to discharge a 
specific flow or pressure rather than density, each 
sprinkler in the design area shall discharge at a 
flow or pressure at least equal to the minimum 
required. 


d) Calculations shall begin at the hydraulically most 
remote sprinkler. 


e) The calculated pressure at each sprinkler shall be 
used to determine the flow rate of that particular 
sprinkler. 

f) Pipe diameters on the installation side of the 
control valve set may decrease only in the direction 
of water flow, except in the case of grid and loop 
configurations. 


wa 


Upright sprinklers shall not be connected to any 
pipe with a diameter greater than 65 mm. Pendent 
sprinklers shall not be directly connected to any 
pipe with a diameter greater than 80 mm. For 
larger diameters, an arm pipe shall be fitted so 
that the distance from the sprinkler deflector to the 
edge of the main pipe is not less than 1.5 times the 
diameter of this pipe. 


5 


IS 15105 : 2021 


Table 24 Equivalent Length of Fittings and Valves 
[ Clause 10.5.4 (а) | 


SI No. Fittings and Valves Equivalent Length of Medium Grade Steel Pipe (in m) 
According to IS 1239 (Part 1) (C = 120) for Diameter in mm equal to 


50 65 80 100 150 200 250 

a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
1) Screwed elbow 90° 1.46 1.89 2.37 3.04 4.30 5.67 7.42 
ii) Welded elbow 90° 0.69 0.88 1.10 1.43 2.00 2.64 3.35 
iii) Screwed elbow 45° 0.76 1.02 1.27 1.61 2.30 3.05 3.89 
ту) All other fittings 2.91 3.81 4.75 6.10 8.61 11.34 13.85 
v) Gate valve 0.38 0.51 0.63 0.81 1.13 1.50 1:97 
vi) Alarm valve and N.R valve - - 3.94 5.07 TAT 9.40 12.30 
vii) | Alarm valve and N.R valve (Mush room) - - 119,71 5.36 35.88 47.27 61.85 
vii) Butterfly valve 2.19 2.86 3.55 4.56 6.38 8.62 9.90 
ix) | Globe valve 6.43 21.64 126.80 34.48 48.79 64.29 84.11 


NOTE — The equivalent lengths can be converted as necessary for pipes with other C values by multiplying the above values by following factors: 


100 110 120 130 140 150 
0.714 0.85 1 1.16 1.33 1.51 


Table 25 Equivalent Length of Fittings and Valves 
| Clause 10.5.4 (а) | 


SI Хо. Fittings Equivalent Length (in m) of Medium Grade Steel Pipe (in m) 
According to IS 1239 (Part 1) (C = 120) for Diameter in mm equal to 


25 32 40 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Screwed elbow 90° 0.775 1.04 1.22 
ii) Welded elbow 90? 0.367 0.49 0.56 
iii) Screwed elbow 45? 0.40” 0.55 0.66 
іу) АП other fittings 1.54 2.13 2.44 


D [t is strongly advised to avoid 25 mm sized elbows in the installation. 


Table 26 Accuracy of Hydraulic Calculations 
[ Clause 10.5.4 (b) ] 


SI No. Quantity Unit Accurate to 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Length m 0.01 
ii) Height m 0.01 
iii) Equivalent length m 0.01 
іу) Flow Ipm 1.00 
v) Pressure loss mBar/m 1.00 
vi) Pressure mBar 1.00 
vil) Velocity m/s 0.10 
viii) Area па? 0.01 
іх) Density of water application Ipm/m? 0—10 


IS 15105: 2021 


10.5.7 Minimum Sprinkler Discharge Pressure 


The pressure at the hydraulically most unfavorably 
situated sprinkler, when all the sprinklers in the area 
of operation are in operation, shall be not less than that 
required to achieve the density specified in 8 or the 
following, whichever is the higher: 


a) 0.7 bar for light hazard. 

b) 0.5 bar for ordinary hazard. 

c) 0.5 bar for high hazard (process and storage). 
d) 1.00 bar for intermediate sprinkler with K-115. 
e) 2.00 bars for intermediate sprinklers K-80. 


NOTE — Where a higher minimum operating pressure for the 
desired application is specified in the rules, same shall take 
precedence (see 10.5.8). 


10.5.8 Maximum Sprinkler Discharge Pressure 


For storage applications, higher pressures than what 
is stated in 10.5.7 will be required (see Annex C). 
Pressure at any sprinkler in such cases shall not exceed 
shall not exceed 7 bar (see 10.3.3). 


10.5.9 To avoid excessive build-up in pressures in 
piping closer to the installation valves, pipe network 
shall be designed on the basis of layout shown in 10.3 
with more distribution pipes feeding pockets of range 
arrays. For large installations, pressure balancing 
shall be done if required, by insertion of either local 
orifice plates or pressure reducing stations in order to 
avoid excessive pressures in hydraulically favourable 
locations. 


11 COMPONENTS 
INSTALLATION 


OF SPRINKLER 


11.1 Piping 

For a sprinkler system to perform properly during a 
fire, the network of piping that delivers water from 
its source to the open sprinklers must be capable of 
withstanding both the internal pressure acting upon 
it and high external temperatures. In addition, the 
piping network must be properly supported and able to 
maintain its structural integrity during an earthquake. 
It must also be installed so it does not interfere with 
the sprinkler’s water discharge. The requirements given 
below shall receive attention. 


11.1.1 The pipe used in the sprinkler system (from 
the pump house to the installation control valves) 
shall be laid underground or in masonry culverts with 
removable covers of incombustible construction and 
shall be of any one of the following types: 


a) Cast iron double flanged class ‘A’ pipes conforming 
to the following standards: 


1) Horizontally cast iron pipes : IS 7181 
2) Vertically cast iron pipes : IS 1537 


46 


3) Centrifugally cast (spun) iron pipes : IS 1536 
? Where the nominal diameter of the pipe exceeds 300 mm and 
where the pump delivery pressure exceeds 7 bar, class B pipes 
would be necessary. 


b 


— 


Spun Pipes 

1) Centrifugally cast (spun) iron pipes, class A: 
IS 1536 with rubber gasket joints 

2) Centrifugally cast (spun) ductile iron pipes: 
IS 8329 


c) Wrought or mild steel pipes (galvanized) of heavy 
grade: IS/ISO 3183” 


d) Wrought or mild steel pipes (non-galvanized) of 
heavy grade: IS 1239? and IS/ISO 3183 


е) Electric resistance welded (ERW) steel pipes: 
IS 3589 
? No welding is permissible. 
2 Welding permissible with butt-welded joints and coated 
and wrapped as per IS 10221. At least 10 percent of all the 
welded joints shall be radiographically tested and half of the 
joints radiographed shall be field joints. It is preferable if one 
flange joint is introduced after every three lengths of pipes, 
considering the ease of maintenance. 


11.1.2 The pipe used in the sprinkler system (from the 
pump house to the installation control valves) may be 
laid above ground in case of piping materials as per 
11.1.1 (c) to 11.1.1 (e) above with welded [except in 
case of 11.1.1(c)], threaded or flanged joints subject to 
following conditions: 


a) Pipes shall be laid in exclusive rolled steel 
section/steel supports and shall not run in pipe 
racks with other utility piping. 


b) The external pipes shall be run at minimum 
distances from the buildings as stated below: 


1) Light hazard :6m 
2) Ordinary hazard :6m 
3) High hazard (including storage) : 15m 


11.1.3 Pipes shall not be laid under buildings or plant 
areas or storage areas. As far as possible, pipes shall not 
be laid under large open storage, railroads and roads 
carrying heavy traffic. 


11.1.4 Underground pipes shall be laid not less than 
1 m (top of pipe) below ground level. 


11.1.5 Underground pipes in case of materials in 11.1.1 
(a), (b)(1) and (b)(2) shall be provided with masonry or 
equivalent supports and thrust blocks (where necessary) 
at regular intervals. 


11.1.6 Where soil conditions are unsatisfactory, 
masonry or equivalent supports and shall be provided 
at regular intervals for all other pipes also. 


11.1.7 Pipes shall not traverse on ground, which is not 
under the control of the owner of the installation. Pipes 
shall also not pass through public roadways. 


11.1.8 Тһе installation piping (from the pump house ир 
to the installation control valve and also the installation 
piping with sprinklers above the installation control 
valve) shall be capable of withstanding for 120 min 
a pressure equivalent to 150 percent of the maximum 
working pressure. 


11.1.9 All bolt holes in the flanges shall be drilled. 
Drilling of each flange shall be in accordance with the 
relevant Indian Standards. 


11.1.10 Flanges shall be faced and have jointing of 
rubber insertions or asbestos compound. 


11.1.11 Welded joints of any type shall not be permitted 
for pipes having diameter less than 50 mm. 


11.1.12 It is not permissible to run the sprinkler pipes 
through an unsprinklered building or occupancy and 
where it is not practicable the supply pipeline shall be 
installed at ground level and enclosed in brick trenches 
covered with removable RCC precast slabs. 


11.1.13 All installation pipework above ground 
shall be installed at a slope not less than 1 : 500 for 
horizontal run of pipes. Normally the pipework should 
slope through the installation valve. If the pipework is 
trapped (below the level of the installation valve for 
example in the basements), arrangements shall be made 
to provide drain cocks at the bottom of such pipes to 
drain the trapped water in full. 


11.1.14 Sprinkler pipes shall not be embedded in 
concrete floors or ceilings of any building. 


11.1.15 A single air vent shall be provided on each 
wet-pipe system. The vent shall be located near a high 
point in the system to allow air to be removed. 


11.2 Fittings 


11.2.1 Fittings installed underground shall be of cast 
iron heavy grade conforming to IS 1538 whereas those 
installed over ground shall be of heavy grade wrought or 
mild steel conforming to IS 1239 (Part 2) or malleable 
iron fittings conforming to IS 1879. 


11.2.2 All fittings shall be able to withstand for 
120 min at least a pressure of 150 percent of the 
maximum working. 


11.2.3 Welded fittings according to the laid down 
welding procedure are permitted. Welded parts shall be 
galvanised or suitably coated after welding as per the 
requirement of the areas to be protected by the system, 
that is chemical and electrolytic corrosion. 


11.2.4 Welded joints shall not be permitted for fittings 
of less than 50 mm diameter. 


47 


IS 15105 : 2021 


11.3 Joining of Piping and Fittings 


11.3.1 Threaded Pipes and Fittings 


a) All threaded pipes and fittings shall have threads 
cut to relevant Indian Standards. 


b) Steel pipes with thicknesses less than schedule 
30 (size 200 mm or more) and those of schedule 
40 (size less than 200 mm) shall be permitted to be 
jointed only with threaded fittings. 


c) Joint compound or tape shall be applied only to 
male threads. 


11.3.2 Welded Pipe and Fittings 


a) Pipes meant for sprinkler installation shall only be 
shop welded, unless permitted by the authorities or 
agencies responsible for approval of the sprinkler 
system. 


b 


— 


Welding shall be done under supervision as per 
proper approved procedures through qualified 
welders. Necessary records shall be maintained 
with regard to work completed, defects observed, 
re-work and clearance, etc. Also details of 
radiography test for the welded pipes duly signed 
by the protocol shall be maintained. 


11.3.3 Groove Joining Methods 


a) Pipes joined with grooved couplings shall be 
joined by approved couplings, gaskets and groove 
dimensions. 


b) Grooved connections of fittings and valves 
and grooves cut and rolled on pipe shall be 
dimensionally compatible with the couplings. 


11.4 Pipe Supporting Methods (Above Installation 
Control Valve ICV) 


11.4.1 General 


a) Sprinkler pipes shall be supported from the 
building structure which itself shall be capable of 
supporting the water filled pipework and shall not 
impair the performance of sprinklers under fire 
conditions. 


b) Pipework shall not be used to support any other 
loads except where primary support is designed 
for the suspension of the piped service. 

c) Distribution/range pipes shall not be supported 
from ceiling sheathing or cladding or from any 
other associated suspension systems. 


d 


— 


Pipes below obstructions such as ductwork shall 
be either supported from the building structure 
or from the steel members supporting such 
obstructions. Such members shall be capable of 
supporting the weight of water filled pipes too. 


е 


— 


Hangers shall not be welded ог fastened directly to 
the pipework. It shall be ensured that the building 


15 15105: 2021 


structure can support the added minimum load. 
When pipe hangers are attached to a non-building 
structure, ensure the non-building structure 
design takes into account the load imposed by the 
sprinkler system piping. 

f) The supports on which the pipework rests shall be 

secured firmly in position. 

g) The thickness of all parts of pipe supports shall not 
be less than 3 mm. 

h) Wherever possible, pipes shall be supported from 
non-combustible building elements. 

j) Pipework in corrosive areas shall be of either 
stainless steel or suitably protected against 
corrosion. 

k) The distance between the pipe supports measured 
along the line of connected pipes (whether the 
pipes run horizontally, vertically or at angles) 
shall not be less than the following Table 27. 

Table 27 Spacing of Pipe Supports 


| Clause 11.4.1 (k) | 


SI No. Material Diameter Spacing 
mm m 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Steel 25 3.6 
ii) 32 to 100 4.5 
ili) More than 100 6.0 
iv) CPVC 25,32 1.8 
v) 40, 50 24 
уі) 65,80 2.7 
уп) Моге Шап 80 Not 
applicable 


11.4.2 Distribution Pipes 
a) 


The first support on a nominally horizontal 
distribution pipe shall not be at more than 2 m 


from the main distribution pipe. 
b 


— 


The last support on a nominally horizontal 
distribution pipe shall not be more than 450 mm 
from the end. 

c) Drop or rise pipes shall be secured to the building 
structure either directly or indirectly at the adjacent 
nominally horizontal part of the pipe within 
300 mm of the drop or rise. 


11.4.3 Range Pipes 


a) At least one support shall be provided for: 
1) each pipe run connecting adjacent sprinkler, 
and 
2) the pipe run connecting the distribution pipe 
and the first sprinkler on the range pipe. 
b) Pipe supports shall not be closer than 150 mm to 
any sprinkler axial central line. 


48 


c) The first support on a range pipe shall not be more 
than 2 m from the distribution pipe. 


d) The last support on a range pipe shall not be at 
more than 1.5 m from the range pipe end or where 
there is a horizontal arm pipe of 450 mm or longer, 
the arm pipe end or where there 15 a drop or rise 
exceeding 600 mm, the drop or rise pipe end. 


11.4.4 Outgoing mains from the installation valve to 
the system shall be supported at every 3.5 m of its run. 


11.4.5 The thickness of all components used in pipe 
supports shall not be less than 3 mm anywhere. 


11.4.6 Some ofthe typical supporting arrangements are 
shown in Fig. 13. 


11.5 Protection Against Fire and Mechanical 
Damage 


a) Piping shall be installed in such a way that the 
pipes are not exposed to mechanical damage. 
Where pipes are installed above gangways with 
low headroom, or at intermediate levels, or in 
other similar situations, precautions shall be taken 
against mechanical damage. 

b) Where itis unavoidable for water supply pipework 

to pass through a non-sprinklered building, it shall 

be installed at ground level and shall be enclosed 
to protect against mechanical damage, with 
appropriate fire resistance. 


11.6 Painting 


Non-galvanized ferrous pipework shall be painted if 
environmental conditions make it necessary. Galvanized 
piping shall be painted wherever the coating has been 
damaged, say by threading. 


11.7 Drainage 


See 11.9.4 for installation requirements of drain valves. 
11.8 Other Type of Pipes and Fittings 


11.8.1 General 


a) Pipes other than that listed under 11.1.1 and 
11.1.2 may also be used for sprinkler installation 
provided suitable standards are available for 
fabrication, testing and approval. 


b 


— 


Fittings shall also be available of same material 
for such pipes and standards shall be available for 
fabrication, testing and approval. 


с 


— 


Such pipes and fittings shall preferably bear 
‘ISP’ mark. 


Such pipes shall not be used for portions of any 
occupancy. 


d 


— 


е 


МУ 


Such pipes shall be used for Ше specific purpose 
as defined in the standard and shall not be used 
beyond the purpose for which they are approved 
and licensed. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


© 


il 
A A 
У ы? 


Вапа Напдег 


Pasa l 


ш? 


е 


Сір 
Clivies hanger 
Band hanger 
Saddle bracket 

TIT 
i 
uw 

Ceiling flange 

Bracket 
Fic. 13 A 


49 


IS 15105: 2021 


Adjustable Clevis hanger Split ring Riser clamp Pipe clamp 


swivel ring 


Eyelet Offset eyelet 
C-type clamps 


зове 


Universal beam clamps Wide mouth Рипїп Steel Malleable 
beam clamp clamp С-сіатр С-сіатр 


Ceiling flanges Side beam attachments 


__ M — inserts 


Retainer straps 


къ | Г Ср 


Toggle nut U-bolt U-hook Wraparound Short strap Wood beam 
U-hook clamp 


Post-installed anchors 


em) ш) E 


Wedge anchor Drop in Rod coupling 


Eye rod 
Power driven 


ls —— 2 — 
«duum <р 


Concrete Steel 


(ЛИФТ) B ( 1 
AI thread rod 


ША (177727 


Coach screw rod 


Гад screw Drive screw Wood screw 


Fig. 13 B 
Fic. 13 PIPE SUPPORT 
50 


11.8.2 CPVC Pipes and Fittings 


11.8.2.1 CPVC plastic pipes accordance with following 
clauses shall be investigated for suitability in automatic 
sprinkler installations and approved for this service. 
Approved CPVC pipes shall be installed in accordance 
with its approval limitations, including installation 
instruction. 


Before using CPVC pipes, the following factors shall 
be taken into consideration: 


a) Pressure rating, 
b) Beam strength (hangers), 
c) Unsupported vertical stability, 


d) Movement of pipes during sprinkler operation 


(affecting sprinkler pattern), 
e) Corrosion (internal, chemical and 


electrolytic, 


external), 


f) Resistance at elevated temperatures, 


g) Joining methods (strength, permanence, fire 


exposure), and 
h) Integrity during seismic movement. 


11.8.2.2 CPVC pipes shall comply with IS 16088, 
bearing ISI mark and fittings shall comply with the 
IS 16534 with regard to its fabrication and installation 
and shall preferably bear ISI mark. Also usage of piping 
for installation in a building shall be investigated with 
regard to their installation and approvals. 


11.8.2.3 When CPVC pipe is used in combination 
systems utilizing internally coated steel piping and 
CPVC piping, the steel pipe shall be investigated for 
compatibility with CPVC by a testing laboratory. 
Cutting oils and lubricants used for fabrication of the 
steel piping shall be compatible with CPVC materials. 


11.8.2.4 When CPVC pipe is used in combination 
systems utilizing steel pipe that is not internally coated 
and CPVC piping, no additional evaluations are 
required. Cutting oils and lubricants use for fabrication 
of the steel piping shall be compatible with CPVC 
materials. 


11.8.2.5 Fire stopping materials intended for use on 
CPVC piping penetrations shall be investigated for 
compatibility with CPVC materials. 


11.8.2.6 Other construction materials, such as paint, 
electrical and communication wiring, thread sealants, 
gasket lubricant shall not come in contact with CPVC 
unless they have been evaluated as compatible with 
CPVC materials by a testing laboratory. 


11.8.2.7 CPVC pipes can be used only for the following 
applications: 


a) For light hazard occupancies (non-industrial) 
where the areas of any rooms, corridors, halls, 


51 


IS 15105 : 2021 


etc are not more than 126 т? and are bounded 
by masonry/or RCC walls up to the roof and all 
openings therein protected as stipulated in 5.2.2. 

b) For ordinary hazard portions (of not exceeding 
37 m?) of occupancies which are incidental to the 
otherwise predominant light hazard occupancy. 

с) For wet pipe installations. 

d) For fully calculated pipework installations. 

е) Installations employing quick-response sprinklers. 

f) In ceiling voids where sprinkler protection is not 
required within the void. 


11.8.2.8 CPVC pipes shall по be used for the following: 
a) In spaces which are used as ventilation plenums. 
b) In combustible concealed spaces. 


11.8.2.9 Maximum pressure in the installation with 
CPVC pipes shall not exceed 12 bar. 


11.8.2.10 CPVC pipes shall not be used in locations 
where the temperature 15 likely to exist or reach more 
than 65 °С. 


11.8.2.11 For seismic zones ав defined in 
IS 1893 (Part 1), acceptance to use CPVC piping in 
sprinkler installations is with the authority or user 
having jurisdiction, depending on the seismic zones 
(as per IS 1893 (Part 1) and their suitability to relevant 
zones. 


11.8.2.12 Other installation requirements 
a) Where installed exposed, CPVC piping with 
sprinklers shall be installed below smooth, 
horizontal and firmly fixed ceilings only. They 
shall not be installed below false ceilings. 


b 


— 


Sprinkler system shall be installed with quick 
response sprinklers of pendent type. Sprinklers 
shall be installed in such a way that the deflectors 
are within 200 mm from the ceiling and also 
the maximum distance between sprinklers shall 
not exceed 4 m in accordance with the approval 
restrictions. 


For horizontal sidewall installations, sidewall 
sprinklers shall be installed in such a way that 
the deflectors are within 150 mm from the ceiling 
and within 100 mm from the sidewall and the 
maximum distance between sprinklers shall 
not exceed 4 m in accordance with the approval 
restrictions. 


c) 


d 


— 


Such installations shall be used with sprinkler 
heads with temperature rating not exceeding 
93 °С. 
е) Such installations shall not be used in combustible 
spaces. 


f) Where installed in concealed spaces, the minimum 
protection for the CPVC pipes and fittings 


IS 15105: 2021 


5 


һ 


1 


i) 


wa 


) 


shall consist of either one layer of 10 mm thick 
gypsum wall board, 12.5 mm plywood soffits, or a 
suspended membrane ceiling with lay-in panels or 
tiles having a weight of 0.07 kg/m? when installed 
with metallic grids. Alternate arrangements for the 
protection of pipes shall be in accordance with 
approval conditions. 


Other restrictions such as jointing of pipes/fittings 
with solvent cement, thermal expansion of the 
pipes, supporting arrangements, etc, shall be 
addressed as specified in the approval conditions 
and manufacturers installation manual. 


The minimum riser diameter shall be 25 mm and 
the maximum riser diameter shall be 50 mm. The 
maximum distance between the wall(s) and the 
outside surface of the riser pipe shall be 40 mm. 


Where obstructions are present below the 
sprinklers, CPVC piping shall not be used. 


k) It is not allowed to install the system with upright 


sprinklers. 


11.8.3 Flexible Drop Pipes for Sprinklers (See Fig. 14) 
a) Flexible drop pipes shall be used strictly under 


b 


ma 


situations like those mentioned below and not as 

an automatic choice or alternative: 

1) If relative movement is likely to occur 
between different sections of pipe work within 
the sprinkler system, for example owing to 
expansion joints. 

2 

3) 


МУ 


Іп highly earthquake prone regions. 


For use in commercial suspended ceilings 
where the space between the ceiling and false 
ceiling is low, that is, less than 500 mm and 
constraints exist to install pipes or for perfect 
alignment of fittings. 


Flexible drop pipes shall comply with the 
following material specifications: 


1) Temperature rating: Maximum temperature — 
150 °С. 


2) Maximum working pressure — 12 bar. 


3) It shall be capable of withstanding a test 
pressure of four times the maximum working 
pressure or 40 bar, whichever is the greater, 
and shall not include parts which, when subject 
to fire, might impair either the integrity or the 
performance of the sprinkler system. 


4 


wa 


Flexible pipes shall contain a continuous 
pressure-retaining stainless steel or 
non-ferrous metal inner tube. 

Bend radius shall not be less than 200 mm. 
No bends shall be allowed within 250 mm 
from the terminations of the pipe on either 
side. 


5) 
6) 


52 


с) 


7) Maximum number of bends allowed for 
flexible drop pipes shall not exceed 3. 


8) Flexible sprinkler hose length including 
the connectors at either end is limited to a 
maximum of 1.20 m to minimize the potential 
for hose kinking and undesirable movement of 
a sprinkler after installation. 


The following requirements shall apply to the 
installation of flexible drop pipes: 


1) A flexible sprinkler hose drop assembly 
consists of a flexible hose, inlet fitting for 
connection to the branch line, and an outlet 
fitting for connection to the sprinkler. These 
flexible hose with fittings is intended to 
be installed using the anchoring devices 
referenced in the manufacturer’s installation 
instructions. They shall not be supported on 
the false ceiling framework. 


Flexible drop pipes shall not be fitted in the 
fully extended position. 


2 


— 


3 


МУ 


Flexible pipes and joints shall not be used to 
take up misalignment between a distribution 
main and the feed pipes where the concealed 
space is more than 800 mm. 


4 


— 


Flexible drop pipes shall not be embedded in 
concrete or other building materials. 


The flexible drops shall be of make 
approved/certified by relevant agencies. 
Approval also includes other fittings like 
mounting brackets, fitting systems, fitting 
methods, etc. In addition, manufacturers 
recommendations shall also Бе taken 
into consideration while installation 
(see Fig. 14). 


АП flexible drop hoses shall have end 
connections such that they cannot be 
interconnected to create a longer hose. 


5) 


6 


— 


7 


МУ 


Flexible drop connectors shall be used оп wet 
pipe and fully calculated installations only. 


8 


— 


Flexible drop connectors shall only be used to 
connect a single sprinkler to a distribution pipe 
with a length not exceeding 1.2 m. 


9 


— 


Installation of flexible drops shall be as per the 
approved methods specified in the installation 
manual and shall not result in kinks, twists, 
tight bends, crush damage, etc. 


10 


— 


Flexible drop pipes shall be used only for 
pendent type spray sprinklers. 


11 


— 


Flexible drop connectors shall only be used 
in accessible locations where inspections are 
possible. 


12 


— 


Frictional losses in flexible drops shall be 
taken into account while performing hydraulic 
calculations. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


ACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE 


KEY 

1 DISTRIBUTION PIPE 

2 FLEXIBLE CONNECTOR 

3 MINIMUM BEND RADIUS LIMIT 

4 SPRINKLER 

5 CEILING 

6 FLEXIBLE CONNECTOR/SPRINKLER 
SUPPORT ASSEMBLY 

7 FITTING - RIGHT - ANGLE BEND 

8 BENDS LESS THAN MINIMUM 
BEND RADIUS 


о 
wo 


| 


Fic. 14 FLEXIBLE DRops 


53 


IS 15105: 2021 


11.9 Valves 


11.9.1 General 


а) 


b 


wm 


с 


ме 


а 


М7 


е 


— 


The various types of valves used in the installation 
are as under: 


1) Stop valves (shut-off valves), 
2) Test valves, 

3) Drain valves, 

4) Flushing valves, 

5) Check valves, 

6) Installation valves, 

7) Pre-action valves, and 

8) Subsidiary valves. 


АП stop valves which may cut off water supply to 
the sprinkler installation shall: 


1) close in the clockwise direction, 


2) be fitted with an indicator that clearly shows 
whether it is in the open or closed position; and 


3) be secured in the right position by a strap and 
padlock or secured in an equivalent manner. 


Care shall be taken to ensure that all stop, test, 
drain and flushing valves are suitable for the 
system pressures, especially in locations, such as 
high-rise buildings, where high static pressures 
are likely. 


Butterfly valves (see IS 13095), if used, shall be of 


the gear-operated type for sizes more than 150 mm 
and motor operated 1f more than 300 mm. 


Valves, which interlock when closed, shall be 
positioned in a conspicuous place where the key 
is obtrusive when the valve 15 closed. 


11.9.2 Main Stop Valves 


a) 


b 


wm 


с) 


d) 


Where sprinkler systems are fed by a ring main 
supply pipe arrangement on the premises, stop 
valves shall be installed to isolate the ring into 
sections, in such a way that no section shall 
include more than 4 installation control valve sets 
(ICVs). 

One, and only one, main stop valve shall be fitted 
immediately downstream of the main alarm valve 
of a standard sprinkler installation. 


The main stop valve(s) shall be at a fire brigade 
access level and readily accessible when 
responding to a fire alarm. 


Where the working pressure of the installation 
is more than 7 kg/cm’, cast iron valves with 
PN 1.6 rating shall be provided. However, 
cast steel valves of class 150 shall suffice for 
installation under all pressure conditions. 


11.9.3 Test Valves 


a) 


Alarm and pump start test valves — Test valves 
(15 mm nominal size) shall be provided, as 
appropriate, to test: 


54 


1) the hydraulic alarm or any electric alarm 
pressure switch if provided, by drawing water 
from the downstream side of a wet alarm 
valve, and any downstream main stop valve(s). 


2) any water flow alarm switch installed 
downstream of the main installation valve set. 
The test valve shall be connected downstream 
of the water flow alarm. 


3) an automatic starting device on a pump. 
4 


— 


any pump house sprinkler alarm flow switch 
installed upstream of the installation control 
valve. 


b) The test valve shall be installed close to the alarm 


valve, flow switch or pump starter as appropriate. 


c) Test valves shall be fitted as follows: 


1) On suction pump supplies, upstream of the 
pump outlet stop valve and the check valve. 


2) Immediately upstream of the check valve on a 
water supply feed pipe or trunk subject to any 
requirements of the inflow water authority, 
15 mm test valves shall be fitted, as appropriate, 
to test the following: 


1) The hydraulic alarm and any electric 
alarm pressure switch by drawing water 
from the immediate downstream side of 
the following: 


A)a wet alarm valve, and any 
downstream main stop valves; and 
B) an alternate alarm valve. 

i) The hydraulic alarm and any electric 
alarm pressure switch by drawing water 
downstream of the main water supply stop 
valve and from the upstream side of: 

A) an alternate alarm valve, 
B) a dry pipe alarm valve, and 
C) a pre-action alarm valve. 


ii) Any water flow alarm switch installed 
downstream of the control valve set by 
drawing water downstream of the water 
flow alarm. 


d) An automatic pump starting device. 
e) Any pump or pressure tank house sprinkler alarm 


flow switch installed upstream ofthe control valve 
set. 


f) Atest facility shall be provided, incorporating a test 


valve with any associated fittings and pipework, 
delivering a flow equivalent to the discharge from 
a single sprinkler, connected at the hydraulically 
most remote location on a distribution pipe. 


11.9.4 Drain Valves 


Drain valves shall be fitted as specified in Table 28 to 
allow drainage from pipework as follows: 


a) Immediately downstream of Ше control valve set 
or of its downstream stop valve, if fitted; 


b) Immediately downstream of any subsidiary alarm 
valve; 


c) Immediately downstream of any subsidiary stop 
valve; 


d) Between a dry pipe or subsidiary control valve set 
and any subsidiary stop valve installed for testing; 


e) Any pipe, with the exception of drop pipes to 
single sprinklers in a wet installation, which 
cannot be drained through another drain valve. 


f) The valves shall be fitted at the lower end of the 
pipework and sized as specified in Table 28. The 
outlet shall be no more than 3 m above the floor 
and shall be fitted with a suitable plug. 


In case, drainage cannot be done through the drain 
valve at the control valve set, extra valves shall be 
fitted as specified in 11.9.5. 


Range pipes shall have a slope towards the 
distribution pipe of at least 0.4 percent and 
distribution pipes shall have a slope towards the 
appropriate drain valve of at least 0.2 percent. 


wa 


в 


һ 


wm 


— 


Range pipes shall only be connected to the top of 
distribution pipes to enable drainage of water from 
range pipes. 


j 


k 


wa 


Every sprinkler riser shall be fitted with a 50 mm 
drain valve at a readily accessible location to 
enable operation, testing and maintenance easier. 
Suitable arrangements shall be provided to collect 
water discharged through such drain. 


Table 28 Minimum Size of Drain Valves 
( Clause 11.9.4) 


SI No. Valve Principally Draining Minimum Diameter 
of Valve and Pipe 
mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Light hazard installation 40 
ii) Ordinary hazard or High hazard 50 


processing or High hazard 
storage installation 


iii) Subsidiary installation 50 
iv) A-zone 50 
v) Trapped distribution pipes, 25 
diameter < 80 mm 
vi) Trapped distribution pipes, 40 
diameter > 80 mm 
vii) Trapped range pipes 25 
vii) Trapped pipework between dry 15 
or subsidiary alarm valve and a 
subsidiary stop valve installed 
for testing purposes 


11.9.5 Flushing Valves 


a) Where a sprinkler pump draws water from a 
non-potable source such as a canal, river, lake, 


55 


b) 


с 


а 


е 


— 


м7 


— 


IS 15105 : 2021 


etc (with prior permission of the Authorities) 
flushing valves shall be fitted at the spur ends of 
the installation distribution pipes. 


The valves and any associated drain pipework 
shall be ofthe same nominal size as the distribution 
pipe to which they are attached. Each valve outlet 
shall be fitted with a brass plug cap. 


It may be desirable in certain cases to fit flushing 
connections on ranges, for example in the form of 
a blank tee. 


In addition to their use for periodic flushing of the 
pipework, flushing connections may be used to 
check that water 15 available and for carrying out 
pressure and flow tests. 


Pipework, which is completely full of water, may 
be damaged by the increase in pressure due to 
temperature rises. If complete venting of air in an 
installation is likely to occur, for example in the 
case of a gridded layout with flushing connections 
at the extremities, consideration shall be given to 
the fitting of pressure relief valves. 


Flushing of all sprinkler systems shall be arranged 
by providing removable fittings at the end of all 
cross mains/range pipes. А pipe extension on the 
end of a cross mains/range pipe that consists of 
a threaded capped nipple (see Fig. 15) shall be 
available. The diameter of the flushing connection 
can be minimum 32 mm up to a maximum of 
50 mm. 


Fic. 15 FLUSHING OF SPRINKLER MAINS 


11.9.6 Check Valves 


a) Check valves shall be provided where more than 


b 


— 


one water supply is available and the same fitted 
on each water supply pipe to trunk main. 


A test cock shall be fitted upstream of the check 
valve and downstream of the water supply main 
stop valve, except in the case of a pump supply 
where it shall be upstream of the pump delivery 
check valve (see IS 4928) and of the outlet stop 
valve. 


IS 15105: 2021 


11.9.7 Subsidiary Stop Valves 


Subsidiary stop valves, which shall be of the same 
nominal size as the pipe in which they are fitted, shall 
be provided only to control the water supply to the 
following: 

a) Any sprinklers supplied from upstream of an 
installation main control valve set. 

b) Sprinklers under hoods over the dry ends of paper 
making machines where it is necessary to turn off 
the sprinklers to enable machine cylinders to be 
changed. The valve shall be secured open. 


с 


ме 


Sprinklers protecting a computer area. Тһе stop 
valve shall be electrically monitored or of the type, 
which interlocks when, closed, and in alternate 
installations shall be a screw-down diaphragm 
valve. 


11.9.8 Installation Control Valve (ICV) and Alarm Valve 


a) A sprinkler installation shall be fitted with a 
suitable main installation valve to control the water 
supply to the installation. The valve set comprises 
of: 


1) A main stop valve, 
2) An alarm valve, and 
3) A water motor alarm and gong (see Fig. 16). 


b) The main installation control valve(s) shall be 
fitted immediately downstream of the main stop 
valve. 


c) An alarm valve controlling the water supply to 
either a high temperature area or to an area where 
freezing temperatures may occur either shall be of 
a type without a water seal or positioned at such a 
distance from the protected area that the water seal 
is not affected by the high temperature or freezing. 


d 


— 


The installation control valve shall be placed 
externally in the vicinity of the main entrance 
of the building protected at an easily accessible 
place so that the alarm bell sound is heard by the 
inhabitants/passerby. The valve shall be secured 
open by a pad locked or rivetted strap and protected 
against impact damage. 


е 


— 


If there are genuine constraints in locating the 
installation control valves outside the buildings, 
they may be located inside the building in the 
vicinity of main entrance (subject to approval 
of authorities concerned). Installation control 
valve(s) in such cases, shall be located away from 
any exposure to damage and personnel shall be 
normally available in the vicinity of the location 
to get alerted by alarm operation. Also, electrically 
operated sirens interfaced with the opening of 
alarm valve, shall be provided outside the building. 
In no case, installation control valve shall be 
provided inside basement or inside pump room. 


56 


f 


г) 


h) 


Ў 


A рап of the risk with the position of installation 
control valves shall be placed in a conspicuous 
location. A location plate shall be fixed near the 
valves bearing the following words in raised 
letters: 


SPRINKLER 
ALARM VALVE 


Pressure gauges shall be installed above and 
below each installation control valve. 


Pressure relief valve shall be fitted downstream 
of the installation control valve particularly in 
tropical regions where ambient temperature is 
likely to exceed 40 °C. 


In case of pre-action type installation control 
valves, adequate facilities shall be available for 
the dedicated storage of air/inert gas along with 
necessary hardware required for the safe upkeep 
of the system. Also, detection system shall comply 
with various provisions of IS 2189. 


k) Alarm Valve: 


1) Alarm valves shall be fitted on the main supply 
pipe immediately above the installation control 
valve and before any connection is taken off to 
supply any part of the installation. 


2 


— 


In buildings containing more than опе 
installation, each alarm valve must have a 
number indicated thereon and the relevant 
alarm gong shall bear the same number in bold 
letters. 


3) As far as possible, one building shall be 
protected by one installation control valve 
only. Where the risk is quite large and has to be 
fed by more than one valve, the areas fed by the 
installation control valves shall be planned and 
suitably demarcated. Details of the division of 
the sprinkler load with the demarcated areas 
shall be exhibited near the installation control 
valves. 


4 


— 


The provision of one installation control valve 
for detached buildings in one compound is not 
normally permissible. However, if a building 
requires fewer than 20 sprinklers and the 
same is situated within 6 m of the adjoining 
protected building, both the buildings can 
be protected by the same installation control 
valve. However, it shall not be permissible to 
protect more than two buildings with a single 
installation control valve. 


5 


— 


Supervisory facilities shall be provided for the 
installation control valves in the main control 
panel in the pump house and where fire alarm 
system 15 provided in addition, supervisory 
facilities shall be available in the alarm control 
panel. 


ALARM 
GONG 


TO SPRINKLER 
SYSTEM 


IS 15105 : 2021 


TO DRAIN 


SUPPLY 


Fic. 16 INSTALLATION CONTROL VALVE (ICV) 


11.9.9 Multiple Controls 


Multiple controls installed to control open sprinklers or 
open drenchers or to operate a pressure switch shall be 
acceptable in specific cases. 


11.10 Alarms and Alarm Devices 


a) 


b 


— 


с 


— 


d) 


Each installation control valve set shall be 
provided with a water motor alarm suitable for 
sprinkler service located as close as possible to the 
alarm valve. 


Alarm signal and initiation of alarm shall happen 
within 45 to 60 s upon release of water from 
sprinklers in the system or by opening drainage 
pipe at the control valve sets. 


Each water motor alarm gong shall be prominently 
marked with the number of the installation 
to indicate the building/area protected by the 
installation alarm valve. 


The water motor shall be installed with its gong 
on the outside of an exterior wall and with its 
centre line not higher than 6 m above the point 
of connection to the alarm valve. A strainer 


57 


e 


— 


(see IS 907 and IS 3582), readily accessible for 
cleaning, shall be fitted between the motor nozzle 
and the alarm valve connection. The water outlet 
shall be positioned so that any flow of water can 
be seen. 


The pipework to the water motor shall be 
galvanized, medium grade steel complying with 
IS 1239 (Parts 1 and 2). The equivalent length 
of pipe between the alarm valve and the water 
motor shall be not more than 20 m assuming 
an equivalent length of 3 m for each change of 
direction. The nominal size shall be not less than 
15 mm for equivalent lengths less than or equal 
to 6 m; and 20 mm for equivalent lengths greater 
than 6 m. The pipe shall be fitted with a stop valve 
located within the premises and shall be provided 
with a permanent drain through an orifice not 
larger than 3 mm diameter. The orifice place may 
be integral with the pipe fitting, and shall be of 
either stainless steel or a non-ferrous material. 
Any device to reduce the frequency of false or 
intermittent alarms fitted to the installation shall 
be suitable for sprinkler service. 


IS 15105: 2021 


11.11 Pressure Gauges 
11.11.1 General and Specification 


Pressure gauges fitted in the installations shall comply 
with relevant Indian Standards to ensure they are rated 
for at least twice the expected static pressure at the spot 
of their installation. 


a) Install pressure gauges at the following locations: 


1) On the upstream and downstream sides of 
any installation control valve, dry-pipe valve, 
preaction valve, and refrigerated-area valve. 

2) On the upstream and downstream sides of 

any check valve that is installed on a sprinkler 

riser in the absence of an alarm check 
valve, dry-pipe valve, preaction valve, or 
refrigerated-area valve. 


3 


— 


On the upstream side of any sprinkler system's 
automatic system valve that feeds open 
sprinklers. 

4) Ontheair supply that feeds dry-pipe, preaction, 
and refrigerated-area sprinkler systems. 

5) On the air receiver and air pump supply if 
they have been provided on dry-pipe sprinkler 
systems. 

6) At any accelerators on dry-pipe or preaction 
sprinkler systems arranged to indicate the air 


pressure at the accelerator. 
b 


— 


Pressure gauge connection shall be provided near 
the most remote sprinkler located on either a 
deluge or exposure protection sprinkler system. 


The scale subdivision shall not exceed 0.2 bar for 
a maximum scale value up to and including 10 bar 
and 0.5 bar for a maximum scale value of more 
than 10 bar, up to and including 16 bar. 


с 


wa 


d) The maximum scale value shall be of the order of 


150 percent of the maximum pressure. 
11.11.2 Application of Pressure Gauges 


a) Installation Control Valves — A pressure gauge 
shall be fitted at each of the following points: 


1) Main control valve sets. 
2) Immediately downstream of the alarm valve 
(designated the ‘C’ gauge). 
3) Immediately upstream of the main control stop 
valve (designated the “В” gauge). 
b 


wm 


Water Supply Connections — Each pump supply 
shall be fitted with a damped pressure gauge on 
the supply pipe immediately downstream of the 
outlet check valve and upstream of any outlet stop 
valve. 


c) Removal — Means shall be provided to enable 
each pressure gauge to be removed readily 
without interruption of the water or air supply to 
the installation. 


58 


11.12 Water Flow and Pressure Switches 


a) Water flow alarm switches shall only be used 
in wet installations. A test connection shall be 
fitted downstream of each switch to simulate the 
operation of a single sprinkler. It shall be fitted 
with a drain. The draw-off pipe shall be galvanized 
steel or copper. 

b) The pressure/flow characteristic of the fully 
opened test valve and draw-off pipe shall be equal 
to that of the smallest nominal bore sprinkler 
supplied through the flow switch. Any orifice 
plate shall be at the pipe outlet and shall be either 
stainless steel or non-ferrous material. 


с 


wm 


The test pipe outlet shall be positioned relative to 
the drainage system in such a way that the flow of 
water can be seen during tests. 


11.13 Pressure Regulating Valves (PRVs) 


a) Pressure regulating valves shall be used to restrict 
unwarranted pressure in the installation and 
piping, particularly in high rise installations. 


b) Pressure gauges shall be provided on the inlet and 
outlet sides of each PRV. 


c) A relief valve shall be provided of size not less 
than 15 mm on the discharge side of the PRVs so 
as to relieve excess pressure. 


d) Means shall be provided downstream of all PRVs 
for flow tests at sprinkler system demand. 


11.14 Sprinkler Rosettes 
a) Rosettes shall be made of metal. 


b) Rosettes shall not be used to support ceilings or 
other structures. 


c) No part of a rosette shall project from the ceiling 
below the top of the visible portion of the heat 
sensitive element of the sprinkler. 


d) The escutcheon plates shall be of certified type for 
use around a sprinkler. 


e) Escutcheons used with recessed flush type or 
concealed sprinklers shall be part of the certified 
sprinkler assembly. 


11.15 Sprinkler Guards 


When sprinklers, other than ceiling or flush sprinklers, 
are installed in a position at risk of accidental 
mechanical damage, they shall be fitted with a suitable 
metal guard. Guards used shall be the part of the listed 
sprinkler assembly. 


11.16 Sprinkler Water Shields 


a) Sprinklers installed in racks, or under perforated 
shelves, platforms, floors or similar locations, 
where water from a higher sprinkler or sprinklers 
may cause wetting close to the bulb or fusible 
element, shall be fitted with a metal water shield 
with a diameter of between 75 mm and 150 mm. 


b) 


Water shields on upright sprinklers shall not be 
attached directly to the deflector or yoke, and 
any bracket supports shall be designed so as 
to minimize obstruction to the sprinkler water 
distribution. Water shields shall be factory fitted 
and integral part of sprinklers. The guards shall be 
listed for use along with the sprinkler installed. 


12 PUMPSETS 


12.1 General Requirements 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Pumpsets shall be exclusively used for the 
sprinkler systems, be of an approved type and 
shall be of one of the following types, and in all 
these cases, pumps shall be automatic in action: 


1) Electric motor driven centrifugal pumps, 


2) Compression ignition engine driven centrifugal 
pumps, 
3) Vertical turbine submersible pumps, and 


4) Multi-stage multi-outlet pumps (high rise 
applications). 


Pumps shall be direct-coupled, except in the case 
of engine-driven vertical turbine pumps wherein 
gear drives shall be used. Belt-driven pumps shall 
not be accepted. 


Parts of pumps like impeller, shaft sleeve, wearing 
ring, etc shall be of non-corrosive metal preferably 
of brass or bronze. 


Where sea water is used or where the quality of 
the water necessitates the use of special metals 
and alloys, the use of such metals and alloys shall 
be insisted upon. 


The capacity of the pump(s) shall depend on the 
type of hazard protected and flow requirements 
as per calculations of water demand for given 
system. Electrical ог diesel-driven pumps 
supplying sprinkler systems shall be of sufficient 
capacity to exceed both the system flow rate and 
pressure demands as determined by hydraulic 
calculations, by a minimum of 20 percent for both 
flow and pressure. Pumps shall be chosen with 
duty parameters as stated in Table 29. 


In case of electrically driven pumps, it is required 
to provide a compression ignition engine driven 
stationary of similar capacity be installed as a 
standby and vice-versa. 

NOTE — Notwithstanding the above, if power to motorized 
fire pumps is obtained from two sources, one of which is a 
captive generating plant located in a block either 6 m away 
from all surrounding building or, where this is not feasible, fire 
separated from adjoining buildings in a manner indicated in 
12.2, more than one pump may be of the electrically-driven 
type. 


59 


IS 15105 : 2021 


Table 29 Duty Parameters of Pumps 
[ Clause 12.1(e) ] 


SI No. Hazard Type Pumping Delivery Pressure 
Capacity (see Note 3) 
Ірт (m?/h) bar 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Light 1 620 (96) 5.6 
1 800 (110) 5.6 
ii) Ordinary 2 280 (127) 5.6/7.0 
2 850 (171) 7.0 
iii) High and storage 2 850 (171) 7.0 
4 550 (273) 7.0/8.8 
NOTES 


1 It shall be noted that the pumping capacities specified above are 
applicable only to those occupancies that are not specifically covered 
in Table 7 of SP 7 (Part 4). This has been highlighted here for greater 
clarity (see Note 2). 


2 Fire pumping capacities for all occupancies under groups A to F and 
a few under groups G and H have been already specified in Table 7 of 
SP 7 (Part 4) and these shall be adhered to. However, for the remaining 
occupancies, pumping capacities shall be as per this table. 


3 Attention is drawn to Annex B on high rise installations. 


g) In case of jockey pumps in such systems to take 
care of minor leakages, the capacity thereof shall 
not be less than 3 percent and normally not more 
than 10 percent of the installed pumping capacity. 


h) Each pump shall be provided with a pressure 
gauge on the delivery side between the pump and 
the non-return valve [see IS 5312 Parts (1 and 2)| 
and a plate giving the delivery head, capacity and 
the number of revolutions per minute. 


j) Each pump shall be provided with independent 
suction pipe with flooded suction and 
further provided with sluice or cut off valves 
(see IS 949 and IS 14846). The net positive 
suction head (NPSH) available at site exceeds the 
required NPSH by at least 1 m at 120 percent of 
the duty point as per the manufacturer’s curves. 


k) Suction piping shall be laid either horizontal or 
with a continuous slight rise towards the pump to 
avoid the possibility of air locks forming in the 
pipe. No butterfly valves are allowable in suction 
pipelines. 

m) The diameter of the suction pipe shall be such that 
the rate of flow of water through it is based upon a 
rate of flow of 120 m per min (Max). 


12.2 Pump Room Location 


12.2.1 Pump Rooms at Ground Level 


a) Pumps shall not be installed in the open. The 
pump room shall be so located as to be both easily 
accessible and where any falling masonry and 


15 15105: 2021 


the like from other buildings occasioned by fire 
other causes, cannot damage the pump room. It 
is necessary to install the pump house at ground 
level and the same shall be so situated as to be 
directly accessible from the surrounding ground 
level. 


b 


— 


Normally, pump rooms shall be located 6 m away 
from all surrounding buildings and overhead 
structures. 


с 


ме 


Where this is not feasible, they may be attached 
to a building provided a fire wall having a rating 
of at least 120 min is constructed between the 
pump room and the attached building, the roof of 
the pump room is of reinforced cement concrete 
construction at least 100 mm thick and access to 
the pump room is from the outside. 


d) The pump rooms shall normally have 
brick/concrete walls and non-combustible roof, 
with adequate lighting, ventilation and drainage 
arrangements. 


e 


— 


The pump room shall be located 30 m clear of the 
equipment/vessels handling or storing flammable 
liquids/solvents and/or gases. 


12.2.2 Pump Rooms Below Ground Level 


In case of high-rise buildings, fire pump rooms 
should not be installed within the basement. In such 
unavoidable situations, the following requirements 
shall be complied with: 


a) Pump house shall be situated so as to be directly 
accessible from the surrounding ground level. 


b) Pump house shall be installed not lower than the 
first basement. When so installed, direct approach 
staircase/ramp shall be available from the 
surrounding ground level, leading directly to the 
pump house without having to negotiate through 
other occupancies within the basement. 


c) Pump house shall be separated by fire walls all 
around and doors shall be protected by fire doors 
(120 min rating). 


d) Pump house shall be sufficiently large to 
accommodate all pumps and their accessories, 
electrical panels, diesel day tanks, batteries of 
diesel pumps, etc and also sufficient space shall be 
available to negotiate around pumps on all sides 
for easy approach during maintenance. Installation 
valves and alarm valves, etc shall not be allowed 
inside the pump room. 


е 


wm 


Exhaust pipes for diesel engines shall be well 
insulated and taken to a safe location at ground 
or terrace levels as per the approved engineering 
practices. 


f) Suitable drainage arrangements shall be provided 
to prevent water stagnation inside pump house. 


g) Pump house shall be well ventilated and due care 
shall be taken to avoid water stagnation. 


60 


h) 


Ў 


К 


— 


m 


— 


n) 


p) 


No other utility equipment shall be installed inside 
fire pump room (other than general water pumps). 
No utility piping shall pass through the pump 
house. 


Butterfly valves shall not be used within the pump 
house both in suction and delivery headers. They 
can be used anywhere in the ring mains. 


Insertions like flexible couplings, bellows, etc in 
the suction and delivery piping shall be strictly 
avoided. 


Neither the pump house nor the water tanks shall 
be below roads even if the load carrying capacity 
of the slabs complies with requirements specified 
in rules. 
Positive suction shall be provided for the fire 
pumps. 


Installation of submersible pumps shall not be 
allowed. See 12.1 (a) (3). 


12.3 Requirements for Electrical Pumps 


1) The substation(s) and/or diesel generator (DG) 
house(s) supplying power to the fire pump(s) 
shall be of incombustible construction and 
shall be located at least 6 m away from all 
surrounding buildings. Where this is not 
feasible, all door and window openings of 
the surrounding buildings within 6 m of the 
substation(s) and/or DG house(s) shall be 
protected by single fire doors and 6 mm thick 
wired glass in steel framework respectively. 
Likewise, roof eaves, if any ofthe surrounding 
buildings falling within 6 m of the substation(s) 
and/or DG house(s) shall be cut and wall 
raised as a parapet. The above provision 
shall also apply when the substation(s) 
and/or DG house(s) are within 6 m of each 
other. See also 3.4.6 of SP 7 (Part 4). 


2) Where the substation(s) and/or DG house(s) 
are attached to buildings, a fire wall(s) having 
a rating of at least 120 min shall be constructed 
to segregate the substation(s) and/or DG 
house(s) from the attached buildings and where 
the attached building is storied, the roof of the 
substation(s) and/or diesel generator house(s) 
shall be of RCC construction of at least 
100 mm thickness. 


3) Transformer cubicles inside these substations 
shall be separated from HT/LT cubicles and 
from each other by blank brick/stone/concrete 
walls of 355 mm thickness or of RCC of 
200 mm with door openings, if any, therein 
being protected by single fireproof doors with 
fire rating of at least 120 min. The substation(s) 
and diesel generator house(s) shall also be 
separated from each other as above. 


— 


4) 


5 


— 


6 


wm 


7 


— 


8 


— 


9 


ея, 


10) 


11) 


Transformers installed outdoors which are 
supplying power to fire pump(s), shall also 
be located at least 6 m away from all the 
surrounding buildings [(including substation(s) 
and/or diesel generator house(s)]. 


Where this is not feasible, all door and 
window openings of the surrounding buildings 
[including  substation(s) and/or diesel 
generator house(s)] within 6 m of the of the 
transformers shall be protected by single fire 
doors and 6 mm thick wired glass in steel 
framework respectively. Likewise, roof eaves, 
if any of the surrounding buildings falling 
within 6 m of the transformers shall be cut and 
wall raised as a parapet. 


Blast walls of bricks/stone/concrete blocks 
of 355 mm thickness or of RCC of 200 mm 
thickness shall be constructed between two 
transformers and these walls shall be extended 
horizontally by 600 mm beyond the extremities 
of the transformers and vertically 600 mm 
above the highest point of the transformers. 
NOTE — For high hazard occupancies, substation(s) 
supplying power to fire pumps shall, in addition to 
complying with the above provisions, be located 
30 m clear of all equipment where flammable fluids 
having a flash point below 65 ?C are handled and/or 


stored. 


Overhead feeders to substation(s) supplying 
power to the fire pump(s) are not permitted 
within a horizontal distance of: 


a) 15 m of any process building/plant or 
tanks containing flammable liquids. 


OR 


b) 6mofanyotherbuildingortanks containing 
non-flammable liquids or of storage in 
open. 

In case the feed to such substation(s) is by 

means of underground cables, the cables shall 

not pass under any building or permanent 
structure. 


Sufficient spare power shall always be 
available to drive pumping set(s) at all times 
throughout the year. 


The electric supply to the pumping set(s) shall 
be entirely independent of all other equipment 
in the premises that is, even when the power 
throughout the entire premises is switched off, 
the supply to the pump shall continue to be 
available interrupted. 

This can be achieved by taking the connection 
for the pump(s) from the incoming side of the 
main LT breaker. 

However, in cases where two or more 
transformers and/or sources of supply are 


61 


12 


13 


) 


) 


14) 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


— 


) 


) 


— 


) 


— 


IS 15105 : 2021 


connected to a common bus bar or where 
there 15 provision of a bus coupler between the 
busbar sections, the connection may be taken 
through the bus bars (see Fig. 17). 


In case of power being available from two 
different grids or a captive generation within 
the complex, all supplies shall terminate 
at main LT panel and through bus coupler 
arrangements, power shall be drawn to fire 
pumps. 
The fire pump circuit shall be protected at 
the origin by an automatic circuit breaker so 
set as to permit the motor to be overloaded 
during an emergency to the maximum limit 
permissible by the manufacturers. Further, the 
under-voltage release/no volt coil of the circuit 
breaker shall be removed. 

NOTE — Where cable lengths are long enough to 

warrant back-up protection, authorities may insist on 

provision for such a protection. 
It is recommended that telltale lamps which 
could continuously glow when power is 
available to the fire pump(s) circuit be provided 
and fixed in a prominent position, both in the 
substation and in the pump room. 


A direct feeder without any tappings, shall be 
laid from the substation to the pump house. 
The feeder shall be laid underground and shall 
not pass under any building or permanent 
structure. 


Where there is more than one source of 
power for the operation of pumping set(s) 
every electrical circuit shall preferably be so 
designed as to ensure that when necessary the 
set(s) continue to operate without the manual 
operation of an emergency switch. 


The pumping set(s) shall be securely mounted 
on a robust bedplate, if of the horizontal type, 
and shall be free from vibration at all variations 
of load. 


The rating and design of motors and switchgear 
shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards 
specifications. The motor shall be ofcontinuous 
rating type and its ratings shall be equivalent to 
the horse power required to drive the pump at 
120 percent of its rated discharge. 


The motor shall be of totally enclosed type or 
drip proof type, the latter having their air inlets 
and outlets protected with meshed wire panels 
to exclude rodents, reptiles and insects. 


The motor(s) shall be wound for class B 
insulation preferably for class E and the 
windings shall be vacuum  impregnated 
with heat and moisture resisting varnish and 
preferably glass fibre insulated to withstand 
tropical conditions. 


IS 15105: 2021 


CASE | CASE II 
4 H. T. BREAKER 4 Н.Т. BREAKER 5 


СЕМЕКАТОК 


TRANSFORMER TRANSFORMER 


L. T. BREAKER 
Г 1 [SS OT BREAKER fj ] ! 
| | suB | | 
fle QUE аи ER ЛА, J STATION 1 A Д ЖА А ДА OS AA ASA А А AA AA AA ЖАДЫ YJ 
=m LOAD POINTS о LOAD POINTS SUB STATION 
[ | тес зуитсн [ тр swreal 
| FUSE UNIT | | FUSE UNIT | 
| STARTER | | STARTER | 
| FIRE PUMP | | FIRE PUMP | 
с MOTOR | Uy MOTOR | 
PUMP PUMP 
CASE Ill 
GENERATOR 
i Н. Т. BREAKER 4 HOUSE 
L. T. BREAKER [GENERATOR] 
TRANSFORMER BUS COUPLER | 
а үс шс ee | 
SUB BUS COUPLER Гу) 
STATION | 
Lo Gy рес 
г---- 


ТРІС SWITCH 
FUSE UNIT | 


| | 
ТРІС NS 
PUMP ROOM 
ISOLATOR ~ | STARTER | 
| А 


L FIRE PUMP MOTOR 


CASE IV 


5 Г. T. BREAKER 


BUS COUPLER GENERATOR 
HOUSE 
SUB i or BIS ат == 
А o 
STATION 
| | іс с! 
| | | в B | 
Е СЕЕ 2 ЕЕСССЕСС_ J LL. 2 
[ CHANGEOVER _ 
| SWITCH | 
| EMERGENCY | 
| Pec | 
ieee ones 
n тес зитен — | 
| FUSE UNIT | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| \_ 
TPIC PUMP ROOM 
ISOLATOR | STARTER | 
FIRE PUMP MOTOR 
| ____FIREPUMPMOTOR у 


Fic. 17 SINGLE LINE DIAGRAM OF PUMP MOTOR ELECTRIFICATION 


62 


21) Motor(s) wound for high tension supplies shall 
have a suitable fixed warming resistance to 
maintain the motor windings in a dry condition 
at all times and particularly under monsoon 
conditions. The resistance shall be connected 
to the lighting or other equivalent circuit. Also 
pump motor and the switchgear inside pump 
house shall be housed in an enclosure with a 
degree of protection not less than IP 65. 


22 


МУ 


Heating apparatus shall also Бе provided, 
when necessary, for medium tension motor 
where they are located below ground level, in 
order to maintain the motor windings in a dry 
condition. Adequate drainage arrangements 
shall also be provided in the pump house in 
such cases. 


23) The incoming cable to the fire pump room 
shall terminate in an isolator/breaker which 


shall feed the fire pump panel. 


24) The starting switchgear for the fire pumps 
should be preferably for direct on line starting 
but star/delta starters are also acceptable. It 
shall also incorporate an ammeter with a clear 
indication of the motor full load current. 
NOTE — Remote controlled starting arrangements 
are subject to prior approval of the authorities 


concerned. 


25) Cables for motors and switchgears shall be 
armored or enclosed in heavy gauge screwed 


steel conduit according to conditions. 

It is recommended that the equipment 
throughout be painted fire red (shade no 536 as 
per IS 5) and suitably marked for identification. 


26) 


27 


— 


Necessary spare parts including a set of fuses 

(їп a glass fronted box) shall be. Kept in 

readiness at all times in the pump house. 
NOTE — The wiring for the fire pumps in all 


installations shall be done in accordance with the 
SP 30. 


12.4 Compression Ignition Engine Driven Pumps 


a) Pump Room — The pump room shall be artificially 


b 


) 


heated, if necessary, to maintain the temperature of 
the room above 10 °С. Adequate ventilation shall 
be provided for the air required for aspiration and 
to limit the temperature rise in the room to 10 °C 
above the ambient temperature when the engine is 
on full load. 


Engine — The engine shall be: 


1) Of the compression ignition mechanical direct 
injection type, capable of being started without 
the use of wicks, cartridges, heater plugs or 
ether, at an engine room temperature of 7 °С 
and shall accept full load within 15 s from the 
receipt of the signal to start. 


63 


с 


а 


е 


— 


— 


— 


IS 15105 : 2021 


2) Naturally aspirated, supercharged ог 
turbocharged and either air or water cooled. In 
the case of charged air cooling by means of 
a belt driven fan or of a belt driven auxiliary 
water pump there shall be multiple belts such 
that should half the belts break, the remaining 
belts would be capable of driving the fan or 
pump. 

Capable of operating continuously on full load 
at the site elevation for a period of 6 h. 


3 


— 


4 


— 


Provided with an adjustable governor to 
control the engine speed within 10 percent of 
its rated speed under any conditions of load up 
to the full load rating. The governor shall be set 
to maintain the rated pump speed at maximum 
pump load. 


5) Provided with an in-built tachometer to 


indicate the rpm of the engine. 


— 


6) 
7) 


Provided with a time totalizer (hour counter). 


Any manual device fitted to the engine which 
could prevent the engine starting shall return 
automatically to the normal position. 


Engines, after correction for altitude and ambient 
temperature shall have bare engine horsepower 
rating equivalent to the higher of the following 
two values: 


1) 20 percent in excess of the maximum brake 
horsepower required to drive the pump at its 
duty point. 


2) The brake horsepower required to drive the 
pump at 120 percent of its rated discharge. 


The coupling between the engine and the pump 
shall allow each unit to be removed without 
disturbing the other. 


Cooling System — Тһе following systems are 
acceptable: 


1) Cooling by water from the discharge of fire 
pump (taken off prior to the pump discharge 
valve) direct into the engine cylinder jackets 
via a pressure reducing device to limit the 
applied pressure to a safe value as specified by 
the engine manufacturer. The outlet connection 
from this system shall terminate at least 
150 mm above the engine water outlet pipe 
and be directed into an open tundish so that the 
discharge water 15 visible. 

2) Aheat exchanger, the raw water being supplied 

from the fire pump discharge (taken off prior 

to the pump discharge valve) via a pressure 
reducing device, if necessary, to limit the 
applied pressure to a safe value as specified 
by the engine manufacturer. The raw water 
outlet connection shall be so designed that 


IS 15105: 2021 


the discharged water can be readily observed. 
The water in the closed circuits shall not be 
less than that recommended by the engine 
manufacturer. If the auxiliary pump is belt 
driven there shall be multiple belts so that 
should half the belts break, the remaining belts 
shall be capable of driving the pump. 


3) A frame or engine mounted air-cooled radiator 
with amultiple belts driven fan from the engine. 
When half the belts are broken the remaining 
belts shall be capable of driving the fan. The 
water in the closed circuit shall be circulated 
by means of the auxiliary pump driven by the 
engine and the capacity of the closed circuit 
shall be not less than that recommended by the 
engine manufacturer. 


4) Direct air cooling of the engine by means of 
multiple belts driven fan. When half the belts 
are broken the remaining belts shall be capable 
of driving the fan. 


NOTE — Incase of systems described above, a failure actuated 
audio-visual alarm shall be incorporated. 


f) Air Filtration — The air intake shall be fitted with 
the filter of adequate size to prevent foreign matter 
entering the engine. 


Exhaust System —The exhaust shall be fitted with 
a suitable silencer and the total backpressure shall 
not exceed the engine maker’s recommendation. 
When the exhaust system rises above the engine, 
means shall be provided to prevent any condensate 
flowing into the engine. 


Engine Shutdown Mechanism — This shall be 
manually operated and return automatically to the 
starting position after use. 


wa 


5 


һ 


wm 


j) Fuel System 


1) Fuel — The engine fuel oil shall be of quality 
and grade specified by engine makers. There 
shall be kept on hand at all times sufficient fuel 
to run the engine on full load for 180 min, in 
addition to that in the fuel tank. 


2) Fuel tank — The fuel tank shall be of welded 
steel construction relevant to Indian or foreign 
standard for mild steel drums (IS 2552). 
The tank shall be mounted above the engine 
fuel pump; to provide a gravity feed unless 
otherwise recommended by the manufacturers. 
The tank shall be fitted with an indicator 
showing the level of fuel in the tank. The 
capacity of the tank shall be sufficient to allow 
the engine to run on full load for: 


i) Light hazard : 60 min 
i) Ordinary hazard. : 120 min 
ii) High hazard : 180 min 


NOTE — Where there is more than one compression ignition 


64 


engine driven pump set there shall be separate fuel tank and 

fuel feed pipe for each engine. 

3) Fuel feed pipes — Any valve in the fuel feed 
pipe between the fuel tank and the engine 
shall be placed adjacent to the tank and it 
shall be locked in the open position. Pipe 
joints shall not be soldered and plastic tubing 
shall not be used. 


k) Auxiliary Equipment 


m) 


n) 


p) 


q) 


The following shall be provided: 
1) sludge and sediment trap, 
2) a fuel level gauge, 
3) an inspection and cleaning hole, 


4) a filter between the fuel tank and fuel 
pump mounted in an accessible position 
for cleaning, 


5) means to enable the entire fuel system 
to be bled of air. Air relief cocks are not 
allowed; and 


6) Screwed Plugs are permitted. 
Starting Mechanism 


Provision shall be made for two separate 
methods of engine starting, namely: 


1) Automatic starting by means of a 
battery powered electric starter motor 
incorporating the axial displacement type 
of pinion, having automatic repeat start 
facilities initiated by a fall in pressure 
in the water supply pipe to the spray 
installation. The battery capacity shall 
be adequate for ten consecutive starts 
without recharging with a cold engine 
under full compression. 

Manual starting by crank handle, if 


engine size permits through electric 
starter motor. 


2 


wm 


NOTE — The starter motor used for automatic 
starting may also be used for manual starting 
provided there are separate batteries for manual 


starting. 


Battery Charging — The means of charging the 
batteries shall be by a 2-rate trickle charger 
with manual selection of boost charge and the 
batteries shall be charged in position. Where 
separate batteries are provided for automatic and 
manual starting the charging equipment shall 
be capable of trickle charging both the batteries 
simultaneously. Equipment shall be provided to 
enable the state of charge of the batteries to be 
determined. 

Tools — A standard kit of tools shall be provided 
with the engine and kept on hand at all times. 


Spare Parts — The following spare parts shall be 
supplied with the engine and kept on hand: 


Т 


5 


— 


ma 


1) 
2 


Two sets of fuel filters, elements and seals. 


wa 


Two sets of lubricating oil filters, elements and 
seals. 


3 
4 


— 


Two sets of belts (wherever used). 


— 


One complete set of engine joints, gaskets and 
hoses. 


5 
6 


— 


Two injector nozzles. 


— 


One complete set of piston rings for each 
cylinder. 

7) 
Engine Exercising — The test shall be for a period 
of at least 5 min each day. Where closed circuits 
cooling systems are used the water level in the 
primary system shall be checked at the time of 
carrying out each test and, if necessary, water shall 
be added during the course of test procedure. 


One inlet valve and one exhaust valve. 


A written declaration shall be given that the 
following conditions will strictly complied with: 


1) 
2) 


to test Ше engine at least once a week, 


to maintain the temperature of the engine room 
at not less than 4.5 °C at all times, 

3) to maintain the minimum, quantity of fuel oil 
required as desired in these clauses, 

4) to use a good grade of fuel oil equivalent in 
quality to that specified by the engine maker, 


and 
5 


wa 


to keep on hand the spare parts required as 
specified above. 


12.5 Other Requirements for Pumps 


a) Where there is more than one pump set installed, 


b 


с 


а 


е 


) 


) 


ме же 


Ше suction pipes shall be interconnected through 
a common header. 


Where a redundant system is required, the full 
flow demand of the system shall be met by a main 
pump set and a reserve pump set having the same 
capacity. 

Two pressure sensing devices shall be provided 
to start each pump set. They shall be connected 
in series such that opening the contacts of either 
switch will start the pump set with normally 
closed contacts. 


Means shall be provided for testing pump set 
starting with each pressure sensing device. 


If any isolating valve is installed on the connection 
between the trunk main and any pump set starting 
pressure sensing device, a non-return valve shall 
be installed in parallel with the isolating valve so 
that a fall in pressure on the trunk main will be 
transmitted to the pressure switch even when the 
isolating valve is closed. 


65 


IS 15105 : 2021 


f) The first pump set shall start automatically when 


в 


һ 


] 


К 


т 


n 


— 


Sa 


— 


— 


— 


the pressure in the system falls to a pre-set value 
that shall be indicated and exhibited inside pump 
room. 


Where two pump sets are installed, there shall be 
a pressure gradient setting after which the second 
ones shall also start automatically, and a delay 
shall be provided so to avoid simultaneous starting 
of both units. 


Once the pumpset has started, it shall continue to 
run until stopped manually. 


The following conditions shall be monitored for 
electric pump: 


1) power available to the motor and, where a.c., 
on all three phases; 


2) pump on demand; 
3) pump running; and 
4) start failure. 


All monitored conditions shall be visually indicated 
individually in the pump room. They shall also 
be visually indicated at a location permanently 
attended by responsible personnel. Pump running 
and fault alarms shall also be audibly indicated at 
the same place. 


Starter Alarm Indication (Engine Driven Pump 
Set) — The following conditions shall each be 
indicated both locally and at a responsibly manned 
location: 


1) the use of any switch which prevents the 
engine starting automatically; 


2) the failure of the engine to start after the six 
attempts; 


3) pump running; and 
4) diesel controller. 


When commissioning ап installation, the 
automatic starting system of the diesel engine 
shall be activated with the fuel supply isolated for 
the six cycles each of no less than 15 s cranking 
and no more than 15 s or less than 10 s rest. After 
completion of the starting cycles the fail to start 
alarm shall operate. The fuel supply shall than 
be restored and the engine shall start when the 
manual start test button is turned on. 


13 WATER SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS FOR 
SPRINKLER SYSTEM 


13.1 Water Supply 


a) It shall be noted that the water capacities specified 


in Table 30 below are applicable only to those 
occupancies that are not specifically provided in 
Table 7 of SP 7 (Part 4). This has been highlighted 
here for greater clarity [see (b)]. 


IS 15105: 2021 


b) Fire water capacities for all occupancies under 
groups A to F and a few under groups G and 
H have been already specified in Table 7 of 
SP 7 (Part 4) and these shall be adhered to. 
However, for all the remaining occupancies, water 
capacities shall be as per Table 30. 


c) When more than one water-based fire protection 
system complying with respective Indian 
standards are available, water capacity shall be 
provided, considering the aggregate requirements 
for all such systems. 


d 


М7 


Water for the sprinkler system shall be stored 
in any easily accessible surface or underground 
reservoir or above ground tanks of steel, concrete 
or masonry. The effective capacity of the reservoir 
(above the level of suction puddle flange or the 
level of top of the pump casing whichever is higher 
by a height equivalent to three times the diameter 
of the suction pipe in case of positive suction) 
for various classes of occupancies of sprinkler 
installations shall be as indicated in Table 30. 


е 


— 


If sprinkler protection is also backed up an 
up-to-date hydrant system as per IS 13039, water 
requirement for sprinkler system shall comply 
with Table 30. 


Table 30 Sprinkler Water for Various Hazard 
( Clause 13.1) 
Hazard Type 


(1) (2) (3) 
i) Light 


Exclusive Water Storage 


Not less than 30 min run for the pumping 
capacity or 60 m? whichever is greater 


Not less than 60 min run for the 
aggregate pumping capacity or 150 m? 
whichever is greater 


ii) Ordinary 


iii) High and 
storage 


Not less than 120 min run for the 
aggregate pumping capacity 
f) If sprinkler protection 15 not backed up by ап 
up-to-date hydrant system, water requirement 
for sprinkler system shall need to be loaded for 
supplementing the protection with hose reels 
(see IS 884) and tentative hydrants as detailed 
below: 


1) Light hazard 15 nv 
2) Ordinary hazard 30 n? 
3) High hazard 60 m? 


13.2 Multiple Hazard Installation 


For designing systems for multiple hazard 
classifications, water supply requirements and duration 
of water supply shall comply with following: 


a) Water supply shall be worked out for each 
individual hazard within the system and highest 
requirement shall be considered. 


66 


b) Water supply shall be adequate to supply for the 
highest hazard classification within the system. 


c) If classification of a higher hazard lies only 
within an area of 40 m°, design of the system and 
water requirements shall follow most dominating 
occupancy. 

NOTE — For storage hazards, as well as specific hazards, 
water capacity and supplementary requirements shall vary 
according to the type of protection as detailed in the 
subsequent clauses in this section. 


13.3 Other Requirements 


a) A higher capacity of reservoir than that required as 
per Table 30 may be stipulated by the Authorities 
where considered necessary. 


b 


— 


Water supplies for the sprinkler installations shall 
be free from suspended, fibrous or other matters, 
which may accumulate in the system pipework, 
and it is recommended to use filtered water for the 
system. 


с 


— 


The use of salt or brackish water is not normally 
allowed. In special circumstances where there 
is no suitable fresh water source available, 
consideration may be given for the use of salt 
or brackish water provided the installation 18 
normally charged with fresh water. 


d 


м7 


Combined reservoirs for other firefighting systems 
such as hydrant system, water spray systems, etc 
along with the sprinkler system are permissible 
provided; all the suction inlets are at same level; 
and aggregate capacity of the reservoir is equal 
to the total requirement of all the systems put 
together. 


е 


<~ 


Reservoirs ofand over 225 m’ capacities shall be in 
two independent but interconnected compartments 
with a common sump to facilitate cleaning and 
repairs. The construction and arrangement of 
the reservoir and the common sump shall be in 
accordance with the provisions in IS 13039. 


f) Level indicator shall be provided for measuring 
the quantity of water stored at any time. The 
indicator shall preferably be graduated to read 
directly in т? of water. 


g) Water reservoir shall be cleaned at least once in 
2 years or more frequently if necessary to prevent 
contamination and sedimentation. 

h) It is advisable to provide adequate inflow into 
the reservoir so that the protection can be 
re-established within a short period. 

14 PRE-COMMISSIONING AND 
ACCEPTANCE TESTS 


14.1 An acceptance test must be conducted by the 
installing contractor on every new sprinkler system 


prior to placing it into service. The acceptance test will 
consist of, but not be limited to, the following items: 


a) Ensure all working drawings and specifications 
for the sprinkler system have been acceptable. 


b) Ensure the sprinkler system has been installed per 
the reviewed and accepted working drawings. 


c) Ensure any deviations from the working drawings 
have been listed and are considered acceptable by 
authorities. 


14.2 Installation of Pipework 


a) All installation pipework shall be pressure tested 
in accordance with 11.1.8; and the installation 
piping (from the pump house up to the installation 
valve and also the installation piping with 
sprinklers) shall be capable of withstanding for 
120 min a pressure equivalent to 150 percent of 
the maximum working pressure. 

NOTE — In water sensitive areas, it is advisable to test the 
pipes pneumatically before carrying out any hydraulic testing. 
The coating and wrapping of the underground 
wrought or mild steel pipes shall be carried 
out and also subjected to ‘Holiday’ tests as per 
IS 10221. 


In addition to hydraulic testing as stated above, an 
air pressure leakage test at 3 bar shall be carried 
out for 24 h on the piping downstream of alarm 
valve in case on pre-action systems. 


b 


wm 


с 


wa 


14.3 Initial Testing to Regular Testing Procedures 


The system shall be tested as specified in 15.3, 15.4 and 
15.5 that is, making the initial tests which shall become 
routine tests later as a part of upkeep of the system. 


14.4 Water Supplies 


a) The entire piping system shall be thoroughly 
flushed before commissioning in order to remove 
foreign materials which might have entered or be 
present in the system piping during the course of 
installation or which may have been present in 
existing piping at maximum flow rate available 
to the system consideration shall be given to the 
disposal of water discharged during the flushing. 


b 


— 


In case of large installations [where the number 
of sprinklers in a single building and those in the 
buildings communicating therewith exceed 500], 
it is necessary to ascertain the hydraulic balance to 
check the performance of the pump when working 
at most favourable and unfavourable locations. 
Pressure at the outlets of the orifice plates shall be 
measured at all locations to check the correctness 
of the size of orifice plates selected. 


с 


wa 


Each installation valve shall be tested separately. 
The pump shall start automatically and the supply 
pressure at the appropriate flow rate shall not be 
less than the appropriate value specified in 12.3 
and 12.4 for all types of hazards. 


67 


IS 15105 : 2021 


d) It shall be verified via physical testing that all 
sprinkler system control valves are in the fully 
open position. Also it shall be ensured any tamper 
alarms provided for the sprinkler system control 
valves function properly during the physical 
testing of the control valves. 


The drain valves fitted above the installation 
valve shall be opened and the time taken for the 
alarm gong to operate be noted. There shall not 
be a significant variation in the timing between 
the 15 mm and 50 mm drain valves fitted above 
the installation valve to drain the water from the 
installation. 


е) 


14.5 Flow Test 


a) Upon the satisfactory completion of the entire 
installation, flushing and hydrostatic testing 
of sprinkler system, performance flow test of 
sprinkler system shall be conducted by any one or 
more of the following methods as required by the 
user or the concerned authorities: 


1) Ву shattering the sprinkler bulbs 
convenient floor/area; and 


in a 

2) By operating test line installed in the fire pump 
room and with the help of flow meter and 
pressure gauge. 


b 


wm 


Flow test results shall be satisfactory and results 
shall be recorded and approved by user or 
authorities concerned. 


с 


— 


Supervisory alarm of isolation/control valves 
shall be tested by closing and opening of the 
valves and water flow monitoring alarms shall be 
tested opening test and drain valves. The interface 
signals at fire alarm control panel shall be verified 
and recorded. 


It shall be proved through a full-flow test that 
the available water supply is as indicated on the 
submitted and accepted working drawings. 


d 


— 


14.6 Pump Output 


A running pressure test shall be carried out at the 
delivery of the pump at full load conditions (Q....). The 
pressure obtained in the test can be used to correct the 
pressure available at the *C^ gauge of the installation 


valve. 


14.7 Auto Start of Diesel Pumps 


When commissioning the installation, the automatic 
starting system of the diesel engine driven pump set 
shall be activated with the fuel supply isolated for 
6 cycles each of not less than 15 s cranking and at not 
more than 15 s rest. After completion of six starting 
cycles ‘the fail to start alarm’ shall operate. The fuel 
supply shall then be restored and the pump set shall 
start when the manual start button is operated. 


IS 15105: 2021 


14.8 Installation of Valves 
a) All the valves shall be physically checked for 


b 


— 


proper installation and leakage if any. The reading 
of the pressure gauges shall be checked to see 
whether they match after a few drain tests. 

The proper functions of the alarm gong associated 
with the installation valve and its level of audibility 
shall be checked. An audibility level of 85 db 
above the background noise level is required. 


14.9 Alarm Panel 


a) Ensure any alarms provided for the sprinkler 


b 


15 


wm 


system are received at the alarm control panel, as 
well as at the alarm monitoring station, if one is 
provided. If local alarms are provided, ensure they 
function properly. 


Verify proper function of all actuation systems, 
associated detection devices, and any interlocked 
equipment required for adequate sprinkler system 
operation. 


UPKEEP OF THE SPRINKLER 


INSTALLATION 


15.1 General Arrangements 


a) The user shall carry out a programme of inspection 


b 


— 


c) 


and checks, arrange a test, service and maintenance 
schedule and keep appropriate records including a 
logbook, which shall be produced on demand. 


The user shall arrange for the test, service and 
maintenance schedule to be carried out under 
contract by the system installer or a similarly 
qualified company. 


After an inspection, check, test, service or 
maintenance procedure the system, automatic 
pumps and all other associated hardware shall be 
returned to the original operational condition. 


15.2 Precautions and Procedures When System is 
not Operational 


a) Maintenance, alterations and repair of systems 


b 


) 


not fully operational shall be carried out in a 
way that will minimize the time and extent of 
non-operability. 

When an installation is rendered inoperative, the 
user should implement compensatory measures. 
These measures include: shutting of fire doors and 
shutters, alertness of the security and safety staff, 
reinforcement of first aid appliances, keeping 
other firefighting systems operational, etc. 


c) As much as possible of the installation shall be 


d 


М7 


retained in an operative condition by blanking 
off pipework feeding the inoperative part or parts 
where work is taking place. 

In case of manufacturing units, where the repairs 
and alterations are extensive, or it is necessary 
to disconnect a pipe exceeding 40 mm nominal 


68 


diameter, or to overhaul or to remove a main stop 
valve, alarm valve or check valve, every effort 
shall be made to carry out the work when the 
machinery is stopped. 


e) Any pump out of commission shall be isolated by 


means of the valves provided. 


15.3 Planned Shut Down 


a) Authorities like the insurance companies, local fire 


b 


с 


а 


— 


ме 


М7 


service, etc shall be kept informed before shutting 
of the installation for any reason whatsoever. 


A round through the unit shall be undertaken 
before a part or total shut down to ensure that there 
is no indication of fire. 


The heads of all the departments or blocks shall be 
notified in writing that the installation shall remain 
inoperative and they should exercise abundant 
caution during the period. 


Particular attention should be given to situations 
where installation pipework passes through walls 
or ceilings where these may feed sprinklers in 
areas needing special consideration. 


15.4 Unplanned Shut Down 


When the installation is rendered inoperative as a 
matter of urgency or by accident, the measures stated 
above for planned shutdown shall be implemented with 
least possible delay. 


15.5 Action following sprinkler operation 


a) Following the operation of sprinkler(s), the 


b 


с 


— 


ме 


operated heads shall be removed and replaced 
with appropriate sprinkler heads and water supply 
shall be restored. 


The sprinklers in the vicinity of the operated 
sprinklers shall be checked for damage by heat or 
any other cause and replaced if necessary. 


The sprinkler pump shall not be shut off until the 
extinguishment of the fire. The starting of the 
pump shall be automatic and the stopping of the 
pump after an extinguishment shall be manual. 


15.6 Periodical Testing and Maintenance 


15.6.1 General 


a) Sprinkler systems require competent and effective 


b 


— 


care and maintenance to assure that they will 
perform their purpose effectively at the time offire. 
Systems shall be serviced and tested periodically 
by personnel trained in this work. An inspection 
contract with a qualified agency for service, test, 
and operation at regular intervals is recommended. 
See also IS 15301. 

Operating and maintenance instructions and layout 
shall be available or can be posted at control room 
and/or at the fire station of the plant. Selected 


с 


а 


е 


ме 


М7 


— 


plant personnel shall be trained and assigned the 
task of operating and maintaining the equipment. 


At weekly, or other frequent, regular scheduled 
plant inspection, equipment shall be checked 
visually for obvious defects such as broken or 
missing parts, external loading or other evidence 
of impaired protection. 


At least once a week the system shall be visually 
checked and the reading of various pressure gauges 
of each installation valve shall be recorded. 

A trained pump man shall be available on all shifts 


and at all hours to operate the pump or whenever 
required. 


15.6.2 Fire Water Reservoirs/Tank 


a) Itshall be ensured that firewater tank reservoirs are 


always full and free from any foreign materials. 
The water level shall be recorded weekly. 


b) Depending upon quality of water, reservoirs shall 


be cleaned once in a year or two years and sludge 
formation shall be prevented. 


15.6.3 Fire Pumps 
a) АП the fire pumps shall be run at least 5 min 


everyday. During testing water level of priming 
tank, delivery pressures of pumps, speed, and also 
other parameters are to be checked and recorded. 


b) All pump glands shall be maintained in good 


working conditions and checked weekly. 


c) The bearing grease caps shall be checked once 


d 
e 


YS — 


every week and refilled with fresh grease, if 
necessary. 


Starter contacts shall be cleaned every week. 


Insulation resistance of pump motors shall be 
examined once in every 6 months and record shall 
be maintained. 


Starting mechanism of diesel engine must be 
checked, the battery charger and also the batteries 
must be maintained in effective conditions and the 
engine shall be run at least for 5 min every day. 


15.6.4 Sprinkler System Installation 


а) All piping shall be examined at intervals to 


b 


с 


а 


— 


— 


М7 


determine its conditions. Frequency of inspections 
will be dependent upon local conditions and shall 
be examined once in a year. 


All the installation valves and sprinkler installation 
and associated equipment shall be serviced and 
tested annually by qualified personnel. 


Discharge test of sprinklers shall be carried out 
at least once in 6 months. After each operation, 
sprinklers shall be removed and cleaned, unless 
observations under flow conditions indicate this is 
not necessary. 


Manual checking devices shall be operated at least 
twice annually. 


69 


е) 


г) 


h) 


Ў 
k) 


m) 


n 


— 


p) 


IS 15105 : 2021 


When normally opened valves are closed following 
the system operation or test, suitable procedures 
shall be instituted to ensure that they are reopened 
and that the system is promptly restored to full 
normal operating condition. 


АП sprinklers shall be inspected for proper 
positioning or test, external loading and corrosion 
and cleaned if necessary, based on experience but 
at least once in 6 months. 


The entire system shall be flushed at least once a 
year. 


It is important to ensure that the sprinkler bulbs 
are kept free from paint or dust (otherwise it may 
not function correctly) and that the bulbs are 
accessible and clearly identified for maintenance 
purposes. 


All the equipment pertaining to the sprinkler 
system shall be painted at least once in 2 years. 


Installation valve and alarm gong assembly. 


The pressure gauge readings above and below 
the valves shall be monitored everyday at 
commencement of the first shift. 


The time taken for the operation of alarm gong 
after opening the drain valves shall be monitored 
every week and corrective actions taken in case 
of malfunction of alarm gong. 


The alarm gong assembly shall be checked 
thoroughly once in 3 months. 


15.6.5 Readymade maintenance chart and summary 
sheets for the hydraulic calculation are shown in 


Table 31. 
Table 31 Periodical Testing and 
Maintenance Chart 
( Clause 15.6.5 ) 
SI Subject Activities Duration 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Reservoir Level checking Weekly once 
Cleaning In two years 
ii) Pump Running test Daily 5 min 
Test flow Annually 
Lubrication Quarterly 
Gland packing Weekly 
Overhaul Once in two years 
ii) Suction pipes  Checking/cleaning Once in six months 
iv) Strainers Checking/cleaning Once in six months 
v) Engine Running 5 mins everyday 
Lubrication Quarterly 
Battery Status weekly 
Load test Annually 
Overhaul Once in 2 years 
Fuel tank check Daily 


IS 15105: 2021 


Table 31 ( Concluded) 


SI Subject Activities Duration 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
vi) Motor Lubrication Weekly 
Starter contact Weekly 
checking 
Insulation resistance Half yearly 
vii Main piping Flushing Once in 2 years 
Gauge pressure Check daily 
viii Sluice valves Operation Monthly 
(see IS 909) сапа packing Monthly 
Lubrication Quarterly 
ix) Installation Operation Weekly 
valves Alarm check Weekly 
Overhaul Annually 
Cleaning Quarterly 
x) Sprinkler Total draining, Once in six months 
piping flushing and 
network re-charging with 
water 
xi)  Sprinklers Cleaning Quarterly 
Flow test Quarterly 
xi) Detector Performance Six monthly 
element 
xii) Sprinkler Performance Quarterly 
installation Physical check Monthly 
up of piping for 
seeing dislocation 
of support, wrong 
orientation over 
loading, etc. 
xiv) Flow Check for correct Monthly 
switches function 
xv) Pressure Calibration Annually 
gauges Check readings Weekly 
xvi) Painting of m Every two years 
installation 


15.7 Hydraulic Calculations — General 


a) Summary sheet 


The summary sheet should contain the following 


information: 

1) Date, 

2) Location, 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 
9) 


Description of hazard, 


Name of owner and occupant, 


Building or plant unit number, 


Name and address of contractor, 
Design purpose (type of system), 
Minimum rate of water application, 


Total water requirement as calculated including 


hydrant system where applicable, 


70 


b) 


10) Water supply information in detail, and 


11) Building-wise details showing the total 
discharge and pressure at the top of installation 
valve. 


Detailed working sheet 


Detailed working sheet or computer print-out sheets 
should contain the following information: 


1) 
2) 


Identification of calculation covered, 


Description and discharge constant (K) for the 
type of sprinkler used. 


3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 


Hydraulic design reference points. 

Flow, іп Ірт. 

Pipe size (mm). 

Pipe lengths in metre and details of fittings, 


Equivalent pipe lengths for fittings and 
devices, in m, 


8) Friction loss, in bar/m, 
9) Total friction loss between reference points, in 
bar, 
10) Elevation head in bars between reference 
points, 
11) Required pressure in bars at each reference 
point, 
12) Design details of orifice plates, 


13) Velocity pressure and normal pressure if 


included in calculations, and 


14) Notes to indicate starting points with reference 


to other sheets or to clarify data shown. 


Where extending existing system hydraulic calculations 
are to be furnished indicating the previous design, flow 


and 


pressure at points of connection and adequate 


additional calculations to indicate the effect on existing 
system. 


15.8 Yearly inspection round through the protected 
buildings to check the following important observations: 


a) 


b) 


с) 


9) 


е) 


Have any structural modifications, alterations in 
layout, extensions to existing structure, partitions 
and cabins, new false ceilings, etc been made 
since the last inspection round which necessitate 
changes to the sprinkler system. 

Are there any new buildings, mezzanines or 
extensions? 

Has there been a change in occupancy to all or any 
part of the protected building? 


Is the ambient temperature range still within 
acceptable limits for the design of the sprinkler 
system? 

Has any painting or decoration been undertaken 
since the last inspection? 


f) Have there been апу significant changes to plant 
or equipment (quantity and location), or changes 
in production? 

g) Isthe storage type still consistent with the sprinkler 
system design (that is free-standing storage has 
not changed to rack storage and vice-versa)? 


h) Is the design of the rack sprinklers consistent with 
the storage category? 


j) Are flues (horizontal and vertical) within the 
storage racks kept clear as designated by the 
design requirements? 

k) Are minimum clearances maintained between 
stored items and sprinkler heads? 

m) Has the nature of goods stored or their packaging 
changed? Does this alter the category of stored 
goods? 

n) Have there been any changes to storage 
arrangements (plastic pallets, shelving, drum 
dollies, boxes or totes)? 


p) Have there been any changes in storage height? 


71 


IS 15105 : 2021 


q) Where a smoke or heat detector system interacts 
with a sprinkler system, is a suitable maintenance 
contract in force? 


r) Have there been any problems with the sprinkler 
system? 

s) Any changes to the air handling systems and any 
new ducts added (having a width of more than 
1 т)? 

1) Any obstructions to Ше sprinklers due to change 
in layout? 

u) Any changes within the concealed space like 
adding utility piping, ducts, etc which may 
obstruct the sprinkler layout? 

v) Was there any seismic activity since last 
inspection? In such case, better to have a closer 
look at the non-metallic and flexible sprinkler 
piping for damages or misalignment, if any. 

Based on the observations, remedial measures shall be 
undertaken to keep the installation as per the provisions 
of this standard. 


IS 15105: 2021 


IS No. 
5 : 2007 


884: 1985 


907 : 1984 


908 : 1975 


909: 1992 


949 : 2012 


962 : 1989 


1239 
(Part 1 : 2004) 


(Part 2 : 2011) 


1536 : 2001 


1537 : 1976 


1538 : 1993 


1879 : 2010 


1893 


(Part 1) : 2016 


2189 : 2008 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Colours of ready mixed paints and 
enamel (sixth revision) 


Specification for first-aid hose reel 
for fire fighting (first revision) 


Specification for suction strainers, 
cylindrical type for fire fighting 
purpose (second revision) 
Specification for fire hydrant, stand 
post type (second revision) 


underground 
Sluice valve 


Specification for 
fire hydrant: 


(third revision) 


Emergency (rescue) tender — 
functional requirements 
(third revision) 


Code of practice for architectural 
building and drawings 
(second revision) 


Steel 
other 


and 
fittings 
tubes 


tubulars 
steel 
Steel 


tubes, 

wrought 
Specification 
(sixth revision) 


Steel sockets tubular and other 
steel pipe fittings (fifth revision) 


Centrifugally cast (spun) iron 
pressure pipes for water, gas and 
sewage (fourth revision) 


Vertically cast iron pressure 
pipes for water, gas and sewage 
(first revision) 
Cast iron fittings for pressure 
pipes for water, gas and sewage 
(third revision) 


Malleable cast iron pipe fittings — 
Specification (third revision) 


Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures: Part 1 
General provisions and buildings 
(sixth revision) 


Specification for heat sensitive fire 
detectors for use in automatic fire 
alarm system (fourth revision) 


72 


IS No. 


2552 


3582 


3589 


3614 


3624: 


4928 : 


5312 


(Part 1) : 2004 


(Part 2) : 2013 


7181 


7673 


8329 


8757 


9972 


10221 : 2008 


: 1989 


: 1984 


: 2001 


: 2021 


1987 


1986 


: 1986 


: 2004 


: 2000 


: 2021 


: 2021 


Title 


Steel drums  (galvanized 
ungalvanized) (third revision) 


and 


Specification for basket strainers 
for firefighting purposes cylindrical 
type) (first revision) 

Seamless or electrically welded 
steel pipes for water, gas and 
sewage (168.3 to 2540 mm outside 
diameter) (third revision) 


Fire check doors: Plate metal 
covered апа rolling type 
(first revision) 


Pressure and vacuum gauges 
(second revision) 


Specification for delivery valve 
for centrifugal fire pump outlet 
(first revision) 


Swing check type reflux 
(non-return] valves for water works 
purposes: Part 1 Single-doorpattern 
(second revision) 


Part 2 Multi-door 
(first revision) 


pattern 


Horizontally cast iron double 
flanged pipes for water, gas and 
sewage (first revision) 


Glossary of terms for fire fighting 
equipments (first revision) 


Centrifugally cast (spun) ductile 
iron pressure pipes for water, 
gas and sewage — Specification 
(third revision) 


Glossary of terms associated with 
fire safety (second revision) 


Specification for automatic 
sprinkler heads for fire 
protection (second revision) 
(under publication) 


Code of practice for coating and 
wrapping of underground mild 
steel pipelines (first revision) 


15 Мо. 


12456: 


13039 


13095: 


14846 


15301 


15325 


15519 


2004 


:2014 


1991 


: 2000 


: 2003 


:2020 


:2020 


Title 


Code of practice for fire protection 
of electronic data processing 
installation (first revision) 


Code of practice for provision and 
maintenance of external hydrant 
system (first revision) 

Butterfly 
purposes 


valves for general 


Sluice valve for water works 
purposes (50 to 1200 mm size) 


Code of practice for installation, 
operation and maintenance of 
stationary fire protection pump 


Code of practice for design and 
installation of fixed automatic high 
and medium velocity water spray 
(first revision) 


Water fire protection 
systems system design, 
installation and commissioning — 
Code of Practice (first revision) 


mist 


73 


15 No. 
15908 : 2021 


16088 : 2012 


16534 : 2017 


SP7 
(Part 4) : 2016 


SP 30 : 2011 
SP 46 : 2003 


IS/ISO 3183 : 
2012 


IS 15105 : 2021 


Title 


installation 
of control and 
indicating equipment for fire 
detection апа alarm system — 
Code of Practice (first revision) 
(under publication) 


Selection, and 


maintenance 


Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride 
(CPVC) pipes for automatic 
sprinkler fire extinguishing 
system — Specification 


Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride 
(CPVC) pipe fittings for automatic 
sprinkler fire extinguishing 
system — Specification 


National Building Code of India 
2016: Part 4 Fire and Life Safety 
Code 


National Electrical 


(first revision) 


Engineering Drawing Practice for 
Schools and Colleges 


Petroleum and natural gas 
industries Steel pipe for 
pipeline transportation systems 


(first revision) 


IS 15105: 2021 


ANNEX B 
[ Clause 6.5 (b) ] 


SPECIAL GUIDELINES FOR HIGH RISE BUILDINGS 


B-1 GENERAL 


The requirements of this annex shall be applied to the 
sprinkler protection of multi-storey buildings with 
a height difference between the highest and lowest 
sprinkler exceeding 45 m. 


The requirements are applicable to buildings intended 
for use with occupancies where the hazard is 
classified as no greater than ordinary hazard. Special 
fire engineering solutions are needed for high rise 
systems with hazards greater than ordinary hazard, and 
authorities shall be consulted for suitable advice. 


B-2 DESIGN CRITERIA 


B-2.1 Hazard Group 


High rise sprinkler systems shall comply with the 
requirements as given in B-1. 


B-2.2 Sub-division of High Rise Sprinkler Systems 


High rise sprinkler systems shall be sub-divided into 
sprinkler installations such that the height difference 
between the highest and lowest sprinkler on any one 
installation does not exceed 45 m (see Fig. 18 and 19). 


B-2.3 Standing Water Pressures at Non-return and 
Alarm Valves 


a) The minimum standing pressure at апу 
non-return or alarm valve inlet shall be no less 
than 1.25 times the static head difference between 
the valve and the highest sprinkler оп Ше 
installation. 


b) Non-return valves controlling installation flow 
shall operate correctly with a ratio of service 
pressure to installation pressure not exceeding 
1.16 : 1, as measured by valve lift and pressure 
equalization upstream of the non-return valve. 


B-2.4 Water Pressures 


a) Pipework, fittings, valves and other equipment 
shall be capable of withstanding the maximum 
pressure likely to be encountered. 


b) To overcome the problem of pressures in excess of 
12 bar, hydraulic alarm gongs may be driven via a 


74 


pressure reducing valve controlled by a diaphragm 
valve connected to the main installation control 
valve alarm port. 


B-2.5 Pumping Requirement 


It is necessary to use multi stage multi outlet pumps for 
high rise structures in view of the 45 m restrictions for 
sprinkler systems [see B-1 and B-2.6(e)]. 


B-2.6 Sprinkler Installation 


a) Installation shall follow various clauses from 
the sections concerned with respect to sprinkler 
selection, location, spacing, etc. Attention is 
also drawn to various requirements in E-6 of 
SP 7 (Part 4) for sprinkler installation in high rise 
buildings. 

Sprinkler installation shall be installed in the 
entire building throughout the building in all 
zones irrespective of the heights at upper zones. 


b 


wm 


c) Apart from main sprinkler riser, standby riser(s) 
duly fed by separate installation control valve(s) 
shall also be available for each zone (see 9.2). 


d 


wa 


A controlling valve and a water flow monitoring 
device shall be provided at each floor/level 
of high-rise buildings and the entire sprinkler 
installation along with floor wise components 
shall be provided with continuous supervisory 
arrangements. 


е) Pressure in the sprinkler installation piping 
shall not exceed 7 bar and pressure at the most 
remote sprinkler at any level shall not be less than 
0.5 bar and also not more than 5 bar. Density of 
application shall not be less than 5 Ipm/m". 


f) Pressure reducing valve stations shall be required 
to maintain allowable pressures within the 
installation piping everywhere (see 10.5.7 and 
10.5.9). 


Software based hydraulic calculations аге 
necessary to prove the pressures at all levels from 
the pumps. Where required, pressure reducing 
arrangements shall be made. 


Каи 


5 


IS 15105 : 2021 


озера 
>»-/ 
| / тт тт y у у у Y i 
| 
------------- <b 
| >< 1 
1E Уы V V V къ М V V V 
Li “ V/ 
| A A Е 
3 
| M 
| 
| 
| 
------------ <+ 
- 
| > — T 
ШЕ УУ VV V Fi му м VV 
H V/ “ 
| ГА: /% 
| 
--+----------- -х--- 
| 24 
i у V V V УУ V V 
|| V/ YV 
l A A 
| 
Е 
| o 
"Ur 
| VI 
| 
| 
| 
© | 10 
EAS ho UR c БЕИ >+] 
EN NY V V V аш V V V 
LI М V 9 
| A TA 
1 
6 
“ 
/% 
3 
EON PE UNE сы = 
| 
Й 1 И 
3 i { 
И 4 
б | 
ии: ; 
>И f 
Й И 
И Й 
(2 4 


222222222222222222 


КЕү 

1 STORAGE TANK 6 FLow TEST AND ZONE DRAINAGE 

2 MULTISTAGE PUMP 7 ZONE SUBSIDIARY STOP VALVE 

3 FLOW METER 8 WATER FLOW ALARM SWITCH 

4 WATER SUPPLY DATUM POINT 9 SPRINKLER HEAD 

5 | ALARM VALVE STATION 10 WATER FLOW ALARM SWITCH REST VALVE AND DRAIN VALVE 


(wirH BYPASS ARRANGEMENT) 


Fic. 18 SPRINKLER INSTALLATION IN HIGH RISE BUILDINGS 


75 


IS 15105: 2021 


pot — — 4 
| >< [/ 
| v у о у у үу ү ү у | у | | 
1 рг 
жаһан SSS SS ірін та H 1 ы 1 f 
| t+. | Мы | 
| ыу VV V мм Vv V | ! ! f 
H аі a 
V/ V/ 
| А A Е >< л 
ч 
| VI 
П П Й П 
| | | | | 
| f f f | 
| 1 [Р 1 | 
f | | 1 
L { ME ! 
| a cd oy d ot m ni -——— 1 В Jj X 
D 
| SY VV V кү М Vv Vv V >< 
H Y X 
LN LN 
| 
| 
-+----------- t+ — 5 
| >< — 
| Ev М М V м у V 
jo] i 
А A 
| 
| 
| Е 
о 
| ч 
| VI 
| 
| 
| 10 
--+----------- —p4- 4 
[><] 
| УУ У У V 8m V V Y 
|| Y v 
| A 7A 
| 
6 
“ V 
LN LN 
XAAÁ5 
Y V/ 
LN LN 
4 
== Og pg ass 


2 
KEY 
] STORAGE TANK 
2 MULTISTAGE PUMP 
3 FLrow METER 
4 WATER SUPPLY DATUM POINT 
5 ALARM VALVE STATION 


(WITH BYPASS ARRANGEMENT) 


6 FLow TEST AND ZONE DRAINAGE 

7 ZONE SUBSIDIARY STOP VALVE 

8 WATER FLOW ALARM SWITCH 

9 SPRINKLER HEAD 

10 WATER FLOW ALARM SWITCH REST VALVE AND DRAIN VALVE 


Fic. 19 SPRINKLER INSTALLATION IN HIGH RISE BUILDINGS - ANOTHER ТҮРЕ 


76 


IS 15105 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
[ Clauses 8.1.4, 9.22.10 (c), 10.3.3 and 10.5.8 ] 


GUIDELINES FOR THE PROTECTION OF STORAGE AREAS 
(ESFR SPRINKLER INSTALLATION) 


C-0 INTRODUCTION 


Early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinklers 
are ceiling sprinklers which have the capability of 
suppressing fires within storage risks. There is little 
room for error in the design and installation of ESFR 
sprinkler systems, the design principles and Ше 
operating characteristics are significantly different from 
standard sprinkler protection. ESFR sprinklers might 
be unable to cope with adverse design features and 
non-compliances, which might be common practice 
when installing standard sprinkler protection. Design 
and installation deviations from this standard might 
not just result in a reduced effectiveness, but rather in a 
total system failure. It is therefore essential that all the 
requirements of this annex are complied with, without 
exception, when applying ESFR protection. 


C-1 ESFR sprinkler protection, prescribed under this 
Annex is applicable only in case of the following: 
a) For all materials under category I through IV 
when stored as under (see Fig. 4): 
1) Free standing or block storage. 
2) Post pallets with open bottoms. 
3) Rack storage without solid shelving. 
4) Slatted open shelves. 


b) Plastic and rubber commodities when stored as 


under: 


wm 


1) Free standing or block storage; and 

2) Rack storage without solid shelving. 
C-2 Attention is drawn to various requirements stated 
in 7.2.7, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7 and 9.22 and the same 


shall taken care in designing ESFR sprinkler systems 
for storage buildings. 


C-3 ESFR sprinklers shall not be used for the following 
areas: 


a) Rack storage 
(see also C-5); 

b) Rack storage involving combustible, open-top 
cartons or containers; 


involving solid shelves 


c) Certain materials in which fires cannot be readily 
controlled by sprinklers like acrylic fibre yarn or 
may give rise to unusual fire characteristics like 
tissue paper; and 

d) Buildings where automatic venting facilities are 
provided. 


С-4 Storage methods shall have transverse апа 
longitudinal flues as follows: 


a) Continuous for the full height of each block of 
storage; 

b) Vertically aligned; 

c) Free of stored goods; and 


d) Regularly spaced and having dimensions as 
follows: 


1) Transverse flues shall be at least 80 mm wide 
and shall be spaced at distances of not more 
than 3 m (see Fig. 10A and Fig. 10B). 


2) Longitudinal flues shall be at least 150 mm 
wide and shall be spaced at distances of not 
more than 3 m (see Fig. 10A and Fig. 10B). 


C-5 Single and double row shelved racks shall comply 
with the following: 


a) Slatted shelves shall have shelf open areas, 
uniformly interspaced, of at least 50 percent of the 
shelf plan area. The distance between openings 
shall not exceed 150 mm; or 


b) Grated or mesh type shelves shall have uniform 
openings of at least 50 percent of the shelf plan 
area. The horizontal distance between openings 
shall not exceed 150 mm. 


C-6 Sprinkler selection with regard to nominal 
K-factor, shank thread, temperature rating, colour 
coding, temperature sensitivity, etc shall be as stated in 
Tables 2, 3 and 4. 


C-7 Spacing and location of the sprinklers shall comply 
with various requirements under 9.23. 


C-8 Minimum pressure at any sprinkler when all the 
sprinklers in the design area are in operation shall 
be as per the values in the Tables 32, 33, 34 and 35 
(see also 10.5.7 and 10.5.8). 


C-9 Pipe sizing shall be done by full hydraulic 
calculations using an approved software program for 
the purpose (see also 10.5). 


C-10 The design area shall be a rectangular area, 
consist of the most hydraulically demanding area of 
12 sprinklers, consisting of four sprinklers on each of 
the three adjoining branch lines. 


C-11 Where indicated, intermediate sprinklers shall 
be provided as follows (see notes under Tables 32 and 
Table 34): 


IS 15105: 2021 


a) At least one level of intermediate sprinkler 
protection shall be installed. 

The vertical distance from the floor to the 
intermediate sprinklers shall be half the rack 
height plus or minus half the tier height. 


b) 


Intermediate sprinklers shall have the following 
properties: 


с) 


1) Spray pattern sprinkler; 
2) K-factor of 115; 
3) Quick response thermal sensitivity rating; and 


4) Temperature rating shall be within the range of 
68 °C to 104 “С. 


Intermediate sprinklers shall be located at each 
longitudinal and transverse flue intersection at a 
maximum spacing of 1.5 m in either direction; 


d) 


Metal water shields of nominal diameter 75 mm 
shall be fitted above each intermediate sprinkler; 


е) 


At least eight intermediate sprinklers shall be 
assumed to be operating for calculation purpose; 
and 


The minimum pressure of any operating 
intermediate sprinkler shall be 3.5 bars. 


г) 


С-12 Pumping capacity shall be calculated for Ше total 
water demand when all the 12 sprinklers at design area 
are in simultaneous operation and the same shall be 
loaded by 1 000 litre/min for hose reels and hydrants. 
No loading shall be required if the storage buildings 
are already protected by an independent and uptodate 
hydrant system as per IS 13039. Table 33 shall then be 
used to select the appropriate pump(s). 

Table 32 All the Materials Stated Under 
Category I through ГУ [Post Pallets with Open 
Bottoms, Rack Storage Without Solid Shelving and 
Slatted Open Shelves] 


( Clauses C-8 and C-11 ) 


S.No Maximum Maximum Ceiling Height 
Storage Height m 
m 76 [9.1] 97 [107 | 122 [137 


Minimum Operating Pressure in any 
Sprinkler (bar) 


K-Factor = 200 


i) 6.1 3.5 
ii) 7.6 3.5 | 4.1 

iii) 9.1 5.2 

iv) 10.6 5.2 

v) 12.2 6.2 


78 


S.No Maximum Maximum Ceiling Height 
Storage Height m 
ы 76 |9.1| 97 | 107 | 122 | 13.7 
K-Factor = 242 
vi) 6.1 24 
vii) 7.6 2.4 | 29 
viii) 9.1 3.5 
ix) 10.6 3.5 
x) 12.2 43 
K-Factor = 320 
xi) 6.1 1.7 
xii) 7.6 1.7 2.1 
xiii) 9.1 24 
xiv) 10.6 3.1 
xv) 12.2 3.5 
K-Factor = 360 
xvi) 6.1 1.4 
хуп) 7:6 14 | 1.7 
хуш) 91 21 
xix) 10.6 2.7 
XX) 12.2 3.5 
NOTES 
1 This table shall not apply to pre dominant or exclusive storage of 
plastics and rolled paper. 
2 For building heights up to 13.7 m (last column of the table), following 
shall apply in addition — only for sprinklers with K-Factors 200 and 
242: 
a) One level of in-rack sprinklers shall be considered; and 
b) Not suitable for storage on post pallets with open bottoms. 
3 Upright sprinkler shall be permissible based on listing for the purpose. 


Table 33 All the Materials Stated Under Category I 
through ТУ [Free Standing, Palletized and 
Solid-Piled Storage] 


( Clauses C-8 and C-12 ) 


SI Maximum Maximum Ceiling Height 
No. Storage Height m 
m 76 | 9.1] 9.7 Пол [122 13.7 
Minimum Operating Pressure in any 
Sprinkler (bar) 


K-Factor = 200 


iii) 9.1 5.2 

ту) 10.6 5.2 
K-Factor = 242 

v) 6.1 2.4 

vi) 7.6 2.4 | 2.9 

vii) 9.1 3.5 

viii) 10.6 35 


Table 33 ( Concluded ) 


IS 15105 : 2021 


K-Factor = 320 
ix) 6.1 157 
х) 7.6 1.7 
х1) 9.1 2.4 
xii) 10.6 2.8 
xiii) 12.2 28 
K-Factor = 360 
xiv) 6.1 1.0 
xv) 7.6 1.0 
xvi) 9.1 1.4 
xvii) 10.6 1.7 
xviii) 12.2 28 
NOTES 


1 This table shall not apply to pre dominant or exclusive storage of 
plastics and rolled paper. 

2 Upright sprinkler shall be permissible based on the listing for the 
purpose. 


Table 34 Plastic Materials in Racks Without Solid 
Shelving (Un-expanded Plastic Materials 
Packed in Cartons) 


( Clause C-8 and C-11 ) 


SI Maximum Maximum Ceiling Height 
No. | Storage Height m 
m 
7.6 | 9.1 | 9.7 | 10.7 | 12.2 | 13.7 
Minimum Operating Pressure in any 
Sprinkler (bar) 
K-Factor = 200 
i) 6.1 3.5 
ii) 7.6 3.5 | 4.1 
iii) 9.1 5.2 
іу) 10.7 52 
у) 12.2 6.2* 
K-Factor = 242 
vi) 6.1 2.4 
үй) 7.6 2.4 | 2,9 
уш) 9.1 3.5 
іх) 10.7 3.5 
х) 12.2 4,3% 
К-Еасїог = 320 
хі) 6.1 17 
xii) 7.6 1.7 
xiii) 91 24 | 2.8 
хіу) 10.7 
ху) 122 2.8 


К-Еасїог = 360 
ху1) 6.1 1.0 
хуй) 7.6 1.0 
хуш) 9.1 1.4 
xix) 10.7 17 
хх) 12.2 2.8 


“At least one level of intermediate (in-rack) sprinklers shall be 
considered. 

NOTES 

1 Upright sprinkler shall be permissible based on listing for the 
purpose. 

2 For un-expanded but exposed plastic materials (un-cartoned), 
above table can be applied for protection except that, sprinklers 
with K-factors 320 and 360 shall not be used. 


Table 35 Plastic and Rubber Materials [Free 
Standing, Palletized and Solid-piled Storage] 


( Clause C-8 ) 


SI Maximum Maximum Ceiling Height 
No. | Storage Height m 
n 7.6 | 9.1 | 9.7 | 10.7 | 12/2 | 13.7 
Minimum Operating Pressure in Any 
Sprinkler (bar) 
K-Factor — 200 
i) 6.1 3.5 
ii) 7.6 3.5 | 41 
ili) 9.1 52 
іу) 10.6 5.2 
K-Factor = 242 
у) 6.1 2.4 
vi) 7.6 24 129 
уп) 9.1 3:5 
уш) 10.6 3.5 
K-Factor = 320 
іх) 6.1 | 
х) 7.6 1.7 
хі) 91 24 
xii) 10.6 2.8 
xiii) 12.2 28 
К-Еасїог = 360 
хіу) 6.1 1.0 
ху) 7.6 1.0 
Xvi) 9.1 14 
xvii) 10.6 1.7 
xviii) 12.2 28 
NOTES 
1 This table shall apply to un expanded plastics packed in cartons. 
for the 


2 Upright sprinkler shall be permissible based on the listing 
purpose. 

3 For un-expanded but exposed plastic materials (un-cartoned), above 
table can be applied for protection except that sprinklers with K-factors 
320 and 360 shall not be used. 


79 


IS 15105: 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 9.24.3 ) 
PRE-ACTION SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 


D-0 GENERAL 


Pre-action installations shall be one of the following 
types: 

a) Non-interlock Sprinkler Systems — This is an 
otherwise normal dry pipe installation in which 
the control valve set is activated either by an 
automatic fire detection system or by the operation 
of the sprinklers. Independently of the response 
of the detectors a pressure drop in the pipework 
causes the opening of the alarm valve. These 
systems installations are only recommended in 
areas where fore spread is expected to be rapid. 


b 


wm 


Single-interlock Sprinkler Systems — This is an 
otherwise normal dry pipe installation in which 
the control valve set is activated by an automatic 
fire detection system but not by the operation of 
the sprinklers. These systems installations are 
only recommended in areas where considerable 
damage could occur if there was an accidental 
discharge of water. 


c) Double-interlock Sprinkler Systems — This is 
an otherwise normal dry pipe installation which 
admits water to sprinkler piping upon operation of 
both detection devices and automatic sprinklers. 
When used to protect areas that are subject to 
freezing, double-interlock sprinkler systems shall 
be installed. 


Pre-action sprinkler systems are acceptable for 
installation when the ambient temperature of 
the protected area is above —7 °C at all times. 
Components like pre-action valve, solenoid valve, 
automatic-release panel combination along with 
chosen detection system shall have approval from 
national/international agencies. 


D-1 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS 


a) Sprinklers shall be installed as specified by the 
supplier or as stipulated in 9.17 where applicable. 


b) Piping for range pipes shall be pitched at least 
4 mm/m and distribution piping shall be pitched 
2 mm/m. 


c) Gridded layouts are not permitted for double 
interlock pre-action systems and also for 
pre-action systems protecting storage occupancies. 

d) A system size for double interlock pre-action 
systems of not more than 1 000 shall be permitted. 

е) Theair/inert gas pressure in the installation shall be 
monitored at all times. At least one quick opening 
manually operated valve shall be installed in an 


80 


appropriate position to enable the pre-action valve 
to be activated in an emergency. 


f) In the event of a fault in the fire detection system, 
the installation shall operate as an ordinary dry 
pipe system. 


D-2 SIZE OF INSTALLATIONS 


The number of sprinklers controlled by a pre-action 
alarm valve shall not exceed that shown 9.2 that is, 
number of sprinkler heads in the given area. 


D-3 PIPING ARRANGEMENT 


D-3.1 Sprinkler piping for single-interlock pre-action 
sprinkler system shall be arranged as follows: 


a) To provide single-path flow (no loops) within all 
parts of the sprinkler system. 


b) To meet the recommendations area of coverage as 
in 8. 
EXCEPTION — The feed main or cross main of a 
single-interlock — pre-action sprinkler system protecting 
a non-storage occupancy can be looped as opposed to 
single-path flow, but must still meet area of coverage as in 8.1. 


D-3.2 Sprinkler piping of а  non-interlock or 
double-interlock pre-action sprinkler system shall be 
arranged as follows: 


a) To provide single-path flow (no loops) within all 
parts of the sprinkler system; 


b) To meet the recommendations area of coverage as 
in 8; and 

c) То meet the maximum recommended water 
delivery time once the first sprinkler has operated. 
EXCEPTION — The feed main or cross main of a 
non-interlock or double-interlock pre-action sprinkler system 
protecting a non-storage occupancy can be looped as opposed 
to single-path flow, but must still meet the other two criteria 
listed above. 


D-4 SPRINKLER SYSTEMS WITH MORE 
THAN ONE PRE-ACTION INSTALLATION 


Where a sprinkler system includes more than one 
рге-аспоп sprinkler installation, a risk assessment 
shall be undertaken to establish whether simultaneous 
operation of more than one pre-action installation could 
occur. Where simultaneous charging of pre-action 
sprinkler installations might occur, the following shall 
be implemented: 


a) The volume of stored water supplies shall be 
increased by the volume of the total pre-action 
installations. 


b) The time between multiple pre-action installations 
tripping and water discharging from any remote 
test valve on the installations under consideration 
shall not exceed 60 s. 


D-5 GAS SUPPLY FOR PRE-ACTION 
SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 


a) Provide the gas supply for a pre-action sprinkler 
system in accordance with the following 
recommendations for dry-pipe sprinkler systems. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


2) Not exceed the maximum recommended gas 
pressure maintained in the pre-action sprinkler 
system. 


e) Acheck valve shall be installed on the connection 
between the gas supply and the pre-action sprinkler 
system. 


f) Also a relief valve shall be installed between the 
gas supply and the pre-action sprinkler system 
arranged to relieve at 0.3 bar above the maximum 
recommended gas pressure maintained within the 


b) The gas used for maintaining internal pressure system. 
within the dry-pipe sprinkler system can be dry air, 
an inert gas, or any other gas approved specifically D-6 AUTOMATIC DETECTION SYSTEM 
for this application. It shall be ensured that the gas а) The detection system shall be installed in all 
used in the dry-pipe sprinkler system is compatible rooms and compartments protected by the 
with all sprinkler system components. pre-action sprinkler system and shall be іп 

c) Gas supply shall be so arranged to ensure accordance with IS 2189 in all respects. 
availability at all times for the dry-pipe sprinkler ы) Fire alarm panels shall also be installed in the 
system in accordance with the dry-pipe valve vicinity and the same shall be in accordance with 
manufacturer’s specifications. IS 15908 in all respects. 

d) Ensure the gas supply maintained on site is ^ су Where heat detectors are installed, activation 
reliable; and is capable of filling the dry-pipe temperature of the detectors shall be lower than 
automatic system up to the minimum required the same for sprinklers. 

л шше да 9) Detectors shall be electric or pneumatic fixed 
also arranged to: : Á 
. . temperature type with temperature ratings less 
1) Allow the dry-pipe sprinkler system to meet than that of the sprinklers as mentioned above. No 
the maximum recommended water delivery detectors shall be of rate-of rise type. 
time as specified in the manual for different 
occupancy classifications. 
ANNEX E 
( Informative ) 
( Foreword ) 


SPRINKLER PROTECTION FOR COLD STORAGE OCCUPANCIES 


E-1 The requirements of this annex shall be applied to 
the sprinkler protection of cold storage and warehouses. 
The requirements prescribed in this annex provide for 
dry pipe, pre-action and dry sprinklers used in otherwise 
wet pipe sprinkler systems. 


E-2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


a) Automatic provisions shall be available to shut 
down the air circulation system within the cold 
storage area, when detection system or sprinkler 
operates. 


b) Where sprinkler elements are likely to be damaged 
by mechanical impact during loading/unloading 
operations, they shall be protected against such 
damage by providing metallic guards. 


81 


E-3 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS 


a) Pipelines shall be above ground and readily 
accessible. It shall be possible to dismantle the 
pipes at short notice. 


b) To enable quick removal of pipes, grooved or 
flanged joints shall be used as they are the best 
option. 

c) Pipe supports shall also be so designed to enable 
removal of pipes with slight efforts. 


d) Wherever turning is necessitated for the pipes 
within the cold storage area, “Т” joint shall be 
used and another end of “Т” shall be sealed. This is 
required for inspection purpose to check whether 
any ice formation has taken place. 


IS 15105: 2021 


е) Provisions shall be available to purge Ше pipe 
lines after an operation to ensure all moisture 
contents are removed. 


E-4 PRESSURIZATION OF PIPELINES 


a 


Каи 


Pipework downstream of installation valve shall 
be pressurized either with dry nitrogen gas or air 
drawn across the freezers of lowest temperature in 
the plant and through a dehydrator. 


b 


wm 


Where nitrogen gas is used, due care shall be taken 
to see that any accidental leakage shall not result 
in asphyxiation for personnel around. 


с 


— 


Pressure reducing valves shall be installed on the 
nitrogen cylinders to control the pressure. Also 
pressure relief valves shall be fitted to operate 
at the upper limit of the required gas installation 
pressure. 


E-5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 
a) 


Minimum time between sprinkler operation and 
water discharge shall not exceed 30 s for high 


hazard storage and 60 s for ordinary hazard 


b) Water and water vapour ingress into а dry ‘drop’ 
sprinkler should be avoided. 


c) Any water ingress into the sprinkler pipe will 
freeze, resulting in ice build-up. Ice build-up may 
seriously impair sprinkler performance and may 
prevent sprinkler operation or cause obstructions 
to the water flow. 

d) Where ice build-up occurs or if ice extrudes 

through any drain aperture in the sprinkler 

heat-sensitive element support, the dry sprinkler 
assembly should be removed and replaced. 

е) Hydraulic calculations shall consider friction 

losses/gains through drop/riser pipes within the 

cold storage. Friction losses within the drop/riser 
pipes may however be ignored. 


The length ofthe drop or rise pipe on a dry sprinkler 
within the heated area shall be of sufficient length 
to prevent freezing at the wet pipe end due to 
conduction of heat to the cold store. The minimum 
length for the drop pipe shall be determined using: 
—0.0137 (Т + 6.67) 


where 
storage. ‚2. . : 

b) Suitable calculations shall be made at the design L= ииип length of the drop pipe (in m), 
stage to ensure efficient water discharge based on within the heated area, that is, drop pipe 
the above timing. length exposed in heated area. It should 

not include the length covered by cold 
E-6 OTHER REQUIREMENTS store ceiling insulation or exposed to cold 
store temperatures. 

a) Dry sprinklers should be inspected at regular T = mini Е fcold in °С 
intervals for ice build-up or signs of ice formation Q7 RTA temperature Gigod store, JEN, es 
in the sprinkler rise or drop pipe. Visual inspections 
shall take place at least annually. 

ANNEX F 
( Informative ) 
( Foreword ) 


ZONING OF SPRINKLER INSTALLATION 


F-1 GENERAL 


This annex specifies requirements particular to the 
sprinkler protection of buildings when zoning is 
adopted. It applies only to OH sprinkler installations 
of the wet pipe type. This annex is only for technical 
information and is optional. 


F-2 ZONING CONCEPT 


a) The protected floor area to be controlled by any 
one installation alarm valve on any one floor shall 
not exceed 12 000 т> (see 9.2). 

b) Car parks and areas involving the unloading and 
storage of goods shall be on a separate unzoned 
installation. 


82 


c) Building concerned shall be fully sprinkler 
protected to enable zoning. 


d) The protected floor area to be controlled by any 
one installation alarm valve shall not exceed 
12 000 m?. 


F-3 ZONING REQUIREMENTS 


a) The protected floor area per zone shall not exceed 
6 000 m?. 


b) Each zone shall be independently controlled by 
a single zone subsidiary stop valve, installed in a 
readily accessible position at the floor level of the 
zone it controls. Each valve shall be secured open 
and be labelled to identify the area of protection it 
controls. 


с) Each zone shall be fitted with a flushing valve по 


d 


е 


М7 


— 


less than 20 mm nominal diameter, either on the 
end of the distribution pipe hydraulically most 
remote from the water supply, or on the end of 
each distribution pipe spur, as appropriate. The 
valve outlet shall be fitted with a brass plug cap. 


Permanent test and drainage facilities for the 
zones shall be provided immediately downstream 
of the water flow alarm switch on each zone. The 
test facility shall simulate operation of any single 
sprinkler head. Adequate provision shall be made 
for the disposal of waste water. 


The installation alarm valve of a zoned sprinkler 
installation shall have two stop valves, one on 
each side of a single alarm valve with a bypass 
connection of the same nominal bore around all 
three valves, fitted with a normally closed stop 
valve (see Fig. 20). Each of the three stop valves 
shall be fitted with tamper proof devices to monitor 
their status. 


F-4 MONITORING OF THE INSTALLATION 


a 


wn 


Zoned sprinkler installations shall be provided 
with tamper-proof devices to monitor the status 
of: 


1) Each stop valve (that is either fully open or not 
fully open), including subsidiary stop valves, 
capable of interrupting the flow of water to 
sprinklers. 


2) Water flow into each zone immediately 
downstream of each zone subsidiary stop 
valve, to indicate the operation of each zone, 


b 


— 


IS 15105 : 2021 


by means ofa water flow alarm switch capable 
of detecting a flow equal to or greater than that 
from any single sprinkler. 


3) Water flow through each main installation 
alarm valve set. 


The monitoring devices required by F-4 (a) and 
F-3 (e) shall be electrically connected to a control 
and indicating panel, installed at an accessible 
location on the premises, where the following 
indications and warnings shall be given: 


1) Green visual indicators to indicate that 
each monitored stop valve is in its correct 
operational position. 


2) Audible devices and amber visual indicators to 
indicate that one or more control valve sets are 


not fully open. 


МУ 


3) Audible devices and amber visual indicators to 
indicate that one or more zone subsidiary stop 


valves are not fully open. 


wa 


4) Audible devices and amber visual indicators 
to indicate that the static pressure in any trunk 
main supplying the system has fallen to a 
value 0.5 bar or more below the normal static 


pressure. 


— 


5) Audible devices and red visual indicators 
to indicate that water is flowing into the 


installation. 


— 


F-5 DRAWINGS 


For all installation which are cut into zones, full detailed 
block plan shall be prepared to exhibit the positions of 
all zone control valves. 


KEY 


1 TO INSTALLATION 

2 DOWNSTREAM STOP VALVE 

3 ALARM VALVES 

4 UPSTREAM STOP VALVE 

5 FROM WATER SUPPLY 

6 INSTALLATION MONITORING FACILITY 
7 BYPASS STOP VALVE 

8 ALARM DEVICES 

9 ALARM TEST CONNECTION 


Fic. 20 CONTROL VALVE BYPASS ARRANGEMENT FOR ZONED BUILDING INSTALLATIONS 


83 


15 15105: 2021 


ANNEX С 


( Informative ) 


( Foreword ) 


SPRINKLER INSTALLATION — SUPERVISION 


G-1 GENERAL 


a) The aim of supervising sprinkler systems is the 
continuous monitor of the main functions of the 
system, that is, those whose failure might impair 
the correct automatic operation of the system in 
case of fire, and the raising of a supervisory alarm 
to allow corrective measures to be taken. This 
annex specifies requirements, which are additional 
to that elsewhere in the standard. They shall be 
complied with whenever monitoring is specified. 


b) All devices used for monitoring shall have at least 
IP 54 protection as specified in relevant Indian 
Standard. No more than 15 non-addressable 
supervisory alarm devices shall be connected to a 
common indication. 


c) All signalling and alarm circuits shall be fully 
supervised and a fault alarm shall be given in 
the event of short or open circuit where this 
corresponds to a fault. 


d) Control and indicating equipment shall be in 
accordance IS 2189. 


e) If no fire alarm system is provided, then main 
control panel of sprinkler pump in fire pump 
room shall be provided with facilities listed in this 
Annex. 


G-2 SUPERVISORY FUNCTIONS 


a) The position of all normally open stop valves the 
closing of which could prevent water flowing to 
the sprinklers, including water supply valves, 
control valve sets, subsidiary valves and sectional 
valves. An indication shall be given whenever the 
valve is less than fully open. 


84 


b) 


с 


ме 


а 


М7 


е) 


The position of all normally open stop valves 
the closing of which could prevent the correct 
operation of an alarm or indicating device, for 
example, pressure switch, hydraulic alarm, flow 
switch. An indication shall be given whenever the 
valve is less than fully open. 


All critical liquid levels, including water storage 
tanks and engine fuel tanks. An indication shall be 
given before a water storage level drops more than 
10 percent below its nominal fill level, or before 
a fuel level drops more than 25 percent below its 
nominal fill level. In the case of pressure tanks a 
further indication shall be given before the level 
reaches 10 percent above its nominal fill level. 


Pressures, including at water supplies and 
downstream of all dry and alternate control valve 
sets. On town main supplies and indication shall 
be given if the static pressure drops below the 
calculated running pressure. In all other cases an 
indication shall be given when the static pressure 
drops by more than 20 percent below the tested 
level. 


The power supply to electrical pump sets or other 
critical electrical equipment. An indication shall 
be given if one or more phases fail at any point 
in the main supply, or in the control circuit or an 
electric or diesel pump controller or any other 
critical control equipment. 


Minimum temperature of the sprinkler valve and 
pump room. An indication shall be given if the 
temperature drops below the minimum required 
level. 


IS 15105 : 2021 


ANNEX H 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE 


COMPOSITION 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


Organization 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety 
(DIFR), New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 
Chhatariya Rubber & Chemicals Industries, Mumbai 


City and Industrial Development Corporation, 
Navi Mumbai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, Pune 

Delhi Fire Services Headquarters, New Delhi 

Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Goa 

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

F.M. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


Fire & Emergency Services, J&K, Srinagar 


Fire & Security Association of India, Chennai 
Fire Protection Association of India, Mumbai 
GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Thane 
H. D. Fire protect Pvt Limited, Thane 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 
Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI (Chairman) 


SHRI О. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 
Suni Р. К. DESHMUKH (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


SHRI К. S. CHIMOTE 
SHRI SUVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
SHRI A. К. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. TULANI (Alternate) 


SHRI М. K. JAIN 
ӛнкі Amit SAINI (Alternate) 


Suni J. Р. К. НЕРАТ 


SHRI S. A. HAVELIWALA 
Suet Н. S. HAVELIWALA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND P. MANDKE 


CONTROLLER QA (FE) 
JOINT CONTROLLER ОА (FE) (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK MENON 
SHRI NITIN V. RAIKER (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITABH KISHORE 
SHRI GYASUDDIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI У. K. SINGH 
SHRI BASHIR AHMED SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAS RIZWI 
PRESIDENT 


SHRI S. P. GARG 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR KALKAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI HARISH N. DHARAMSHI 
Suri К. T. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI AASHISH R. GOKHALE 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


85 


IS 15105: 2021 


Organization 
Johnson Controls (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
K. V. Fire Chemicals (India) Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services, 
Bengaluru 

Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 

Branch, Integrated HQ MoD (Army), New Delhi 

Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Association of Fire Officers, Mumbai 
NBCC Ltd, New Delhi 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 
Proion Consultants, New Delhi 
Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RESQ Technologies, Ahmedabad 
Safex Fire Services Limited, Mumbai 


Shah Bhogilal Jethalal & Bros, Ahmedabad 


State Bank of India, Mumbai 
Surex Production and Sales Private Limited, Kolkata 
Swastik Synergy Engineering Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services Department, 
Chennai 


The Supreme Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


TTS Consultant, Kolkata 
UL India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 


Uttar Pradesh Fire Services, Lucknow 
West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, Kolkata 


In personal capacity (5-152, Ist Floor, East of Kailash, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (K-33-4, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4-45, Sector-70, Noida) 


In personal capacity 
(D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman Vihar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (27А, Tapovan Senior Citizens 
Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANTOSH MUZUMDAR 
SHRI NITIN RASTOGI 


SHRI RAJESH Н. SABADRA 
SHRI Оралу К. Sunorr (Alternate) 


Suri К. О. RAMESH 
SHRI К. SRINIVASA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. WARICK 


SHRI SANJAY SHARMA 
Suri A. К. Dusey (Alternate) 


SHRI P. S. RAHANGDALE 
Suri Н. D. PARAB (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 


SHRIMATI SUNITA PURSWANI 
SHRI R. K. AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ISHWAR IYER 

SHRI NEERAJ SEHGAL (Alternate) 
SHRI S. K. NANDY 

SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ROHIT V. SHAH 


SHRI JITENDRA SHAH 
SHRI SANDIP SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH M. SHAH 
SHRI ABHAY D. PURANDARE (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 
SHRI DEBASHIS NEOGI 


SHRI MUKESH D. SHAH 
SHRI KUNAL ZATAKIA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. VIJAYASEKAR 
SHRIMATI N. PRIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
SHRI G. K. SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI TARAK CHAKRABORTY 


SHRI SURESH SHANMUGAM 
SHRI RENOY RAJAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. К. RAO 
SHRI AMAN SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHIJIT PANDEY 
SHRI KAMAL NANDY (Alternate) 
SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


SHRI S. K. DHERI 


Dr Н. S. KAPRWAN 
Suri R. C. SHARMA 


SHRI T. К. A. KRISHNAN 


86 


Organization 


In personal capacity (4-10, Chanakyapuri, 
New Sama Road, Vadodara 390 008) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15105 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ABHAY D. PURANDARE 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST “Е” AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


| REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
SCIENTIST “Е” (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Fire Detection Alarms and Suppression System Subcommittee, CED 22:4 


Organization 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


ASTRAL Polytechnik Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central for Fire Explosive Environment Safety, 
(DRDO), Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, Pune 


Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi 


DSPA Fire Suppressions India Pvt Ltd, Pune 
EAST Corp, Thane 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


FOGTEC Fire Protection Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Е М. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


FYRPROTEK (Fire Engineers & Consultants), 
New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Thane 

Honeywell International (I) Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 
Institution of Fire Engineers (India) Ltd, New Delhi 
Maple Engineering Design Services (India), Pvt Ltd, 


Bengaluru 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S. S. WARICK (Convener) 


SHRI О. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI SELVAKUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RITESH PATEL 
SHRI MANOJ DHAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


SHRI КАЛУ GOEL 
SHRI К. S. CHIMOTE (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. К. TULANI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JAIN 
SHRI AMIT SAINI (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. К. HEPAT 


CoL V. V. KADAM 
CoL N. K. N. Rao (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETAN UDGIR 
SHRI HEMANT KHADSE 


SHRI AMITABH KISHORE 
SHRI GYASUDDIN (Alternate) 


SHRI JACKSON JOSE 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI GULSHAN KHURANA 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANDAR SAWANT 
SHRI AKHAND Kumar (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI В. S. A. NARAYAN 
ӛнкі Н. R. RANGANNATH (Alternate) 


SHRI D. K. SHAMI 


87 


15 15105: 2021 


Organization 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, 
Mumbai 


Newage Industries, Mumbai 


Nitin Fire Protection Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Proion Consultants, New Delhi 


Realty Automation and Security Systems Pvt Ltd, 
Pune 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 
Schrack Seconet AG, Gurugram 

Steel Authority of India, Salem 

The Supreme Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


TTS Consultant, Kolkata 


Johnson Controls (India) Private Limited, Gurugram 


West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, Kolkata 
In personal capacity (A-45, Sector-70, Noida) 


In personal capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman Vihar, 


New Delhi) 

In personal capacity (27A, Tapovan Senior Citizens 
Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 

In personal capacity 
(K-33-A, Green Park, New Delhi) 

In personal capacity, (4-59, Sector 35, Noida), 
New Delhi 


88 


Representative(s) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
DEPUTY CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK M. SHAH 
SHRI SHETUL A SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI NITIN M. SHAH 
SHRI PRAVIN SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT RAGHAVAN 
SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 
SHRI ANANT GOKHALE (Alternate) 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 
SHRI AJIT SAINI 
SHRI D. KUMARESAN 


SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
SHRI С. K. SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI TARAK CHAKRABORTY 


SHRI SANTOSH MUZUMDAR 
SHRI ASHISH DILEEP SAWANT (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr Н. 5. KAPRWAN 
SHRI R. C. SHARMA 


SHRI Т. К. A. KRISHNAN 
SHRI 5. К. DHERI 


SHRI KANWAR A. SINGH 


(Continued from second cover) 


h) Inclusion of use of CPVC pipes for installation of automatic fire sprinkler extinguishing system; and 
flexible sprinkler pipes have also been included. 


j) Certain new components have been introduced under sprinkler hardware like new types of supports 
and other auxiliaries. 


k) More illustrations have been introduced to enhance clarity. 


Informatory Annexes E, F and G have been included on protection of cold storage facilities; zoning of sprinkler 
installation; and supervision of sprinkler installation respectively. 


The guidelines contained in this standard are intended to be used with judgment in determining the protection 
requirements. The classification of various commodities, their class with respect to the overall hazard which is 
expressed as a function of its heat release rate (Btu/min or kW) which is the product of its heat of combustion 
(Btu/Ib or kJ/kg) and burning rate (Ib/min or kg/s) are also covered herein. 


Nothing in this standard prevents introduction of new concepts and technologies, when such systems are at least 
equivalent or superior to various provisions of this standard; and backed up by successful full-scale fire testing in 
recognized test laboratories where the design criteria and test results have been fully documented. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 15 given in Annex Н. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value 
observed of calculated, expressing Ше result of the test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (14596). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 С.І.Т. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
КОГКАТА 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


