**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS/ISO 11843-1 (1997): Capability of Detection, Part 1: 
Terms and Definitions [MSD 3: Statistical Methods for 
Quality and Reliability] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS/ISO 11843-1:1997 



Indian Standard 
CAPABILITY OF DETECTION 

PART 1 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 



ICS 01.040.03:03.120.30:17.020 



©BIS 2010 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELH1 11 0002 

January 201 Price Group 3 



Statistical Methods for Quality and Reliability Sectional Committee, MSD 3 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 1) which is identical with ISO 11 843-1 : 1997 'Capability of detection — Part 1 : 
Terms and definitions' issued by the International Organization for Standarization (ISO) was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Statistical Methods for Quality and Reliability 
Sectional Committee and approval of the Management and Systems Division Council. 

The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is 
particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as 
'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standard while in Indian Standards, 
the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to the following International Standard for which Indian Standard 
also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is listed below along 
with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence 

ISO 3534-1 : 1993^) Statistics — IS 7920 (Part 1) : 2008 Statistics — Technically Equivalent 

Vocabulary and symbols — Part 1: Vocabulary and symbols: Part 1 

Probability and general statistical Probability and general statistical terms 

terms ( third revision) 

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the 
following referred standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 

International Standard Title 

ISO 3534-3 : 1 985 Statistics — Vocabulary and symbols — Part 3: Design of experiments 

VIM : 1 993 International vocabulary of basic and general terms in metrology 



Annexes A and B of this standard are for information only. 



^)Since revised in 2006. 



IS/ISO 11843-1:1997 



Indian Standard 
CAPABILITY OF DETECTION 

PART 1 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 



Scope 



This part of ISO 1 1843 specifies terms and definitions 
relating to the detection of a difference between an 
actual state of a systenn and its basic state. 

The general concepts laid down in this part of 
ISO 11843, critical value of the response variable, 
critical value of the net state variable and nninimunn 
detectable value of the net state variable (see defi- 
nitions Nos. 9 to 11), apply to various situations such 
as checking the existence of a certain substance in a 
material, the emission of energy from samples or 
plants, or the geometric change in static systems 
under distortion. 

Critical values can be derived from an actual 
measurement series so as to assess the unknown 
states of systems included in the series, whereas the 
minimum detectable value of the net state variable as 
a characteristic of the measurement method serves 
for the selection of appropriate measurement pro- 
cesses. In order to characterize a measurement pro- 
cess, a laboratory or the measurement method, the 
minimum detectable value can be stated if appropri- 
ate data are available for each relevant level, i.e. a 
measurement series, a measurement process, a lab- 
oratory or a measurement method. The minimum 
detectable values may be different for a measure- 
ment series, a measurement process, a laboratory or 
the measurement method. 



ISO 11843 applies to quantities measured on scales 
that are fundamentally continuous. It applies to meas- 
urement processes and types of measurement 
equipment where the functional relationship between 
the expected value of the response variable and the 
value of the state variable is described by a calibration 
function. If the response variable or the state variable 
is a vectorial quantity, the concepts of ISO 11843 
apply separately to the components of the vectors or 
functions of the components, 

NOTE — Definitions Nos. 6 and 1 1 refer to theoretical 
quantities which in reality remain unknown. Estimates of 
these theoretical quantities can be determined from ex- 
perimental results. 



Terms and definitions 

Without restriction to the general applicability of this 
part of ISO 11843, it is assumed that the net state 
variable (see No. 4) is non-negative and that the cali- 
bration function (see No. 6) is strictly monotonically 
increasing. See also note 1 of definition No. 9. 

Figure 1 illustrates some of the concepts defined. The 
form of the distribution of the response variable and 
the calibration function is only an example and does 
not imply any restriction to a particular typerof distri- 
bution. The symbols used in this part of ISO 11843 
refer to figure 1 and are illustrative. They do not form 
a normative part of this part of ISO 1 1843. 



IS/ISO 11843-1:1997 



Response variable 



Critical value 
of the response 
variable 




Minimum detectable value of 
the net state variable 



Critical value of 

the net state variable 



Net state variable 



^0 

Value of Z In the basic state 



^c 



State variable 



Z State variable 

zo Value of the state variable in the basic state 

X Net state variable, X = Z-zo 

XQ Critical value of the net state variable 

JCD Mininnum detectable value of the net state variable 

Y Response variable 

yc Critical value of the response variable 

a Probability of an error of the first kind 

P Probability of an error of the second kind for X~xo 



Figure 1 — Calibration function, critical value 

of the response variable, critical value of the 

net state variable and minimum detectable 

value of the net state variable 



IS/ISO 11843-1:1997 



1 

state variable 

Z 

quantity describing the state of a system 

NOTES 

1 Generally, a system is characterized by more than one 
state variable. However, depending on the scope of the 
investigation, only one state variable is selected for the 
purpose of detecting a difference between an actual state 
and the basic state. 

2 Usually the selected state variable attains its smallest 
value in the basic state. 

EXAMPLES 

a) Concentration or annount of a substance in a 
mixture of substances. 

b) Intensity (energy density, power density, etc.) of 
the energy {radiation, sound, etc.) emitted by a 
source. 



response variable 

Y 

variable that shows the observed results of an ex- 
perimental treatment (ISO 3534-3:1985] 

For the purposes of ISO 11 843, this general definition 
is understood in the following specialized form: 

directly observable surrogate for the state variable, Z 

NOTE — The expected value of the response variable is 
related to the net state variable, X. via a calibration function. 

EXAMPLE 

If the state variable is the concentration or amount of 
a substance and a spectroscopic measurement 
method is used, the response variable might be a 
peak height or the area under a peak. 



c) Geometric change in a static system when it is 
distorted. 



basic state 

specific state of a system for use as a base for the 
evaluation of actual states of the system 

EXAMPLE 

A state of equilibrium or of an extreme condition. 



6 

calibration function 

functional relationship between the expected value of 
the response variable and the value of the net state 
variable, X 

NOTES 

1 See paragraph 1 in "Terms and definitions". 

2 In graphical representations of a calibration function, the 
response variable is usually represented by the ordinate 
and the net state variable by the abscissa; see figure 1 . 

3 The calibration function is conceptual and cannot be 
determined empirically. It is estimated through calibration. 



reference state 

state of a system, the deviation of which from the 
basic state is assumed to be known with respect to 
the state variable, Z 



net state variable 

X 

difference between the state variable, Z, and its value 
in the basic state, zq 

NOTES 

1 The net state variable constitutes a derived variable 
following an interval scale, the zero of which corresponds 
to the value of the state variable in the basic state. 

2 If the value of the state variable in the basic state is 
unknown (as is often the case), only the value of the net 
state variable can be measured but not that of the state 
variable itself. 

3 If the assumption is made that the basic state is rep- 
resented by the zero value of the state variable, the net 
state variable is conceptually equivalent to the state vari- 
able itself. 



calibration 

complete set of operations which estimates under 
specified conditions the calibration function from ob- 
servations of the response variable, Y, obtained on 
reference states 

NOTE — As regards its essential content this definition is 
consistent with the definition of "calibration" in the Inter- 
national Vocabular/ of Basic and General Terms in Metrol- 
ogy. However, it uses the terms defined in this part of 
ISO 11843. 



8 

measurement series 

totality of all measurements, the evaluation of which 
is based on the same calibration 

NOTE — Evaluation in this context means the conversion 
of response variable results into estimates of the net state 
variable by means of the estimated calibration function. 



IS/ISO 11843-1:1997 



9 

critical value of the response variable 

yc 

value of the response variable, Y, the exceeding of 
which leads, for a given error probability a, to the 
decision that the observed systenn is not in its basic 
state 

NOTES 

1 If the net state variable is negative or the calibration 
function is strictly monotonically decreasing, this definition 
has to be adjusted accordingly. 

2 The critical value of the response variable is the critical 
value of a statistical test of the nul! hypothesis "The state 
under consideration is not different from the basic state 
with respect to the state variable" against the alternative 
hypothesis "The state under consideration is different from 
the basic state with respect to the state variable". 

The test statistic of the above-mentioned statistical test, 
i.e. the response variable result, is the obsen/ed value in 
the case of a single measurement or a central value (e.g. 
average, median) in the case of repeated measurements. 

3 If the null hypothesis is true and the above rule of 
drawing conclusions is obeyed, the probability of wrongly 
rejecting the null hypothesis (error of the first kind) is a. 

4 The critical value of the response variable depends on: 

— the specified probability a (probability of the error of 
the first kind; see also "significance level" in 
ISO 3534-1); 

— the reference states chosen for calibration; 

— the sample size chosen for calibration; 

— the sample size chosen for the investigation of an 
unknown state; 

— the kind of central value (e.g. average, median, etc.) 
derived from the observed values in the case of 
repeated measurements; 

— the variation in the measurement system. 

5 The range of critical values of the response variable 
resulting from different calibrations depends on random 
influences and variations of properties of the measurement 
system over time. Due to these disturbing influences, each 
critical value of the response variable is valid only for the 
corresponding measurement series. 



10 

critical value of the net state variable 

value of the net state variable, X, the exceeding of 
which leads, for a given error probability a, to the 
decision that the observed systenn is not in its basic 
state 



NOTES 

1 The critical value of the net state variable is the value of 
the net state variable allocated to the critical value of the 
response variable by use of the estimated calibration func- 
tion. 

2 See note 1 of No. 9. 

3 The critical value of the net state variable is the value, 
based on an error probability a, the exceeding of which by 
the estimated value of the net state variable leads to the 
rejection of the null hypothesis "The state under con- 
sideration is not different from the basic state with respect 
to the state variable". 

4 Notes 3 to 5 of No. 9 are valid as regards content. 



n 

minimum detectable value of the net state 
variable 

true value of the net state variable, X, in the actual 
state that will lead, with probability (1 - ^, to the 
conclusion that the systenn is not in the basic state 

NOTES 

1 See note 1 of No. 9. 

2 The minimum detectable value specifies the true value 
of the net state variable for which the probability of wrongly 
not rejecting the null hypothesis {error of the second kind) 
isj3. 

3 Notes 4 and 5 of No. 9 are valid as regards content. 

4 The minimum detectable value predicted from data of 
an actual measurement series characterizes the capability 
of detection of the measurement process for this specific 
measurement series. 

5 The minimum detectable values for different measure- 
ment series 

— of a particular measurement process, 

— of different measurement processes of the same type, 

— of different types of measurement processes based 
on the same measurement method, 

can be understood as realizations of random variables 
where the parameters of the probability distribution of 
these variables can be considered as characteristics of the 
measurement process, the type of measurement process 
or the measurement method, respectively. 



6 The minimum detectable value of the measurement 
method may be used for the selection of measurement 
processes and methods for further measurements. A 
measurement process or a measurement method is suit- 
able for a certain measurement task if the minimum de- 
tectable value is equal to or smaller than a specified value 
(i.e. a specified requirement on scientific, legal or other 
reasons regarding the capability of detection). 



IS/ISO 11843-1:1997 



Annex A 

(informative) 

Terms used in chemical analysis 



An important field of application of the terms and 
definitions in this part of ISO 11843 as welt as the 
methods given in ISO 11843-2 (under preparation) is 
chemical analysis. If the correspondences between 
the general terms used in this part of ISO 11843 and 



the terms used in chemical analysis listed in table A.I 
are used, specific definitions of the terms "critical 
value" and "minimum detectable value" are obtained 
which are given below. 



Table A.I 



General term 



observed system 
state (of a system) 
state variable 
basic state 
reference state 
net state variable 



response variable 

calibration function 

calibration 

measurement series 

critical value of the response variable 

critical value of the net state variable 

minimum detectable value of the net state variable 



Term used In chemical analysis 



material to be analysed 

chemical composition (of the material to be analysed) 

concentration or amount of the analyte 

chemical composition of the blank material 

chemical composition of a reference material 

net concentration or amount of the analyte, i.e. the difference be- 

be analysed and that in the blank material 

rence entre la concentration ou la quantity de t'analyte dans le ma- 



identical to genera! term 



1) 



critical value of the net concentration or amount 2) 
minimum detectable net concentration or amount ^* 



1 ) Corresponding definition is: 

•critical value of the response variable 

value of the response variable the exceeding of which leads, for a given error probability a , to the decision that the concentration or 
amount of the analyte in the analysed nnaterial is larger than that in the blank material 

2) Corresponding definition is: 

critical value of the net concentration or amount 

value of the net concentration or amount the exceeding of which leads, for a given error probability a , to the decision that the concen- 
tration or amount of the analyte in the analysed material is larger than that in the blank material 

3) Corresponding definition is: 

minimum detectable net concentration or amount 

true net concentration or amount of the analyte in the material to be analysed which will lead, with probability (1 - ^, to the conclusion 
that the concentration or amount of the analyte in the analysed material is larger than that in the blank material 



IS/ISO 11843-1:1997 



Annex B 

(informative) 

Bibliography 

111 180 3534-1:1993, Statistics — Vocabulary and (31 VIM: 1993, International Vocabulary of Basic and 

syn)bols — Part 1: Probability and general sta- General Terms in Metrology, 

tistical ternns. 

[21 150 3534-3:1985, Statistics — Vocabulary and 
symbols — Part 3: Design of experiments. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of the these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard alongwith amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates 
that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 3 (355). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 1 0002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 



Regional Offices: 

Central 



Eastern 



Northern 



Southern 



Western 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T Scheme VII M, V.I.R Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700054 

SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 1 60022 
C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



Telephones 

2323 7617 
2323 3841 



2337 8499, 2337 8561 
2337 8626,2337 9120 



260 3843 
260 9285 



2254 1216,2254 1442 
2254 2519,2254 2315 

2832 9295, 2832 7858 
2832 7891,2832 7892 



Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Published by BIS, New Delhi 



