NAT HIAF IS 15519 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


arer Aree aa Gra waT — 
ugh Raga, Hea sik 
aa a — A HaT 


( Teel TREAT ) 


Water Mist Fire Protection 
Systems — System Design, 
Installation and Commissioning — 
Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.220.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2020 Price Group 11 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fire Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 2004. The fire protection of a building or plant must be considered as a 
whole. While water mist fire protection systems form only a part, though an important one, of the available 
facilities, it should not be assumed that their adoption necessarily remove the need to consider supplementary 
measures, such as the provision of portable fire extinguishers or mobile appliances for first aid or emergency use 
or measures to deal with special hazards. Water mist systems have been found to be effective for the suppression or 
extinguishment of a wide variety of the exposed and shielded Class B hydrocarbon pool fires and for combinations 
of incidental Class A and Class B fires. Water mist systems have also demonstrated their effectiveness on some 
Class A fires, including insulated electrical cable fires. 


This revision has been brought out to incorporate the experience gained in use of the standard since its first 
publication. The following are the major modifications in this revision: 


a) Terminologies have been brought up-to-date; 
b) Classifications of mist, nozzle types, associate components and safety requirements have been elaborated; 


c) Design guidelines for water mist sprinkler systems, water mist nozzles, deluge systems, water and 
atomizing gas supply, and water and propellant/atomizing gas supply have been covered in detail; 
d) Hydraulic calculations have been suggested for validating the design of mist systems; and 
e) Review, commissioning and maintenance have been modified and updated. 
This standard provides minimum requirements for the design, supply, installation, testing, commissioning and 
maintenance of water mist systems. Each risk has its own size, configuration and character with respect to nature 


of fire and its propagation. Hence, it may not be possible to provide uniform regulations with respect to design of 
water mist system. 


System acceptance as a whole requires submission of relevant fire test report(s) or listing documents as well as the 
manufacturer’s design, supply, installation, operation and maintenance manual along with application to the local 
authorities concerned for acceptance of the system. 


This standard guides for the protection of both industrial and non-industrial occupancies and also performance 
criteria for personnel (life safety) and property protection. 


The water supply for the system shall preferably use potable water. Where sea water is used, provisions shall be 
made to allow a thorough flushing of the system piping with fresh water after functioning. Other sources can also 
be used, provided they are treated from time to time to remove all suspended matters and impurities. 


The effectiveness of water mist is ascertained by fire testing on a hazard of the same configuration and general 
hazard type. Presently, there is no design procedure that would allow extrapolation of test results to different 
hazards or different enclosure configurations. 


Full detailed test reports or certificate are required along with the drawings to demonstrate the adequacy of the 
system design. Tests shall be conducted at recognized test laboratories as per the relevant standards. In the absence 
of test reports validating the design of water mist system from recognized third party laboratories, the system shall 
not be accepted for installation. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 15519 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


WATER MIST FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS — 
SYSTEM DESIGN, INSTALLATION AND 
COMMISSIONING — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies minimum requirements for 
design, supply, installation, testing, commissioning, 
maintenance and the criteria for acceptance of fixed 
land-based water mist systems. 


1.2 This standard does not provide any requirements 
for the protection of ships, in aircraft, on vehicles and 
mobile fire appliances or for below ground systems in 
the mining industry. 


1.3 This standard does not cover protection requirements 
against explosion. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards given in Annex A. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
below shall apply. 


3.1 Additive — Chemical or mixture of chemicals or 
gases, intentionally introduced into a water mist system 
for one or more of the following purposes: 


a) Enhancement of or compliance with fire protection 
requirements; 


b) Corrosion protection; and 
c) Frost protection. 


3.2 Assumed Maximum Area of Operation 
(AMAO) — Theoretical maximum surface area for 
which the operation of automatic nozzles during a fire 
is assumed to be operated. 
NOTE — This system applies to water mist systems with 
automatic nozzles. The principle is similar to that in automatic 
sprinkler system and can also be expressed in terms of 
‘maximum number of nozzles that can operate simultaneously 
at a minimum residual pressure’. 


3.3 Atomizing Media — Compressed air or inert gases 
that produce water mist by expansion and mechanical 
mixing with water. 


3.4 Automatic — Performing a function without the 
necessity of human intervention. 


3.5 Automatic Water Mist Nozzle — A thermo- 
sensitive device designed to react at a pre-determined 
temperature by automatically releasing water mist and 
distributing it in a specified pattern and quantity over 
a designated area that operates independently of other 
water mist sprinkler nozzles by means of a detection/ 
activation device built into the nozzle. 


3.6 Container — A cylinder or other vessel used to 
store liquids or gases. 


3.7 Container Discharge Valve — A valve directly 
connected to a container which, when actuated, releases 
extinguishing agent into the distribution piping. 


3.8 Corrosion Resistant Material — A material, such 
as bronze, brass, stainless steel and the like which has a 
low propensity for corrosion when used in anticipated 
application. 


3.9 Deluge System — A water mist system using 
nozzles attached to a piping system that are connected 
to a water supply through a valve and where all nozzles 
discharge simultaneously. 


3.10 Deep Seated Fire — A deep-seated fire is the one 
that gets established beneath the surface of a fibrous 
or particulate material. This may result from flaming 
combustion at the surface or from ignition within the 
mass of the fuel. It is characterized by glowing embers 
and smoldering rather than flaming due to reduced 
oxygen levels. Smoldering combustion may then 
progress slowly through the mass. 


3.11 Density — System application rate, which may be 
expressed in the following two ways: 


a) Discharge density of the flow from the system in 
respect of the area of the risk and expressed as litre 
per min/m?. 

b) Flux density of the flow from the system in 
respect of the volume of the risk and expressed in 
Į/min/m’. 


IS 15519 : 2020 


3.12 Directional Valve — A device for controlling 
the passage of the extinguishing agent from a supply 
manifold, directing it to pre-selected area(s) of 
protection. 


3.13 Discharge Duration — Accumulated time (in 
min) during which fire fighting medium is applied at 
the rated pressure. 


3.14 Discharge Time — Time interval (in s) between 
the first appearance of extinguishing agent at the 
nozzle and the time at which the discharge becomes 
predominantly gaseous or ceases. 


3.15 Distribution System — All pipe work and fittings 
downstream of any container valve, deluge valve or 
other control assembly. 


3.16 Dump Valve — An automatic valve installed on 
the discharge side of a positive displacement pump 
to relieve pressure prior to the pump driver reaching 
operating speed. 


3.17 D ,— A drop diameter such that the cumulative 
volume, from zero diameter to this respective diameter, 
is the percentage of the corresponding sum of the total 
distribution. 
NOTE — Ds is the volume median diameter, that is, 
50 percent of the total volume of liquid is in drops of smaller 
diameter and 50 percent is in drops of larger diameter. 
3.18 Enclosure — A totally or partially confined 
volume. 


3.19 Fire Compartment — A volume that is defined 
by fire rated separations. 


3.20 Fire Control — The limitation of the growth 
of a fire by pre-wetting adjacent combustibles and 
controlling ceiling gas temperatures to prevent 
structural damage. 


3.21 Fire Extinguishment— The complete suppression 
of a fire until there are no burning combustibles. 


3.22 Fire Suppression — The sharp reduction of the 
rate of heat release of a fire and the prevention of re- 
growth. 


3.23 Flash-Over — A stage in the development of 
contained fire in which all exposed surfaces reach auto- 
ignition temperatures more or less simultaneously and 
fire spreads rapidly throughout the space. 


3.24 Light Hazard Occupancy — An occupancy 
where the quantity and/or combustibility of contents is 
low and where fires with relatively low rates of heat 
release are expected. 
NOTE — Light hazard occupancies can include occupancies 
(non-storage and non-manufacturing) having conditions 
similar to apartments, churches, clubs, educational buildings, 
hospitals, institutional facilities, libraries (except large stack 
rooms), museums, offices, data processing areas without open 


storage of information media, residential buildings, restaurant 
seating areas, theaters and auditoriums (excluding stages and 
prosceniums), and the like. 


3.25 Machinery Space — These areas include auxiliary 
turbine rooms, oil pumps, oil reservoirs, fuel filters, 
gear boxes, drive shafts, lubrication skids and diesel/ 
petrol engine rooms where the hazard is a combustible 
liquid. Quantity of combustibles and liquids shall be 
as per the listing restrictions from the recognized test 
laboratories. 


3.26 Manual — Requiring human intervention to 
accomplish a function. 


3.27 Monitoring — The supervision of the operating 
integrity of an electrical, mechanical, pneumatic or 
hydraulic control feature of a system. 


3.28 Nominal Size (DN) — A numerical designation 
of size which is common to all components in a piping 
system other than components designated by outside 
diameters or by thread size. It is a convenient round 
number for reference purposes and is only loosely 
related to manufacturing dimensions. 


3.29 Nozzle — A special purpose device, containing 
one or more orifices, designed to produce and deliver a 
water spray meeting either the definition of water mist 
or meeting the specific requirements of an approved 
water mist fire test protocol. 


3.30 Operating Device — Any component involved 
between actuation and release of agent. 


3.31 Ordinary Hazard Occupancy — An area where 
the quantity and combustibility of contents is moderate 
to high and where fires with moderate and high rates of 
heat release are expected. 


3.32 Pre-burn Time — Time from the ignition of the 
fire source till the operating pressure or design flow is 
available at the hydraulically most remote nozzle. 


3.33 Pressure — Various terms associated with 
pressures are given below. 


3.33.1 Maximum Nozzle Operating Pressure — Highest 
pressure that the nozzle distribution system is designed 
for. 


3.33.2 Maximum System Operating Pressure — Highest 
pressure that any one system component is subject 
to. Typically this would be the pressure available in 
cylinder storage at the maximum operating temperature 
or pressure at the pump discharge. 


3.33.3 Maximum System Pressure — Highest pressure 
available from the pressure source. Typically this would 
be the pressure setting of the pressure relieving device. 


3.33.4 Operating Pressure — The pressure at which a 
nozzle is intended to operate. 


3.33.5 Rated Working Pressure — Maximum pressure at 
or below which all components shall operate trouble free. 


3.33.6 Working Pressure — The maximum anticipated 
static (non-flowing) pressure applied to the system 
components exclusive of surge pressures. 


3.33.7 Standby Pressure — The pressure maintained 
in a water mist system under a non-fire or standby 
condition. 


3.34 Pressure Reducing Valve — A valve designed 
for the purpose of reducing the downstream water or 
gas pressure to a specific value under both flowing 
(residual) and non-flowing (static) conditions. 


3.35 Pressure Regulating Device — A device designed 
for the purpose of reducing, regulating, controlling or 
restricting system pressure. Examples include pressure 
reducing valves, pressure control valves and pressure 
restricting devices. 


3.36 Primary Protection — A water mist system 
is considered as a primary protection system (when 
installed) for a part/portion of an occupancy, which is 
otherwise protected by a sprinkler system. Duration of 
water supply shall be at least equal to that required for 
sprinkler system. Required quantity of water shall be 
calculated based on system hydraulics. 


3.37 Propellant — Compressed gas used as a prime 
mover to push water out of storage vessels, through 
pipe networks, or through distribution components. 


3.38 Relief Valve — A device that allows diversion 
of liquid or gas in order to limit excess pressure in a 
system. 


3.39 Residential Area — A building in which sleeping 
accommodation is provided for normal residential 
purposes and also includes lodging and rooming 
houses, 1 or 2 family private dwelling, apartment 
houses, hotels, dormitory, apartments, condominiums, 
and the like. 


3.40 Response Time Index (RTI) — A measure of 
nozzle sensitivity expressed in units of tu” where, t is 
the time constant of the heat responsive element in units 
of seconds and u is the gas velocity expressed in m/s. 
RTI can be used in combination with the conductivity 
factor (C) to predict the response of a nozzle in fire 
environments defined in terms of gas temperature and 
velocity versus time. 


3.41 Single Fluid System — A water mist system 
utilizing a single fluid to supply each nozzle. 


3.42 Special Protection System — A fire extinguishing 
system that is installed for the protection of areas where 
water mist and other limited agent supply systems, 
such as dry chemical or clean agent systems would be 
acceptable methods of protection. 


IS 15519 : 2020 


NOTE — The agent supply shall be adequate for a minimum 
of: 
a) twice the time to extinguish a worst case test fire in an 
accepted fire test scenario, or 


b) the total time to shut down process equipment including 
the time it takes for surface temperatures to drop 
below auto-ignition temperature of the fluid or 10 min, 
whichever is greater. 


3.43 Standard Orientation — The orientation 
in which the air flow is perpendicular to the axis 
of nozzle’s waterway and plane of the frame arms, 
when provided, in order to produce shortest response 
time. 


3.44 Supervision — In waterbased fire protection 
systems, a means of monitoring system status and 
indicating abnormal conditions. 


3.45 Total Compartment Application System — A 
system designed to discharge water mist to protect all 
hazards in an enclosure. 


3.46 Twin Fluid System — A water mist system in 
which water and an atomizing media are supplied to 
the system. They can be single pipe systems, where 
the two fluids are supplied to the nozzles through the 
same pipe, and double pipe systems where the fluids 
are separately supplied and are mixed at the nozzles. 


3.47 Unloader Valve — A type of relief valve that is 
designed to relieve excess flow in case of volumetric 
pumps. 


3.48 Water Mist — A water spray for which the 
Dv, for the flow weighted cumulative volumetric 
distribution of water droplets, is less than 1 000 p at the 
minimum design operating pressure of the water mist 


nozzle. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 This standard addresses the use of fine water sprays 
for the efficient control, suppression or extinguishment 
of fires using limited volumes of water. Properly 
designed water mist systems can be effective on both 
liquid fuel (Class B) and solid fuel (Class A) fires. 


Research indicates that fine (that is, smaller than 400 u) 
droplets are essential for extinguishment of Class B 
fires, although larger drop sizes are effective for 
Class A combustibles, which benefit from 
extinguishment by fuel wetting. For this reason, the 
definition of water mist in this standard includes sprays 
with Dv, „ of up to 1 000 u. 


0.90 
4.2 This standard’s interpretation of ‘water mist’ 
includes some water sprays used in IS 15105 and 
IS 15325 some sprays produced by standard sprinklers/ 
spray nozzles operating at high pressure, as well 
as light mists suitable for greenhouse misting and 
HVAC humidification systems. This range in drop size 
distribution is so broad that some important differences 


IS 15519 : 2020 


in the performance of sprays with finer different 
distributions are not distinguished. 


4.3 The relationship between drop size distribution and 
extinguishing capacity of a water mist is complex. In 
general, very fine particles enhance heat absorption and 
generation of water vapour. With liquid (Class B) fuels, 
too many ‘large’ drops could agitate the surface of the fuel 
and increase burning intensity. On the other hand, larger 
drops could assist the spray to penetrate and wet charred, 
smoldering Class A fuels. Larger drops could also entrain 
finer drops in their wake and improve the transport of 
much smaller drop sizes into the seat of the fire. 


4.4 Drop size distribution alone does not determine 
the ability of a spray to suppress or extinguish a 
given fire. Factors such as fuel properties, enclosure 
effects (which are a function of ventilation and heat 
confinement), spray flux density and spray velocity 
(momentum) are all involved in determining the 
effectiveness of a water mist in fire suppression or 
extinguishment. 


The momentum of an element of spray is the product 
of its velocity and the mass of dispersed water droplets 
(that is, the mass flow rate). It must be stressed that the 
term velocity implies direction as well as speed. 


It is the momentum of a mist in a particular direction, 
relative to the direction of flow of the hot fire gases 
that enhances cooling and suppression effectiveness. 
Opposing directional flows bring about turbulent 
mixing, hence improved cooling. Therefore, all three 
variables, drop size distribution, flux density, and 
velocity are involved in determining the ability to 
suppress or extinguish a fire in a given scenario. 


4.5 A water mist system is a fire protection system using 
very fine water sprays (that is, water mist). The very 
small water droplets allow the water mist to control, 
suppress or extinguish fires by cooling of the flame and 
fire plume, oxygen displacement by water vapour, and 
radiant heat attenuation. 


4.6 Water mist systems have been found effective in 
controlling, suppressing, or extinguishing certain types 
of fires. This standard addresses the use of fine water 
sprays to achieve all the above characteristics in process 
of extinguishment. Wherever, water mist systems were 
found effective, they can be accepted provided they 
have been tested and demonstrated for the particular 
application and class. 


4.7 Classification of Water Mist Systems 


4.7.1 Based on working pressure, water mist systems 
are classified into low pressure, intermediate pressure 
and high pressure systems as defined in 4.7.1.1, 4.7.1.2 
and 4.7.1.3. The pressure range is of significance for 
the component selection. 


4.7.1.1 Low pressure system 


A water mist system where the distribution piping is 
exposed to pressures of 12.1 bar or less. 


4.7.1.2 Intermediate pressure system 


A water mist system where the distribution system 
piping is exposed to pressures greater than 12.1 bar but 
less than 34.5 bar. 


4.7.1.3 High pressure system 


A water mist system where the distribution system 
piping is exposed to pressures of 34.5 bar or greater. 


4.7.2 Based on Particle Size Distribution 


Asa means of allowing distinctions to be made between 
coarser and finer sprays across the 1 000 um spectrum 
of this standard’s definition of water mist, it is useful to 
subdivide mist into class 1, 2 or 3 water mist, according 
to the droplet size distribution as defined in 4.7.2.1, 
4.7.2.2 and 4.7.2.3. The defining boundaries for the 
three classifications are illustrated in Fig. 1. 


CLASS 3 
400 < ( Dy 0.90) $1000 


100 
CLASS 1 
90 [T Dy 0.90 < 200 
w 80 
E 
5 70 
© 
> 60 
x 
w 50 
= 
al 
T 40 
5 
z 30 
© 20 
10 
0 
0 100 200 300 400 


500 600 700 800 900 1000 


DROP DIAMETER (1) 


Fic. 1 CLASSIFICATION OF WATER Mist ACCORDING TO DROPLET SIZE 


4 


4.7.2.1 Class 1 mist 


90 percent of the volume of water is contained in 
droplets less than 200 um in diameter. This represents 
the finest water mist. 


4.7.2.2 Class 2 mist 


90 percent of the volume of water is contained in 
droplets with diameter in 200 - 400 um range. 


4.7.2.3 Class 3 mist 


90 percent of the volume of water is contained in 
droplets with diameter in 400 - 1 000 um range. 


4.7.3 The drop size distribution of a spray does not 
uniquely define its suitability for a given application. It 
is inseparable from the spray direction relative to the fire 
plume, its velocity and flux density. The momentum of 
an element of spray is the product of its velocity (which 
includes direction as well as speed) and the mass of 
dispersed water droplets. 


Therefore, all three variables that is, drop size 
distribution, flux density and momentum are involved 
in determining the ability to suppress or extinguish a 
fire in a given scenario. 


4.8 Water mist systems also offer potential benefits for 
many specialized applications, where it would be difficult 
to find a suitable traditional option. These systems may 
also be used as an alternative to traditional sprinklers and 
deluge systems for those types of applications (cleared 
after fire tests by recognized laboratories), particularly 
when available water supplies are limited or when the 
application of water must be restricted. 
NOTE — Due to the presence of larger drops, higher mass flow 
rates are easier to achieve with Class 2 sprays than with Class 1 
mist. The larger drops are not so large as to be ineffective on 
liquid fuel fires. However, considerable surface wetting occurs 
with sprays in this range; therefore a Class 2 mist is also 
likely to be effective on fires involving ordinary combustibles. 
Class 3 water mists are typically generated by intermediate 
pressure, small orifice sprinklers, impingement nozzles of 
various sorts and fire hose fog nozzles. 


4.9 System Types 


A water mist distribution system is a system that is 
connected to a water supply and equipped with one or 
more nozzles capable of delivering water mist. A water 
mist system shall meet the performance requirements 
of its intended application. 


4.9.1 Pre-engineered Systems 


A water mist system having predetermined flow rates, 
nozzle pressures and volumes, and spray densities of 
water mist. These systems have the specific pipe sizes, 
maximum and minimum pipe lengths, flexible hose, 
number of fittings, and number and types of nozzles. 


4.9.2 Engineered System 


A water mist system where, as required by the accepting 
authority, individual calculation and design shall be 


IS 15519 : 2020 


done to determine the system flow rates, pipe sizes, 
area or volume protected by the system, discharge 
density of water mist, number and types of nozzles, and 
nozzle placement. 


4.9.3 Deluge System 


A water mist system using open spray nozzles attached 
to a piping system that is connected to a water supply 
through a valve that is opened either manually or by 
means of a detection system installed in the same area 
as the spray nozzles. When the valve opens, water 
flows into the piping system and discharges through 
all spray nozzles attached to the system. There are 
different types of deluge type water mist systems 
including: 


a) Total flooding system — A system designed to 
discharge water mist to simultaneously protect all 
hazards in an enclosure. 


b) Zoned application system — A system designed to 
protect hazards in a pre-determined portion of an 
enclosure. 


c) Local application system — A system arranged 
to discharge directly on an object or hazard in an 
enclosed or un-enclosed or open outdoor hazards. 


4.9.4 Dry System 


A water mist system using sealed nozzles attached to a 
piping system containing air, nitrogen or inert gas under 
pressure, the release of which (as from an opening of 
sealed nozzle) allows the water supply pressure to open 
a dry-pipe valve. The water then flows into the piping 
system and out through any nozzles that have opened. 


4.9.5 Pre-action System 


A water mist system using sealed nozzles attached to a 
piping system containing air that might or might not be 
under pressure with a supplemental detection system 
installed in the same areas as the mist nozzles. The 
actuation of the detection system opens a valve and the 
water then flows into the piping system and out through 
any nozzles that have opened. 


4.9.6 Wet System 


A water mist system using sealed nozzles attached to 
a piping system containing water and connected to a 
water supply so that water discharges immediately 
from nozzles that are operated by the heat from a fire. 


4.10 Nozzles 


The nozzles covered in this standard are intended to 
generate water mist to control, extinguish or suppress 
fire and consist of the following types: 


a) Automatic — A thermo-sensitive device designed 
to react at a pre-determined temperature by 
automatically releasing water mist and distributing 
it in a specified pattern and quantity over a 
designated area that operates independently of 


IS 15519 : 2020 


other nozzles by means of a detection/activation 
device built into the nozzle. 


b) Coated — A nozzle that has a factory applied 
coating for corrosion protection. 


c) Concealed — A recessed nozzle with a ceiling 
cover plate. 


d) Flush — A nozzle in which all or part of the body, 
including the inlet thread, is mounted above the 
lower plane of the ceiling. 


e) Fusible element — A nozzle that opens under the 
influence of heat by the melting of a component. 


f) Glass bulb — A nozzle that opens under the 
influence of heat through pressure resulting from 
expansion of the enclosed fluid. 


g) Hybrid — Nozzles capable of operation using 
both automatic and non-automatic means. 


h) Multiple orifice — A nozzle having two or more 
outlet orifices. 


j) Open (spray nozzle) — A nozzle without a thermo- 
sensitive element which discharges water mist. 


k) Pendent — A nozzle that is arranged in such a way 
that water mist is directed downward by striking a 
distribution plate or by nozzle orientation. 


m) Pilot —A heat actuated nozzle which also controls 
the flow of water to one or more connected 
nozzles. 


n) Recessed — A nozzle of which all or part of 
the body, other than the inlet thread, is mounted 
within a recessed housing. 


p) Sidewall — A nozzle intended for installation 
near a wall and ceiling interface and designed to 
discharge water outward from, and onto adjacent 
walls. 


q) Upright — A nozzle that is arranged in such a 
way that water mist is initially directed upwards 
against a distribution plate. 


r) Sealed — A nozzle that operates independently 
of other nozzles by means of a detection and 
activation device built into the nozzle. 


5 OBJECTIVES OF WATER MIST SYSTEM 


Water mist extinguishing systems can be used to protect 
life and property from consequences of fire through 
suitable design, supply, installation and commissioning. 


5.1 The performance of the water mist system is 
enumerated hereunder: 


a) Fire control — Fire control which can be described 
in detail by one or more of the following: 

1) A reduction in the thermal exposure to the 
structure where the primary objective is 
to maintain the structure’s integrity of the 
building (for example, to prevent flashover). 


2) A reduction in the threat to occupants where 
the primary objective is to minimize loss of 
life. 


3) A reduction in fire related characteristic such 
as a heat release rate, fire growth rate or spread 
to adjacent objects, dilution of smoke and 
flammable vapour. 


b) Cooling — When turning into vapour, water 
absorbs more heat than any other fire fighting 
agent. 

c) Inerting — In evaporation, the water volume 


expands over | 700 times displacing oxygen. 
Evaporation rate of water depends on the free 
surface area, which can be increased by splitting 
the bulk volume into droplets: the smaller the 
droplets are in the form of water mist, the faster 
is the evaporation and the more efficient is the 
cooling and inerting. 


d) Blocking radiant heat — Water in the form of 
mist has an additional and extremely useful fire 
fighting mechanism that no other agent has that 
is, a dense cloud of micro-droplets effectively 
absorbs and scatters the heat radiated by the fire, 
protecting the immediate surroundings. 


e) Fire suppression — Sharp reduction in the rate of 
heat release of a fire and the prevention of fire re- 
growth. 


f) Fire extinguishment — The complete suppression 
of a fire until there are no burning combustibles. 

5.2 Application of water mist system are enumerated 
hereunder. 
Water mist systems are used for a wide range of 
performance objectives including the following: 

a) Fire extinguishment, 

b) Fire suppression, 

c) Fire control, 

d) Temperature control, and 

e) Exposure protection. 
5.3 Typical applications of water mist systems, but not 
limited to what is mentioned above, are as follows: 


a) Buildings like hotels, residentials, offices, 
churches, art galleries, libraries, theaters, heritage 
buildings, hospitals, high rise buildings, etc. 

b) Computers and data processing equipment and 
control rooms. 

c) Electronic equipment including telecommunication 
equipment. 

d) Electrical hazards, such as transformers, switches, 
circuit breakers, and rotating equipment cable 
runs in tunnels, etc. 

e) Aircraft hangers, cargo bay and crew cabin 
compartment. 


f) Defence applications (land) like aircraft hangers, 
command centres, maintenance and training 
facilities. 


g) Transportation sectors like road and train tunnels, 
metro stations, terminals and rolling stock 
(passenger, machinery and technical areas). 


h) Local protections like rooms, vaults, enclosed 
machines, containers, storage tanks and bins. 


j) Industrial applications (local protection) like 
machinery spaces, engines using flammable fuels, 
gas turbines, fryers, gas jet fires, etc. 

k) Cooking equipment (local protection) using 
cooking oils and fats. 

m) Spray booths (painting lines) and engine test cells 
of automotive industry. 


n) Conveyor belts. 


p) Flammable liquid storage and processing areas 
and combustible solids. 


q) Marine and navy applications like vessels, 
submarines, cargo ships, ship bays, etc. 


r) Offshore facilities like platforms and production 
facilities. 
NOTE — Unless the system is demonstrated and approved for 
the type of protection by any recognized national/international 
laboratories along with certification for the type of occupancy 
configuration following fire tests, water mist systems may not 
be treated as acceptable protection. Further, no extrapolation of 
test results shall be made. 


5.4 A system may be used to protect more than one 
risk area by means of directional valves. Where two 
or more areas could be simultaneously involved in a 
fire by reason of their proximity, such areas shall be 
protected by either, 


a) individual systems designed to allow simultaneous 
operation, or 


b) a single system sized and arranged to discharge 
simultaneously on all potentially involved hazards. 


5.5 Some advantages of the water mist systems over the 
other water based protection systems are given below: 


a) Water requirement fire 
minimum. 


for suppression is 


b) Water damage to properties is minimum. 
c) Faster fire suppression/cooling characteristics. 


d) Three dimensional nature of fire suppression 
mechanism. 


e) Suitability for suppression of liquid fires. 
f) Ease of installation. 


g) Leakage from pipe lines are very minimum in 
view of usage of stainless steel pipes and fittings. 


h) Non-toxic for humans. 


j) No decomposition products during the process of 
extinguishment. 


IS 15519 : 2020 


k) Minimum downtime following an extinguishment 
process. 


5.6 Limitations of Water Mist Systems 


These systems shall not be used for direct application 
to materials that react with water to produce significant 
amounts of heat or hazardous products. Such materials 
include the following: 


lithium, sodium, 
titanium, zirconium, 


a) Reactive metals, such as 
potassium, magnesium, 
uranium and plutonium; 


b) Metal alkoxides, such as sodium methoxide; 
c) Metal amides, such as sodium amide; 
d) Carbides, such as calcium carbide; 


e) Halides, such as benzoyl chloride and aluminium 
chloride; 


f) Hydrides, such as lithium aluminum hydride; 

g) Oxyhalides, such as phosphorus oxybromide; 

h) Silanes, such as trichloromethysilane; 

j) Sulphides, such as phosphorus pentasulphide; and 

k) Cyanates, such as methylisocyanate. Water mist 
systems shall not be used for direct application to 
liquefied gases at cryogenic temperatures (such as 


liquefied natural gas) which boil violently when 
heated by water. 


5.7 Environmental Factors 


When selecting a system to protect a risk, the effects of 
water run-off on the environment shall be considered. 


5.8 Approval and Testing 


Any water mist system that has been tested and 
approved by a recognized test and approval body shall 
be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this standard. 

NOTE — Any other technology that can provide an equivalent 


or better level of safety shall not be qualified or deemed as 
water mist systems, as per this standard. 


6 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Hazards to Personnel (General) 


6.1.1 For fire situations, suitable safeguards shall be 
provided to ensure prompt evacuation of and to prevent 
entry into hazardous atmospheres and also to provide 
means for prompt rescue of any trapped personnel. 


6.1.2 Safety items, such as personnel training, warning 
signs, discharge alarms, self-contained breathing 
apparatus, evacuation plans and fire drills shall be 
considered. 


6.2 Hazards to Personnel (Specific to Water Mist) 
6.2.1 Normally, discharge of water mist in an occupied 


area is not likely to pose any serious hazard to the 
personnel. However, attention is drawn to the following 


IS 15519 : 2020 


clauses in respect of safety to the personnel during 
discharge. 


6.2.2 Even though one of the fire fighting mechanisms 
of water mist is displacing oxygen by water vapour, 
this is a local phenomenon at and close to the flames, 
that is, where temperatures are high. The major cause 
of significant oxygen depletion in an enclosure is 
the fire itself that consumes oxygen and generates 
combustion gases into the space. The other effects 
of fire, that is, heat and toxic gases are acutely far 
more dangerous than any effects related to oxygen 
depletion with plain water mist as the fire fighting 
agent. 


6.2.3 Direct impingement of water mist could pose an 
eye hazard. Noise during the operation of water mist 
systems could pose a hearing hazard. Water mist may 
also reduce visibility in the surroundings and hence 
increase the time and difficulty in egress from an 
affected enclosure. 


6.2.4 Injecting water into the enclosure during a large 
fire situation may have an instantaneous effect of 
cooling that decreases the volume of buoyant gases 
followed by hot steam expansion. The end result could 
be a probable sudden drop in the pressure inside the 
enclosure, depending on the size of the protected 
enclosure. 


6.2.5 The potential growth of bacteria in stored water 
supplies may be a concern where water mist systems 
are utilized in public spaces. If the risk is considered 
as a potential risk, measures to prevent such growth 
should be taken and stored water supplies should 
be tested for bacteria at appropriate maintenance 
intervals. 


6.2.6 Systems using an inert gas as a form of 
propellant for the water mist shall conform to the 
safety requirements specified in IS 15493. Systems 
discharging gas into the protected volume, different 
from air, shall comply with the requirements of the 
respective standards. 


6.2.7 Water mist systems using additives shall not 
be used in normally occupied areas unless they have 
been evaluated to be safe for human exposure at the 
maximum concentration of the additive that can be 
reached upon system discharge. Evaluation shall 
include at least skin irritation, eye irritation, inhalation 
toxicity and toxicity on human beings. 


6.2.8 There are eminent dangers in respect of protection 
to certain specific occupancies like deep fat dryers 
where there is a possibility of hot oil splash during 
discharge of water mist system. Installation manuals 
shall specify all the precautions to be taken and safety 
provisions for such occupancies. 


6.3 Hazards to Property 


6.3.1 Due to the small amount of water that too very 
finely distributed, water mist is unlikely to cause any 
serious damage to the equipment in the enclosure as 
in the case of other water based systems like hydrant, 
sprinkler, spray or foam systems. 


6.3.2 Usage of pure potable water flowing through 
stainless steel pipes are not likely to cause serious 
damage to the property and further evaporation of 
water mist helps in the reduction of water damage to 
the property below. 


6.3.3 Flooding is a possibility but is minimal as water 
spray system uses very small volume of water and thus 
quick cleaning is enabled. 


6.4 Electrical Hazards 


6.4.1 The clearance is the air distance between water 
mist system equipment including piping and nozzles, 
and un-enclosed or un-insulated live electrical 
components at other than ground potential. The 
minimum clearances provided are for the purpose of 
electrical clearance under normal conditions; and are 
not intended for use as safe distances during water mist 
system operation. 


6.4.2 All system components shall be located to 
minimum clearances from un-enclosed and un-insulated 
energized electrical components in accordance with the 
provisions contained in SP 30. 


6.4.3 In risk that contain live electrical equipment and 
where the presence of free water or water mist may 
create conditions hazardous to personnel, consideration 
should be given to the evacuation of the area or the 
shutting down of electrical equipment prior to the 
discharge of water mist. 


6.4.4 Clearance from water mist equipment to the live 
and un-insulated electrical equipment shall be governed 
by the relevant provisions of SP 30. 


6.4.5 Water mist systems should not be installed in 
the presence of high voltage live electrical equipment, 
except where a risk assessment and testing has been 
carried out and has determined that it is safe to do so. 


NOTE — It is preferable that electrical equipment be de- 
energized prior to discharge of the water mist. 


6.5 Other Requirements 


6.5.1 Generally, in areas protected by a water mist 
system, which are capable of being occupied, the 
following safety requirements shall be provided: 
a) Lighting and adequate direction signs for safe 
evacuation; 


b) Pre-discharge, visible and audible alarms; and 


c) Warning and instruction signages. 


6.5.2 Water Quality (Water Mist Specific) 


a) Water mist system with additives protecting 
normally occupied areas shall incorporate a 
manual lock-off valve unless the additive in the 
concentration used has been evaluated as safe for 
human exposure by an appropriate authority. The 
valve, where fitted, shall be locked whenever the 
protected area is occupied. 


b) Water mist systems using potable water or 
natural sea water are not considered to present a 
toxicological or physical hazard and are safe for 
use in occupied areas. 


c 


ma 


Water supply for a water mist system shall be 
taken from a source that is equivalent in quality 
to a potable source with respect to particulate and 
dissolved solids or from a source of natural sea 
water. 


d) A filter or a strainer shall be provided at each water 
supply connection or system riser. 


e) The maximum filter rating or strainer mesh 
opening shall be 80 percent of the minimum 
nozzle waterway dimension. 


f) When selecting water mist system for protection 
of a hazard location, the effects of water run-off on 
the environment shall be taken into consideration. 


7 APPROACH TO DESIGN OF WATER MIST 
SYSTEM 


7.1 System Design 


7.1.1 General 


a) A system shall be designed and installed in 
accordance with its application for the specific 
hazard and/or occupancy as defined in their listing 
or in the relevant fire test reports and performance 
objectives. Compliance with the above shall 
address compartment geometry, fire hazard and 
system variables. 


b) The characteristics of the specific application 
(compartment variables and hazard classification) 
shall be consistent with the listing of the system. 


c 


wa 


Pre-engineered water mist systems for 
compartment enclosures shall not be extrapolated 
beyond the volume, ceiling height, ventilation rate, 
and number of nozzles tested, unless dimensions 
of the enclosure are such that additional nozzles 
are required to maintain nozzle spacing. 


7.1.2 Hazard Analysis 


A fire hazard analysis shall be conducted to determine 
both the design of the system and the type of detection 
and activation methods required. The system shall be 
assessed on the hazard type, fire loading and anticipated 


IS 15519 : 2020 


fire growth. The case of ignition or re-ignition of the 
fuel, the fire growth rate and the ability to achieve 
extinguishment shall be considered when selecting or 
designing a system. 


No general design method is available for water mist 
protection systems. Performance objectives need to 
be proven by fire test in the configuration and for the 
hazard and types of fire scenarios expected. 


Recognized third party laboratory testing for water mist 
systems involve the completion of a series of fire tests 
identified in a fire test protocol as well as reliability 
testing of the components that make up the water mist 
system. The test protocol describes the fire tests needed 
to prove the water mist system is effective. The fire test 
specifies the type of fuel in configuration(s) that would 
be more realistic for the hazard protected. Reliability 
testing consists of testing all components of the system 
to verify they will function properly. 


7.1.3 Applicability 


a) Fire test protocols shall be designed to replicate 
the range of the application parameters associated 
with a particular hazard or occupancy. 


b) The system hardware shall be listed for the 
intended application. 


c) Test protocols shall be conducted to verify the 
working limits, and installation parameters of the 
system and its components as described in the 
manufacturer’s design and installation manual. 


7.1.4 Fire Hazard Classification 


a) The fire hazard shall be classified by both 
the combustible loading and fuel type. The 
combustible loading shall be evaluated in terms of 
amount and anticipated fire growth rate. 


1) Combustible loading — A fire hazard analysis 
shall be conducted to determine both the 
performance level of the water mist system 
and the protection needs of the hazard. The fire 
hazard shall be based on the fuel type, quantity 
of the fuel present (combustible loading) and 
anticipated fire growth rate. 


2) Fuel type — Overall fire hazard is directly 
related to the type and quantity of the fuel 
present in a space. The ease of ignition/re- 
ignition of the fuel, the fire growth rate and the 
difficulty of achieving control, suppression, 
extinguishment or any combination thereof, 
shall be considered when selecting or designing 
a water mist system. 


b) Class A Fires 


Fuel loading and configuration shall be considered 
when selecting/designing a system to protect 
a space or area containing class A materials. 
Consideration shall be given to the potential for 


IS 15519 : 2020 


deep seated fires as well as to the potential for 
smoldering fires. 


Class B Fires 


The hazard associated with Class B fires is related 
primarily to the fuel loading, fuel configuration, 
flash point and burning rate of the fuel. Pre-burn 
time also affects the overall characteristics of the 
fire. Class B fires are grouped into two categories 
namely, two-dimensional pool fires and three- 
dimensional spray and running fuel fires. The 
parameters associated with each category are as 
follows: 


c) 


1) Two-dimensional fires — Fuel loading and 
configuration, fuel flashpoint, and pre-burn 
time pool/spill size. 

2) Three-dimensional fires — Fuel loading and 
configuration, fuel flashpoint, pre-burn time; 
cascade/running fuel fires, fuel flow rate, fire 
configuration; spray fires, fuel line pressure, 
fuel spray angle, fuel spray orientation and re- 
ignition. 

d) Class C fires electrical conductivity of water and 

water mist shall be addressed when considering 

applications where the primary fire is a Class C 

fire. 


7.1.5 Combination of Fires 


Combination in fuel loadings and hazards shall be 
addressed. 


7.1.6 The location of fuel in the space shall be 
considered when selecting and designing a water mist 
system including the following: 

a) Fuel located at higher elevations in the space, 

b) Fuel located in close proximity to vent openings, 

c) Fuel located in the corners of the space, and 

d) Fuel stacked against walls. 


7.2 Protected Hazard Features 


Water mist systems are intended for the protection 
of areas in buildings, based on the characterization 
of the occupancy fire hazard, or for the protection of 
compartments or specific objects that are characterized 
by the compartment features and/or object fire hazards. 


7.2.1 Area Classification 


Systems to be designed for area protection shall be 
characterized by the classification of the occupancy 
that is most likely performed in the area. 


7.2.2 Compartment Variable 


Compartment characteristics shall include at least 
the compartment geometry, the openings, if any, the 
ventilation (natural/ forced). Special consideration 
shall be given to the degree of obstruction and the 


10 


potential shielding of the fire location that can be 
encountered. Floor area, enclosure volume, ceiling 
height, ventilation conditions and the like shall be 
considered when designing a system in regard to nozzle 
location, system flow rate and the total water usage of 
the system. 


7.2.3 Fire Hazard Variable 


The fire hazard for the compartment/object protection 
shall be classified according to the combustible loading 
and the fuel type. The combustible loading shall be 
evaluated in terms of amount and anticipated fire 
growth rate. 


7.2.4 Compartment Features 


Systems to be designed for compartment/object 
protection shall be characterized by compartment/ 
object variables as well as fire hazard variables. 


7.3 Ventilation 


Ventilation considerations shall include both natural 
and forced ventilation parameters. 


7.3.1 Natural Ventilation 


The number, size and location of the openings in the 
space (for example, the door and window) shall be 
addressed in the design and installation of the system. 
In some cases, special precautions are necessary 
to minimize the effects of these openings. These 
precautions include, but are not limited to, automatic 
door closures and water mist curtains. 


7.3.2 Forced Ventilation 


The effect of the air handling system in the protected 
area shall be considered in the design and installation. 
The system shall shut down prior to system activation, 
however, if it can be demonstrated that the air-handling 
system is not detrimental to the performance of the 
water mist system or has been compensated for, it may 
continue to operate. 


NOTE — Natural ventilation or openings in the enclosure allow 
the hot gases to exhaust mist from the enclosure, decreasing the 
system’s extinguishing potential in total area protection. The 
flow of gases in or out of the enclosure, or when air handling 
equipment is left running, can affect the mixing characteristics 
of the system and may require additional water mist nozzles 
to compensate for such conditions. Prior to or simultaneously 
with the discharge of the system, provision should be made 
for the closing of doors and dampers, and the shutdown of 
electrical equipment. 


7.4 Design Guidelines for Water Mist Sprinkler 
Systems (Automatic/Wet Pipe Systems 


7.4.1 It is the designer responsibility to match the area/ 
compartment/object fire hazard characteristics and 
the listing of the successfully passed fire tests of the 
proposed water mist system (see 7.2). 


7.4.2 Extent of Protection 


Generally, water mist sprinkler protection shall be 
considered for the entire area within building(s) or 
plant(s), but need not be provided in the following 
areas: 


a) Stairs, spaces below stair headings (other than 
rooms above a stair) and lift well. 

b) Washrooms, toilets and water closets (but not 

cloakrooms). 

c) Bathrooms fitted with doors having a floor area of 

less than 5.1 m?. 

d) Cupboards and pantries fitted with doors having a 

floor area of less than 2 m’. 

e) Rooms or compartments containing electric 

power distribution apparatus, such as switchgear 


and dry type transformers, and used for no other 
purpose(s). 


7.4.2.1 A building or storey segregated from the water 
mist protected building by fire walls of not less than 
240 min fire resistance in which each opening is 
protected by two doors (arranged in series) or fire 
shutters each of not less than 120 min fire resistance. 


7.4.3 Account shall be taken of possible interaction 
between water mist sprinkler systems and other fire 
protection measures. Examples of possible adverse 
interactions between water mist sprinkler protection 
and other fire protection measures are: 


a) Water damage to an inadequately shielded fire 
alarm control panel in a water mist sprinkler 
protected area with consequent possible failure of 
the fire alarm system. 


b) Operation or failure of smoke detectors in zones 
adjacent to one in which water discharge has taken 
place because of the water spray mist travelling to 
adjacent zones. 


Such possible interactions need careful considerations. 


7.4.4 Water mist systems shall meet the following 
criteria. 


7.4.4.1 Overall criteria 


Nozzles shall be positioned and oriented in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s design and installation manual, 
and shall meet the established design parameters, such 
as: 

a) Specific hazards and protection objectives 

minimum and maximum heights; 
b) Nozzle type and unique identification; 
c) Number of operating nozzles; 


d) Minimum and maximum distances between 
nozzles; 


e) Minimum and maximum distances from nozzles 
to walls; 


11 


IS 15519 : 2020 


Maximum coverage area per nozzle; 


Minimum flow rate characteristics for each 
nozzle; 


Maximum distance between nozzle and diffusers; 
Location of nozzles with regard to obstructions; 


Positioning of nozzles with regard to ceiling (flat, 
pitched or curved); 


m) Minimum and maximum operating nozzle 
pressures; 


n) Nozzle protection; 


p) Nozzle ceiling plates used with flush, recessed or 
concealed water mist nozzles; 


Minimum and maximum water flow rates and 
water pressures at the nozzles; 


q) 


Design pressure [pumped systems (pressure 
versus time curve), self-contained systems; 


Additive requirements, where applicable, 
allowable range of nozzle orientation angle from 
vertically down; 


Classification of automatic nozzle thermal 
response characteristics as fast, special or standard 
response; and 


t) 


u) Maximum compartment volume, if applicable. 


7.4.4.2 These design parameters can be used in the 
successful fire tests for the type of hazard under design 
consideration. 


a) Due to the large variety of different types of 
water mist systems and hazard applications, 
some parameters mainly related to the pressure 
and flow rate cannot be provided in a prescriptive 
manner by single numbers. In such cases, 
sufficient and relevant design information shall 
be provided to enable the reproduction of the 
system as tested. 


b) Minimum discharge pressure — The minimum 
discharge pressure, for water (and atomizing 
media, where applicable) shall be complied with 
at all discharge devices in the operating area, 
including the hydraulically most remote ones, for 
the entire duration of the system. Where different 
hazard classifications are protected by the same 
system, the minimum pressure per each different 
discharge device shall be met. 


Operating area— The minimum number ofnozzles 
to be considered simultaneously discharging over 
the operating area shall be indicated in the listing 
of the system for the specified hazard classification 
based on actual performance tests. 

d) Single area protected by water mist systems shall 
not exceed 10 000 m? or in other words, area 
served by a single control valve shall not exceed 
10 000 m’. 


IS 15519 : 2020 


7.5 Water Mist Nozzles 


7.5.1 Automatic Nozzles 


All nozzles shall be made from corrosion resistant 
material. Consideration shall be given to the effects 
of corrosive atmospheres, vibration and intended use 
when materials are chosen. Where a coating is used, 
it shall be applied by the nozzle manufacturer and the 
coated nozzle shall be approved. 


Nozzles with glass bulb type heat responsive elements 
shall be equipped with protective covers that are designed 
to remain in place during installation and be removed 
before the spray nozzle system is placed in service. 


Nozzles shall be selected, spaced and installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s design and 
installation manual based on successful fire tests taking 
also into account the following additional parameters: 


a) Distance from walls and other obstructions, 
installation of nozzles to compensate for 
obstructions and installation around openings; and 


b) Minimum allowed distance from fire load distance 
below ceilings. 


Obstruction to discharge pattern of water mist nozzles 
shall be minimized when defining the interaction 
between water mist sprinkler nozzles and obstructions 
located below the nozzles, 


The sensitivity and discharge pattern of the water mist 
nozzles shall not be adversely affected by obstructions, 
such as beams, light fittings, other nozzles, etc. 


The general rule of limiting the size of the obstruction 
to one third of the distance from the nozzle shall be 
followed where different indications are not given. 


Where external clogging is likely, discharge nozzles 
shall be provided with frangible discs, blow-off caps or 
other suitable devices. These devices shall provide an 
unobstructed opening upon system operation and shall 
be arranged so that they cannot injure personnel 


A nozzle shall be provided with a strainer or filter 
constructed from corrosion resistant materials. The 
maximum dimension of an opening in the strainer or 
filter shall not exceed 80 percent of the smallest orifice 
diameter being protected. 


Spare nozzles may be stocked based on the quality 
of nozzles used. The stock of spare, individual and 
thermally activated nozzles shall include all types and 
ratings installed for the following criteria: 


1) For systems having less than 50 : 3 (min ) 
nozzles 

2) For systems having 50 to 300 : 10 (min) 
nozzles 

3) For systems having 301 to 1 000 : 15 (min) 
nozzles 

4) For systems having over 1 000 : 30 (min) 


nozzles 


12 


Automatic nozzles shall be equipped with a heat 
sensitive device designed to react at a pre-determined 
nominal release temperature and colour coded as 
indicated below. 


The temperature rating of the water mist nozzles shall 
be closest to (at least 30°C greater than) the highest 
anticipated ambient temperature of the location and 
within a range of 79°C to 100°C when installed under 
glazed roofs. 


Nozzles shall be permanently marked to identify the 
manufacturer, model number, year of manufacturing, 
the approval mark(s), if any, and/or component 
identification. Nozzles subjected to mechanical 
damage shall be protected with guards. Guards shall 
not significantly reduce the effectiveness of the nozzle. 


Automatic nozzles shall be equipped with a blow-off 
cap or other protective device, if the environment 
is prone to allow clogging of the exit port(s) by 
foreign material. These devices shall provide an 
unobstructed opening upon system operation and 
shall be arranged in such a way as to prevent injury 
of the personnel. 


Water mist nozzles shall have quick response thermal 
sensitivity rating. Also any water mist nozzle removed 
from the installation shall be discarded and only new 
nozzles shall be used. 


Escutcheons used in a recessed or flush type nozzle 
installation shall be a part of a listed nozzle assembly. 
Cover plates used with concealed nozzles shall also be 
a part of listed assembly. 


In case of an occupancy change involving temperature 
change, nozzles shall be changed accordingly. 


Standard temperature ratings, classifications and colour 
coding of automatic nozzles shall be as per Table 1. 


7.5.2 Open Nozzles 


All nozzles shall be made from corrosion resistant 
materials. Consideration shall be given to the effects 
of corrosive atmospheres, vibration and intended use 
when materials are chosen. Where a coating is used, 
it shall be applied by the nozzle manufacturer and the 
coated nozzle shall be approved. 


Open nozzles shall be equipped with a blow-off cap or 
other protective device, if the environment is prone to 
allow clogging of the exit port(s) by foreign material. 
These devices shall provide an unobstructed opening 
upon system operation and shall be arranged in such a 
way as to prevent injury of the personnel. 


Spare water mist nozzles shall be available in 
accordance with 7.5.1. 


Nozzles shall be selected, spaced, and installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s design and 
installation manual based on successful fire tests taking 
also into account its distance from walls and other 
obstructions installation of nozzles to compensate for 
obstructions, installation around openings, minimum 


IS 15519 : 2020 


Table 1 Temperature Range and Colour Coding of Automatic Nozzles 
( Clause 7.5.1 ) 


Sl Maximum Ambient Nozzle Temperature Temperature Nozzle 
No. Temperature 2c Class Colour 
mG 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 38 57-77 Ordinary 57 Orange 
68 Red 
ii) 66 79-107 Intermediate 79 Yellow 
93 Green 
iii) 107 121-149 High Blue 
iv) 149 163-191 Extra high Purple 
v) 191 204-246 Very extra high Black 
vi) 246 260-302 Ultra high Black 
vii) 329 343 Ultra high Black 


allowed distance from fire load, uninterrupted spray 
pattern, etc. 


Nozzles shall be provided with a strainer or filter 
constructed from corrosion resistant material. The 
maximum dimension of an opening in the strainer or 
filter shall not exceed 80 percent of the smallest orifice 
diameter being protected. 


7.6 Design Guidelines for Deluge Systems 


7.6.1 Water mist deluge systems are intended for the 
protection of fire hazards in compartments. 


7.6.2 Types of Compartment Protection Systems 


According to the application characteristics the deluge 
water mist systems are classified further as: 


a) Local application systems, 
b) Volume protection systems, and 
c) Zoned protection systems. 


Compartment protection water mist systems can be 
either manually or automatically activated as agreed to 
between the user and the authority. 


Local application systems shall be tested for the 
associated hazard class selected and for the main 
protection objective/objectives of the applications 
concerned. Local application systems in multiple 
hazard areas, where protection for individual objects 
is foreseen, shall be suitable for all associated hazards 
present in the area. 


Volume protection systems shall be tested for all 
hazards expected to be present in the volume. Volume 
protection systems to be installed in a multiple hazard 
application shall be tested and approved for all hazards 
present in the volume. Where the spread of fire is likely 
to involve two or more enclosed volumetric spaces, 
adjacent fire hazards shall be taken into account and the 
water mist system shall be designed for the combined 
hazard. 


13 


Zoned systems shall be tested for all hazards expected 
to be present in each zone but designed for the zone 
having largest volume. Zoned systems designed for 
more than one zone shall be tested and approved for 
all present hazards in the zones. Where the spread of 
fire is likely to involve two or more zones, adjacent fire 
hazards shall be taken into account and the water mist 
system shall be designed for the combined hazards. 


7.6.3 Nozzles shall be selected, spaced and installed in 
accordance with the requirements defined in 7.5 and 
with the manufacturer’s design and installation manual 
based on successful fire tests taking also into account 
the following additional parameters: 


a) Type of hazard, 
b) Distance to the protected object, and 


c) Nozzle orientation. 
7.6.4 Air Velocity, Openings and Ventilation 


7.6.4.1 Air velocity, openings and ventilation 
shall be taken into account in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions based on test results. 


7.6.4.2 Wherever possible, the ventilation system shall 
be shut down before the system operates. In those cases 
where this is not possible or desirable, the air velocity 
and/or total leakage area shall be within the limits 
specified by the manufacturer on the basis of tests. 


7.6.5 Automatic Shut-down 


7.6.5.1 During a fire incident, provision shall be made 
to stop any supply of combustible substances as part 
of the shutdown emergency procedures (product and 
raw materials feed) with the exception of the minimum 
supply for emergency running systems. This point shall 
also be taken into consideration when specifying the 
operating period. 


7.6.5.2 Normally, power supplies to the equipment in 
the affected area shall be switched offupon activation of 


IS 15519 : 2020 


the system or detection of a fire. Minimum supplies for 
emergency running systems are an exception. Whereas 
this is not possible for process reasons, provisions shall 
be taken in the design of system. 


7.6.6 Activation and Control Mechanism for Deluge 
Systems 


7.6.6.1 General 


Control and actuation systems shall be electrical, 
pneumatic, mechanical, or any combination of these. 
Such systems shall be either manual only or automatic 
with manual over-ride in accordance with IS 15493. 


7.6.6.2 Operating devices, such as pumps, storage 
container, discharge valves, isolation and discharge 
controls and ancillaries shall incorporate manual reset 
facilities. Operation of any container release device 
shall cause operation of all containers required for that 
particular risk. All devices shall be located, installed 
and suitably protected so that they are not subject to 
mechanical, chemical or other damage which may 
impede their correct operation. 


7.6.6.3 Control and indicating equipment automatic 
water mist deluge systems, shall comply with IS 2189. 
A system is solely designed for manual operation, the 
control and indicating equipment shall comply with the 
system listing. 


7.6.6.4 Audible alarms and visible warning devices 
shall be provided as follows: 


a) Fire alarm— In systems that require more than one 
detector to operate before the extinguishing agent 
is discharged, a visible indication appropriate to 
the risk shall light and the alert tone shall sound 
immediately upon receipt of any alarm. 


b) Do not enter and evacuate — Where it is required 
that the protected area be evacuated before system 
discharge, the initiation of the discharge sequence 
shall cause these visual devices to illuminate and 
activate the audible ‘evacuate’ tone continue after 
extinguishant discharge until the risk is made safe. 

c) System inoperative — Any condition that inhibits 

the automatic discharge of the system shall cause 

this visual indicator to illuminate. Some of such 
conditions are: 


1) Operation of maintenance isolation switch; 
2) Fault in actuation system; 
3) Operation of lock-off valve (where fitted); 


4) Operation of manual inhibit switch (where 
fitted); and 


5) Isolation or fault on any part of the fire 
detection system. 


Automatic mechanical release systems shall employ 
suitable means such as cables and, where required, 
drop weights. The control cables shall be run within 
protective tubes with free turning corner pulleys at 


14 


all changes of direction. Mechanical control shall 
be capable of being tested periodically for proper 
operation. Where fusible links are used, they shall 
conform to relevant standards. 


Manual mechanical release shall be protected from 
accidental operation. The release shall require a push 
or pull of not more than 110 N and a movement of not 
more than 150 mm to ensure operation. 


Pneumatic release systems may be operated 
pneumatically by gas pressure from a stored or 
continuous source. Alternatively, release systems may 
be operated directly from gas-pressure-generating heat 
detection systems. All pneumatic systems shall be 
capable of being tested periodically for proper operation. 


In the case of systems using stored pressure water 
containers, gas pressure from the storage containers 
may be used as a source of energy for system release. 
Alternatively, pressure from separate pilot gas 
containers may be used. 


Where gas pressure from pilot containers is used for 
the release of multiple water containers, the pilot gas 
quantity and flow rate shall be adequate to release 
simultaneously all of the containers for that risk. 
Pilot gas containers that are not fitted with a pressure 
indicating device shall be duplicated. The pilot gas 
shall be used solely for actuating the system. 


7.7 Water and Atomizing Gas Supply Design 


7.7.1 Water mist systems shall have at least one 
automatic supply of water and atomizing media, where 
required, to operate the system at the correct pressure, 
flow and duration. 


7.7.2 Water flow (and atomizing media where required) 
shall be such to supply the system at the maximum 
required flow. 


7.7.3 The flow required for water mist sprinkler 
systems shall be based on the nominal flow rate of the 
hydraulically most favourable nozzles in the operating 
area, or on the number of nozzles specified to operate 
simultaneously, whichever is higher. The amount of 
atomizing gas, where required, shall be sufficient for 
the above mentioned total flow. 


7.7.4 The flow required for deluge water mist systems 
shall be based on the supply of the largest single hazard 
or group of hazards to be protected simultaneously. 
The amount of atomizing gas, where required, shall be 
sufficient for the above mentioned total flow. 


7.7.5 The maximum and minimum pressure of the 
water supply and atomizing gas, where required, shall 
be within the approved limits of operating pressure for 
the nozzles specified by the manufacturer taking into 
account both the hydrostatic pressure difference and the 
pipe hydraulic pressure loss. 


7.8 Water and Propellant/Atomizing Gas Supply 
Design 


7.8.1 Water mist systems shall have at least one 
automatic supply of water and propellant/atomizing 
media, where required, to operate the system at the 
correct pressure, flow and duration. 


7.8.2 Water and propellant/atomizing media, where 
required, shall be such to supply the system at the 
maximum required flow. 


7.8.3 The flow required for the water mist sprinkler 
systems shall be based on the nominal flow rate of the 
hydraulically most favourable nozzles in the operating 
area, or on the number of nozzles specified to operate 
simultaneously, whichever is higher. The amount of 
atomizing gas, where required, shall be sufficient for 
the above mentioned total flow. 


7.8.4 The flow required for the deluge water mist 
systems shall be based on the largest single hazard or 
group of hazards to be protected simultaneously. The 
amount of atomizing gas, where required, shall be 
sufficient for the above mentioned total flow. 


7.8.5 The maximum and minimum pressure of the 
water supply and atomizing gas, where required, shall 
be within the approved limits of operating pressure for 
the nozzles specified by the manufacturer taking into 
account both the hydrostatic pressure difference and the 
pipe hydraulic pressure loss. 


7.9 Hydraulic Calculations 


7.9.1 Design of water mist systems shall be validated 
by hydraulic calculations. System flow calculations 
procedures shall be in accordance with: 


a) Darcy-Weisbach method for systems designed for 
intermediate and high pressures, single fluid and 
single liquid phase systems; 

b) Hazen-Williams method for low pressure systems; 
and 


c) Other approved procedures for propellant gas or 
atomizing media. 


NOTE — The procedures and protocols for the calculations 
shall be as per software recognized and certified by approved 
national/international agencies. 


7.9.2 For single and twin fluid systems, hydraulic 
calculations shall be based on flow rate and pressure (as 
specified by the manufacturer and as determined during 
the tests) on a wetting over 140 m? most remote area 
or simultaneous operation of 9 water mist sprinklers, 
whichever is greater. For water mist deluge systems, 
hydraulic calculations shall be based on flow rate 
and pressure (as specified by the manufacturer and as 
determined during the tests). 


15 


IS 15519 : 2020 


7.9.3 For dry and pre-action systems, water delivery 
delay associated with the water transit time from 
the water supply valve to the most remote nozzle 
shall be calculated and confirmed to be less than the 
manufacturer’s stated maximum water delivery time. 
In no case shall the water delivery time exceed 60 s. 


7.10 Water Mist Systems Supply 


7.10.1 Mist System with Pumping Arrangements 


Pumped systems are systems with a continuous supply 
with a specified minimum duration and pressure, for 
example, systems connected to a public water main, 
systems supplied by a water reservoir with one or more 
pumps, which may be electric, diesel or pneumatically 
driven, etc, with or without an atomizing/propelling 
agent supply. A pumped system can be supplied 
by a public or private water main either directly or 
supplemented by a water main booster pump set. 


7.10.2 Mist Systems (Self-Contained) 


Systems supplied by a limited amount of water and/ 
or atomizing/propelling media contained in specific 
containers or cylinders, known as ‘self-contained 
systems’, characterized by a specified duration of the 
discharge. 


A self-contained system has no connection to an 
external water source and typically comprises a set of 
cylinders or a skid mounted pressure tank, connected 
to a source of gaseous stored pressure (for example, 
pressurized air or inert gas cylinders) and does not 
require any external power source to operate. 


7.11 Mist System with Pumping Arrangements 


7.11.1 Pumps used in water mist systems are usually 
of centrifugal or positive displacement type although 
the continuous developing technology of water mist 
systems may propose different solutions. Centrifugal 
pumps are used in low pressure and medium pressure 
systems, whereas positive displacement pumps are 
used in medium and high pressure systems. 


7.11.2 Pump sets supplying water mist systems shall 
be designed to start both automatically and manually, 
though they shall be always in ‘auto’ mode. 


7.11.3 The rated duty of the pump set shall be a function 
of the most unfavourable or the most favourable area 
curve or of the most demanding deluge system. When 
measured at the supplier’s test facility, the pump set 
shall provide: 


a) A pressure at least 10 percent higher than that 
required for the most demanding system for 
centrifugal pump, 

b) A flow at least 10 percent higher than that required 
for the most demanding system for positive 
displacement pumps, and 


IS 15519 : 2020 


c) Pump set shall also be capable of providing 
the flow and pressure of the most unfavorable 
situation within the network. 


7.11.4 Installation of pumps, type of pumps and 
prime movers, other components within the pump 
room like piping, valves, gauges, etc, pump room 
location and electrification of motorized pumps, etc, 
shall be governed by various provisions in 7. These 
requirements, by and large, remain the same for 
sprinkler installation as prescribed in 9 of IS 15105. 


7.11.5 Pumps Operation 


Pump shall be automatic in operation that is, when the 
pressure in the system falls due to operation of water 
mist nozzle(s), pump shall be triggered by pressure 
switches or pressure sensing devices or pressure 
transducers or any other recognised method. The auto 
starting mechanism shall be evaluated and certified by 
recognised national/international agencies as a part of 
approval of the water mist system. 


Means shall also be provided to check and test the pump 
set starting with the type of auto-start arrangement as 
above without causing disturbance to the pressurized 
system. 


The first pump set shall start automatically when the 
pressure in the system falls to a value that shall be 
indicated in the manufacturer design and installation 
manual or as decided earlier. 


Where two pump sets are installed, the second one 
shall also start automatically as the first one (in case 
minimum pressure is not reached) and a delay shall be 
provided so as to avoid simultaneous starting of both 
units. When more pumps are required, there shall be 
a sequential start (pre-set pressure gradient) of each 
pump as above. Once the pump set has started, it shall 
continue to run until stopped manually. 


7.12 Mist Systems (Self-Contained) Arrangements 
7.12.1 Pressurized Storage Arrangements 


7.12.1.1 The arrangement of pressurized storage 
containers and accessories for either water or gas shall 
be as follows: 


a) Storage containers shall be installed, mounted 
and braced in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
listing. 

b) Containers and accessories shall be located and 

arranged so that inspection, testing, recharging and 

other maintenance are facilitated, and interruption 
to protection is kept to a minimum. 


ma 


c 


wa 


Storage containers shall be located as close as 
possible to the hazard or within the hazards 
they protect and shall not be exposed to fire or 
mechanical damage in a manner that affects 
performance. 


16 


d) Containers should be located outside of and as near 
as practicable to, the risk. Containers protecting 
a single risk can be located within the protected 
area they serve only if sited to minimize the risk 
of exposure to fire and explosion. 


e 


wm 


Storage temperature should not exceed 55°C nor 
be less than 4°C, unless the system is designed 
for operation in storage temperatures outside this 
range. External heating or cooling may be used to 
keep the temperature within the desired range. 


Containers shall be so located that they are 
not subject to severe weather conditions or to 
mechanical, chemical or other damage. Where 
excessive climatic or mechanical exposures are 
expected, suitable guards or enclosures shall be 
provided. 

g) Reliable means shall be provided to indicate the 
pressure in refillable pressurized gas containers. 


h) Water cylinders shall have special linings. 


j) Water cylinders shall be filled with demineralized 
water. 


7.12.1.2 Atomization gas for twin fluid systems 


Atomizing gas essential to the generation of water mist 
shall be taken from a dedicated source and shall comply 
with the following: 


a) Atomizing gas shall be supervised for high and 
low pressure. 


b) Regulators controlling the supply of water and 
atomizing gas shall be listed for the intended 
purpose. 

c) Acheck valve or other means shall be installed in 
the piping at the supply point to every nozzle to 
prevent the entrance of water into the atomizing 
gas. 


d) Filters or other means to protect nozzles from 
obstructions shall be provided. 


e) Where used, air compressors shall be a dedicated 
source and shall be listed for use on fire protection 
systems. 


f) Electrically driven compressors used as a 
dedicated supply shall be connected to the 
emergency supply. 


7.13 Water Supply 


7.13.1 The water supply for the system shall preferably 
use potable water. Where sea water is used, provisions 
shall be made to allow thorough flushing of the system 
piping with fresh water after a functioning. Other 
sources can also be used, provided they are treated 
from time-to-time to remove all suspended matters and 
impurities. 


7.13.2 All practical steps shall be taken to ensure the 
availability and reliability of water supplies. A water 


supply shall not be affected by possible frost conditions, 
drought, flooding or any other conditions that could 
reduce the flow or effective capacity or render the 
supply inoperative including tampering. 


7.13.3 In case of a reliable inflow into the tank(s), total 
capacity required can be reduced by 15 min inflow 
from the source. 


7.13.4 Fill-line for the water shall be routed through 
<100 um filter (as a part of the supply) and it is 
preferable to keep the chloride content within 50 ppm. 


7.13.5 Water storage shall be constantly supervised, 
cleaned and flushed, whenever required. Cleanliness 
shall be maintained always. 


7.13.6 Each pump driven mist system arrangement is 
configured to provide the total suppressant requirement 
typically for 60 min of water to the most remote nine 
water mist nozzles (other than for expellant cylinder 
band) or 140 m? area, whichever is greater. For deluge 
systems, water shall be available for 60 min based on 
pressure/flow requirements arrived from hydraulic 
calculations. 


7.13.7 Water mist systems shall be connected to one 
or more of the following types of water supplies 
depending upon the size and nature of the occupancy 
under protection: 


a) Pressure tank or vessel; 
b) Stored pressure cylinders; 


c) Automatic fire pump(s) drawing water from a 
dedicated water tank(s); 


d) Elevated tanks; and 


e) Separate break tanks as per manufacturer’s 
specification and approval limitations. 


7.13.8 If water for the mist system is stored in a 
common tank along with other fire fighting facilities 
like hydrant or sprinkler systems, capacity of the tank 
shall be equivalent to sum total of water requirements 
for all such systems. 


7.13.9 If water for the mist system as well as domestic 
supply is stored in the same tank, the suction puddle 
for the domestic pumps shall be connected at a 
height so that, supply for the mist system shall not be 
exhausted. 


7.13.10 Separate and dedicated tank (break tank) can 
also be provided for the water mist system subject to 
compliance with 7.13.1 and 7.13.5. Also permanently 
connected water fill-in arrangements shall be available 
for this tank. 


7.13.11 Water storage facilities shall otherwise comply 
with various provisions (as applicable) stated in 
IS 15105. 


17 


IS 15519 : 2020 


8 PUMPSETS 


8.1 General Requirements 


8.1.1 Exclusive pumpsets shall be used for the water 
mist systems. They shall be of the approved type out of 
the following: 


a) Electric motor driven centrifugal pumps; 

b) Compression ignition engine driven centrifugal 
pumps; and 

c) Positive displacement pumps. 


In all the above cases, pumps shall be automatic in 
action. 


8.1.2 Pumps used in water mist systems are usually 
of centrifugal or positive displacement type although 
the continuous developing technology of water mist 
systems may propose different solutions. Centrifugal 
pumps are used in low pressure and medium pressure 
systems, whereas positive displacement pumps are 
used in medium and high pressure systems. 


8.1.3 Parts of pumps like impeller, shaft sleeve, wearing 
ring, etc, shall be of non-corrosive metal, preferably 
brass or bronze. 


8.1.4 Where sea water is used, or where the quality of 
water necessitates use of special metals and alloys, the 
use of such metals and alloys shall be insisted upon. 


8.1.5 The capacity of pump(s) shall depend on the 
type of hazard protected and flow requirements as 
per calculations of water demand for given system. 
Electrical or diesel-driven pumps supplying water mist 
systems shall be of sufficient capacity to exceed both the 
system flow rate and pressure demands as determined 
by hydraulic calculations by a minimum of 10 percent 
for both flow and pressure for centrifugal pumps, and 
10 percent for flow in case of positive displacement 
pumps (see 7.11.3). 


8.1.6 Where water mist systems are provided for 
several buildings from a central pump house through 
a common delivery manifold, one additional pump of 
similar capacity shall be provided as a standby in case 
the number of main pumps is less than three. Where 
separate systems are provided for each building also, 
one standby pump of similar capacity shall be provided 
for each system in addition to the main pump(s) in case 
the number of main pumps is less than three. 
NOTE — Emergency power shall be mandatory for the pumps 
from two different sources like captive generation plant or 
dedicated diesel generator supply, capable of running the 
aggregate installed pumping capacity. 


8.1.7 Make-up pumps of adequate capacity shall be 
provided for pre-filling of the entire pipeline system. 


8.1.8 Each pump shall be provided with a pressure 
gauge on the delivery side between the pump and the 


IS 15519 : 2020 


non-return valve, and a plate giving the delivery head, 
capacity and the number of revolutions per minute. 
Also separate pressure gauge shall be provided on 
common manifold. 


8.1.9 Each pump shall be provided with independent 
suction pipe flooded suction and further provided with 
sluice or cut off valves. The Net Positive Suction Head 
(NPSH) available at site exceeds the required NPSH 
by at least 1 m at 110 percent of the duty point as 
applicable in terms of the manufacturer’s curves and 
approval limitations, if any. 


8.1.10 Suction piping shall be laid either horizontal 
or with a continuous slight rise towards the pump to 
avoid the possibility of air locks forming in the pipe. 
No butterfly valves are allowable in suction pipelines. 


8.1.11 Pumps shall not be installed in the open. The pump 
room shall be so located as to be both easily accessible 
and where any falling masonry and the like from other 
buildings occasioned by fire and other causes, cannot 
damage the pump room. Normally, pump rooms shall 
be located 6 m away from all surrounding buildings 
and overhead structures. Where this is not feasible, 
they may be attached to a building provided a fire 
wall having a rating of at least 120 min is constructed 
between the pump room and the attached building, the 
roof of the pump room is of RCC construction at least 
100 mm thick and access to the pump room is from the 
outside. The pump rooms shall normally have brick/ 
concrete walls and non-combustible roof with adequate 
lighting, ventilation and drainage arrangements. 

NOTE — The pump room shall be located 30 m clear of the 

equipment/vessels handling or storing flammable liquids/ 

solvents and/or gases. 
8.1.12 In case of twin fluid systems, quantity of gas 
required to drive the pump shall be sufficient to drive 
the pump for duration as specified in the manufacturer’s 
installation and design manual. 


8.2 Electrically Driven Pumps 


8.2.1 The sub-stations and/or DG houses supplying 
power to the fire pumps shall be of incombustible 
construction and shall be located at least 6 m away from 
all surrounding buildings. Where this is not feasible, all 
door and window openings of the surrounding buildings 
within 6 m of the sub-stations and/or DG houses shall 
be protected by single fire door and 6 mm thick wired 
glass in steel framework, respectively. Likewise, roof 
eaves, if any of the surrounding buildings falling within 
6 m of the sub-station(s) and/or DG houses shall be cut 
and wall raised as a parapet. The above provision shall 
also apply when the sub-station(s) and/or DG houses 
are within 6 m of each other. 


8.2.2 Where the sub-stations and/or DG houses are 
attached to buildings, a fire wall having a rating of 
at least 120 min shall be constructed to segregate the 


18 


sub-station(s) and/or DG house(s) from the attached 
buildings; and where the attached building is storeyed, 
the roof of the sub-station(s) and/or DG houses shall 
be of RCC construction of at least 100 mm thickness. 


8.2.3 Transformer cubicles inside these sub-stations 
shall be separated from HT/LT cubicles and from each 
other by blank brick/stone/concrete walls of 355 mm 
thickness or of RCC of 200 mm with door openings, 
if any, therein being protected by single fire door with 
fire rating of at least 120 min. The sub-stations and DG 
houses shall also be separated from each other as above. 


8.2.4 Transformers installed outdoors, which are 
supplying power to fire pump(s), shall also be located 
at least 6 m away from all the surrounding buildings 
(including substations and/or DG houses). Where this 
is not feasible, all door and window openings of the 
surrounding buildings (including sub-stations and/or 
DG houses) within 6 m of the of the transformers shall 
be protected by single fire doors and 6 mm thick wired 
glass in steel framework, respectively. Likewise, roof 
eaves, if any of the surrounding buildings falling within 
6 m of the transformers shall be cut and wall raised as a 
parapet. Blast walls of bricks/stone/concrete blocks of 
355 mm thickness or of RCC of 200 mm thickness shall 
be constructed between two transformers and these 
walls shall be extended horizontally by 600 mm beyond 
the extremities of the transformers and vertically 
600 mm above the highest point of the transformers. 


NOTE — High hazard (B) occupancies, sub-stations supplying 
power to fire pumps shall, in addition to complying with the 
above provisions, be located 30 m clear of all equipment where 
flammable fluids having a flash point below 65°C are handled 
and/or stored. 


8.2.5 Overhead feeders to sub-stations supplying power 
to the fire pumps are not permitted within a horizontal 
distance of 15 m of any process building/plant or tanks 
containing flammable liquids 6 m of any other building 
or tanks containing non-flammable liquids or of storage 
in open. 


8.2.6 In case the feed to such sub-stations is by means 
of underground cables, the cables shall not pass under 
any building or permanent structure. 


8.2.7 Sufficient spare power shall always be available 
to drive pumping set(s) at all times throughout the year. 


8.2.8 The electric supply to the pumping set(s) shall 
be entirely independent of all other equipment in the 
premises, that is, even when the power throughout the 
entire premises is switched off, the supply to the pump 
shall continue to be available uninterrupted. This can be 
achieved by taking the connection for the pump(s) from 
the incoming side of the main LT breaker. However, in 
cases where two or more transformers and/or sources 
of supply are connected to a common bus bar or where 
there is provision of a bus coupler between the bus bar 


sections, the connection may be taken through the bus 
bars. 


8.2.9 The fire pump circuit shall be protected at the 
origin by an automatic circuit breaker so set as to 
permit the motor to be overloaded during an emergency 
to the maximum limit permissible by the manufacturer. 
Further, the under voltage release/no volt coil of the 
circuit breaker shall be removed. 

NOTE — Where cable lengths are long enough to warrant 


backup protection, authorities may insist on provision for such 
a protection. 


8.2.10 It is recommended that telltale lamps which 
could continuously glow when power is available 
to the fire pump(s) circuit be provided and fixed in a 
prominent position, both in the sub-station and in the 
pump room. 


8.2.11 A direct feeder without any tappings shall be 
laid from the sub-station to the pump house. The feeder 
shall be laid underground and shall not pass under any 
building or permanent structure. 


8.2.12 Where there is more than one source of power 
for the operation of pumping set(s), every electrical 
circuit shall preferably be so designed as to ensure that 
when necessary the set(s) continue to operate without 
the manual operation of an emergency switch. 


8.2.13 The pumping set(s) shall be securely mounted 
on a robust bedplate, if of the horizontal type, and shall 
be free from vibration at all variations of load. 


8.2.14 The rating and design of motors and switchgear 
shall conform to IS/IEC 60947 (Parts 1 to 5). The motor 
shall be of continuous rating type and its ratings shall 
be equivalent to the horse power required to drive the 
pump at 150 percent of its rated discharge in case of 
centrifugal pumps. 


8.2.15 The motor shall be of totally enclosed type or 
drip-proof type, the latter having their air inlets and 
outlets protected with meshed wire panels to exclude 
rodents, reptiles and insects. 


8.2.16 The motor(s) shall be wound for class B 
insulation preferably for class E and the windings 
shall be vacuum impregnated with heat and moisture 
resisting varnish, and preferably glass fibre insulated to 
withstand tropical conditions. 


8.2.17 Motors wound for high tension supplies shall 
have a suitable fixed warming resistance to maintain 
the motor windings in a dry condition at all times and 
particularly under monsoon conditions. The resistance 
shall be connected to the lighting or other equivalent 
circuit. 


8.2.18 Heating apparatus shall also be provided, when 
necessary, for medium tension motor where they, are 


19 


IS 15519 : 2020 


located below ground level, in order to maintain the 
motor windings in a dry condition. Adequate drainage 
arrangements shall also be provided in the pump house 
in such cases. 


8.2.19 The incoming cable to the fire pump room shall 
terminate in an isolating switch fuse unit incorporating 
the HRC fuses and, where, necessary provided with a 
distribution system. 


8.2.20 The starting switchgear for the fire pumps shall 
be suitable for direct on line or star-delta starting but 
other alternative arrangements are subject to prior 
approval of the authorities concerned. It shall also 
incorporate an ammeter with a clear indication of the 
motor full load current. 


NOTE — Remote controlled starting arrangements are subject 
to prior approval of the authorities concerned. 


8.2.21 Cables for motors and switchgears shall be 
armoured or enclosed in heavy gauge screwed steel 
conduit according to conditions. 


8.2.22 It is recommended that the equipment throughout 
be painted fire red (shade No. 536 as per IS 5) and 
suitably marked for identification. 


8.2.23 Necessary spare parts including a set of fuses 
(in a glass fronted box) shall be kept in readiness at all 
times in the pump house. 


8.2.24 The wiring in all installations shall be done in 
accordance with SP 30. 


8.3 Compression Ignition Engine Driven Pumps 


8.3.1 Pump Room 


The pump room shall be artificially heated, if necessary, 
to maintain the temperature of the room above 10°C. 
Adequate ventilation shall be provided for the air 
required for aspiration and to limit the temperature rise 
in the room to 10°C above the ambient temperature 
when the engine is on full load. 


8.3.2 Engine 
The engine shall be, 


a) of compression ignition mechanical direct 
injection type, capable of being started without 
the use of wicks, cartridges, heater plugs or ether, 
at an engine room temperature of 7°C and shall 
accept full load within 15 s from the receipt of the 
signal to start. 


b 


wm 


naturally aspirated, supercharged or turbocharged 
and either air or water cooled. In the case of 
charged air cooling by means of a belt driven fan 
or of a belt driven auxiliary water pump there shall 
be multiple belts such that should half the belts 
break, the remaining belts would be capable of 
driving the fan or pump. 


IS 15519 : 2020 


c) capable of operating continuously on full load at 
the site elevation for a period of 6 h. 


d) provided with an adjustable governor to control 
the engine speed within 10 percent of its rated 
speed under any conditions of load up to the full 
load rating. The governor shall be set to maintain 
the rated pump speed at maximum pump load. 


e) provided with an in-built tachometer to indicate 
the RPM of the engine. 


f) provided with a time totaliser (hour counter). 


Any manual device fitted to the engine which could 
prevent the engine starting shall return automatically to 
the normal position. 


8.3.3 Engines, after correction for altitude and ambient 
temperature shall have bare engine horsepower rating 
equivalent to the higher of the following two values: 


a) 20 percent in excess of the maximum brake 
horsepower required to drive the pump at its duty 
point; or 

b) The brake horsepower required to drive the pump 
at 150 percent of its rated discharge in case of 
centrifugal pumps. 


8.3.4 The coupling between the engine and the pump 
shall allow each unit to be removed without disturbing 
the other. 


8.3.5 Cooling System 
The following cooling systems are acceptable: 


a) Cooling by water from the discharge of fire pump 
(taken off prior to the pump discharge valve) 
direct into the engine cylinder jackets via pressure 
reducing device to limit the applied pressure to a 
safe value as specified by the engine manufacturer. 
The outlet connection from this system shall 
terminate at least 150 mm above the engine water 
outlet pipe and be directed into an open tun dish so 
that the discharge water is visible. 


b 


wm 


A heat exchanger, the raw water being supplied 
from the fire pump discharge (taken off prior 
to the pump discharge valve) via a pressure 
reducing device, if necessary, to limit the applied 
pressure to a safe value as specified by the engine 
manufacturer. The raw water outlet connection 
shall be so designed that the discharged water 
can be readily observed. The water in the closed 
circuits shall not be less than that recommended 
by the engine manufacturer. If the auxiliary pump 
is belt driven there shall be multiple belts so that 
should half the belts break, the remaining belts 
shall be capable of driving the pump. 


c) A frame or engine mounted air cooled radiator 
with a multiple belts driven fan from the engine. 
Even when half the belts are broken, the remaining 
belts shall be capable of driving the fan. The water 


20 


in the closed circuit shall be circulated by means 
of the auxiliary pump driven by the engine and the 
capacity of the closed circuit shall be not less than 
that recommended by the engine manufacturer. 

d) Direct air cooling of the engine by means of 
multiple belts driven fan. When half the belts are 
broken, the remaining belts shall be capable of 
driving the fan. 


NOTE — Incase of systems described above, a failure actuated 
audio-visual alarm shall be incorporated. 


e 


wm 


It is also recommended to provide the cooling 
water supply piping with the following: 


1) Label showing the intended direction of flow; 
2) An indicating manual shut-off valve; 

3) An approved flushing type strainer; 

4) Pressure regulator; 

5) An automatic valve; 

6) Second indicating manual shut-off valve; 


7) Pressure gauge towards the engine after the 
last manual valve; and 


8) Bypass line with manual valves, flush type 
strainer and a pressure regulator around the 
manual shut-off valve, strainer, pressure 
regulator, and automatic valve. 


8.3.6 Air Filtration 


The air intake shall be fitted with the filter of adequate 
size to prevent foreign matter entering the engine. 


8.3.7 Exhaust System 


The exhaust shall be fitted with a suitable silencer 
and the total backpressure shall not exceed the engine 
maker’s recommendation. When the exhaust system 
rises above the engine, means shall be provided to 
prevent any condensate flowing into the engine. 


8.3.8 Engine Shutdown Mechanism 


This shall be manually operated and return automatically 
to the starting position after use. 


8.3.9 Fuel System 


a) Fuel — The engine fuel oil shall be of quality and 
grade specified by engine makers. Sufficient fuel 
shall be kept on hand at all times to run the engine 
on full load for 2h in addition to that in the fuel 
tank. 


b) Fuel tank — The fuel tank shall be of welded 
steel construction relevant to Indian or foreign 
standard for mild steel drums. The tank shall be 
mounted above the engine fuel pump to provide 
a gravity feed unless otherwise recommended by 
the manufacturers. The tank shall be fitted with an 
indicator showing the level of fuel in the tank. The 
capacity of the tank shall be sufficient to allow the 
engine to run on full load for at least 2 h. 


NOTE — There is more than one compression ignition engine 
driven pump set, there shall be separate fuel tank and fuel feed 
pipe for each engine. 


c 


wa 


Fuel feed pipes — Any valve in the fuel feed pipe 
between the fuel tank and the engine shall be 
placed adjacent to the tank and it shall be locked in 
the open position. Pipe joints shall not be soldered 
and plastic tubing shall not be used. 


8.3.10 Auxiliary Equipment 
The following shall be provided: 
a) Sludge and sediment trap, 
b) Fuel level gauge, 
c) An inspection and cleaning hole, 


d) Filter between the fuel tank and fuel pump mounted 
in an accessible position for cleaning, and 


e) Means to enable the entire fuel system to be bled 
of air. 


NOTE — Air relief cocks shall not be used; and screwed plugs 
may be used. 


8.3.11 Starting Mechanism 


Provision shall be made for two separate methods of 
engine starting, namely automatic starting by means of 
a battery powered electric starter motor incorporating 
the axial displacement type of pinion, having automatic 
repeat start facilities initiated by a fall in pressure in 
the water supply pipe to the spray installation. The 
battery capacity shall be adequate for ten consecutive 
starts without recharging with a cold engine under 
full compression. Manual starting by crank handle, if 
engine size permits or electric starter motor. 

NOTE — The starter motor used for automatic starting may 


also be used for manual starting provided there are separate 
batteries for manual starting. 


8.3.12 Battery Charging 


The means of charging the batteries shall be by 
a 2 rate trickle charger with manual selection of 
boost charge and the batteries shall be charged in 
position. Where separate batteries are provided for 
automatic and manual starting the charging equipment 
shall be capable of trickle charging both the batteries 
simultaneously. Equipment shall be provided to enable 
the state of charge of the batteries to be determined. 
It is recommended to provided stand by batteries for 
each engine. 


8.3.13 Tools 


A standard kit of tools shall be provided with the engine 
and kept on hand at all times. 


The following spare parts shall be supplied with the 
engine and kept on hand: 


a) Two sets of fuel filters, elements and seals; 


b) Two sets of lubricating oil filters, elements and 
seals; 


21 


IS 15519 : 2020 


c) Two sets of belts (wherever used); 

d) One complete set of engine joints, gaskets and 
hoses; 

e) Two injector nozzles; 

f) One complete set of piston rings for each cylinder; 
and 


g) One inlet valve and one exhaust valve. 


8.3.14 Engine Exercising 


The test shall be for a period of at least 5 min each 
day. Where closed circuits cooling systems are 
used, the water level in the primary system shall be 
checked at the time of carrying out each test and, if 
necessary, water shall be added during the course of 
test procedure. 


8.3.15 Performance can be ensured when the following 
conditions are complied with: 
a) To test the engine at least once a week; 
b) To maintain the temperature of the engine room at 
not less than 4.5°C at all times; 
c) To maintain the minimum quantity of fuel oil 
required; 
d) To use a good grade of fuel oil equivalent in 
quality to that specified by the engine maker; and 
e) To keep on hand the spare parts required as 
specified above. 


8.4 Other Requirements for Pumps 


8.4.1 Where there is more than one pump set installed, 
the suction pipes shall not be interconnected. Where 
a redundant system is required, the full flow demand 
of the system shall be met by a main pump set and a 
reserve pump set having the same capacity. 


NOTE — See also 7.11.5. 
8.4.2 The following conditions of the electric pump 
shall be monitored: 


a) Power available to the motor and, where a.c. on all 
three phases; 

b) Pump on demand; 

c) Pump running; 

d) Start failure/common fault; and 

e) Manual and auto status. 


8.4.3 All monitored conditions shall be visually 
indicated individually in the pump room. They shall 
also be visually indicated at a location permanently 
attended by responsible personnel. Pump running and 
fault alarms shall also be audibly indicated at the same 
place. 


8.4.4 Starter Alarm Indication (Engine Driven Pump 
Set) 


IS 15519 : 2020 


8.4.4.1 The following conditions shall each be indicated 
both locally and at a responsibly manned location: 


a) Use of any switch which prevents the engine 
starting automatically; 


b) Failure of the engine to start after the six attempts; 
c) Pump running; 
d) Diesel controller; and 


e) Manual and automatic status. 


8.4.4.2 When commissioning an installation, the 
automatic starting system of the diesel engine shall be 
activated with the fuel supply isolated for the 6 cycles 
each of not less than 15 s cranking and not more than 
15 s or less than 10 s rest. After completion of 6 starting 
cycles, the fail to start alarm shall operate. The fuel 
supply shall then be restored and the engine shall start 
when the manual start test button is turned on. 


9 COMPONENTS 


9.1 Water Mist Nozzles 
See 7.5. 
9.2 Pipes and Fittings 


9.2.1 Pipe work material for all water and atomizing 
media shall be of stainless steel to relevant Indian 
standard or of at least equivalent quality in respect to 
corrosion. Alternative solutions are acceptable if the 
same level of safety in respect to clogging of the chosen 
nozzle and filters due to corrosion can be proven. The 
pipe work shall be able to withstand at least four times 
the design pressure. 


9.2.2 Piping material shall be stainless steel of suitable 
grade or of at least equivalent quality in respect to 
both corrosion and fire resistance. Alternate solutions 
are acceptable if the same level of performance can be 
proven with respect to clogging of the chosen nozzle 
and filters due to corrosion, and if the alternative 
material can be proven to be equally fire resistant. 
Zinc coated pipes are not acceptable for the water 
mist installation piping. The chosen material shall be 
suitable to withstand the anticipated temperatures at the 
site of installation. 


9.2.3 All system piping and fittings shall be rated for the 
maximum working pressure to which they are exposed. 
The pipe work shall be installed in accordance with 
the manufacturer’s design and installation manual, and 
shall be protected against corrosion. Pipes and fittings 
shall be installed in such a way that the pipe work is 
not exposed to damage, for example, by fire, passing 
vehicles, frost and seismic movement. 


9.2.4 Special consideration shall be given to systems 
installed in corrosive environments and where possible 
thermal expansion problems which may occur due to 
very long straight pipe runs. 


22 


9.2.5 Installation of piping and fittings shall comply 
with various provisions of IS 15105. Bending of 
pipe or tube shall be permitted, provided bends are 
made without kinks, ripples, distortions, reductions 
in diameter or any noticeable deviations from a round 
shape. The minimum radius of a bend shall be in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. 
All threads used in system piping shall conform to the 
requirements of relevant standards. Joint sealing tape, 
compounds or thread lubricants shall be applied only to 
the male thread. All fittings on system piping shall be 
suitable for the maximum subjected pressure. Fittings 
downstream of the strainer shall be of corrosion 
resistant material such as copper, stainless steel or 
hot-dipped galvanized steel where used, flanges shall 
conform to the requirements of relevant standards. 


9.2.6 Welding and brazing shall conform to the 
requirements of relevant standards and filler materials 
used in brazing shall have a melting point in excess 
of 535°C. Welding or brazing fluid residue shall be 
removed prior to installation. 


9.2.7 Each pipe or section of pipe work shall be cleaned 
after preparation and before assembly. The pipe work 
shall be free of particulate matter and oil residue before 
the installation of nozzles or discharge devices. All the 
system piping and fittings shall be installed in such a 
way that the entire system can be drained. Where a 
system employs thread sealing materials such as tape or 
has welded or brazed joints, dirt traps shall be provided. 
Dirt traps shall consist of a tee with a capped dirt leg at 
least 50 mm long. 


9.2.8 Pipe Supports 


Piping shall be securely supported and allowance 
shall be made for thrust forces, vibration, expansion, 
contraction and heat resistance. It shall be designed to 
withstand likely vibration and mechanical, chemical 
or other damage. Where there is the possibility of 
explosion, the piping shall be attached to supports that 
are least likely to be displaced. In all other respects 
hangers shall comply with the requirements of relevant 
standards. 


The maximum distance between supports shall take 
into account the total mass of the pipe and contents. 
The distance between supports shall be in accordance 
with Table 2. 


9.3 Strainers 


9.3.1 Line strainers or filters shall have a clean-out 
port preferably with replacement strainer or filter 
elements. Filters or strainers without replaceable 
elements may only be used if they are included as a 
component of a listed system. Such filters or strainers 
shall be installed with dismountable joints to facilitate 
the removal and replacement of the complete unit. 
The maximum filter or strainer mesh opening shall 


IS 15519 : 2020 


Table 2 Spacing for Pipe Supports 
( Clause 9.2.8 ) 


SI No. Nominal Pipe Size Maximum Spacing Between Hangers 
mm m (feet) 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) 6-14 1.21 (4.00) 
ii) 15-22 1.52 (5.00) 
iii) 23-28 1.82 (6.00) 
iv) 30-38 2.12 (7.00) 
v) 40-49 2.42(8.00) 
vi) 50-59 3.00 (10.00) 
vii) 60-70 3.33 (11.00) 
viii) 71-89 3.64 (12.00) 
ix) 90-108 3.94 (15.00) 

be 80 percent of the minimum nozzle waterway 9.4 Valves 


dimension. Strainers and filters shall be installed and 
arranged to facilitate inspection, maintenance and 
replacement. 


9.3.2 A filter or a strainer shall be provided at each 
water supply connection or system riser. Strainers 
shall be made of corrosion resistant materials. For 
pressure bearing parts and for the sieve, metallic 
materials shall be used. The flow direction shall be 
given on the body of system strainers. It shall be 
possible to take out the sieve and the dirt particles of 
system strainers without having to remove the strainer 
housing. 


9.3.3 All parts shall be constructed in such a way that 
wrong mounting will be obvious. The design pressure 
shall be equal to the system operating pressure, with 
a minimum of 12.5 bar. Strainers shall be designed in 
such a way that spheres with a diameter of more than 
0.8 times the minimum nozzle waterway dimension 
cannot pass the strainer. 


9.3.4 Nozzles with waterways (that cannot be passed 
by a 4 mm sphere) shall be equipped with upstream 
strainers. These strainers shall be designed to prevent 
any particles carried in the discharge pipe work from 
clogging the discharge orifices. The free flow through 
the range pipe shall not be obstructed by the strainers 
of nozzles installed directly into a pipe fitting, that is, 
no part of the strainer shall protrude into that pipe. If 
the nozzle strainer is projecting from the nozzle inlet 
into the pipe fitting, the design shall be such that a 
sphere with a diameter of 3 mm can pass the waterways 
between the inner surface of the pipe fitting and the 
outer surface of the strainer 


NOTE — The pressure loss of the strainer shall be taken into 
account during hydraulic calculation. 


23 


9.4.1 Control/Activation Valves 


Control and activation valves shall include any device 
or valve that automatically opens to supply water 
to the nozzles after the detection of a fire. Control 
and activation valves shall operate by an approved 
mechanical, electrical, hydraulic or pneumatic means. 
For control valves with actuator mechanism, such as 
pneumatic type, hydraulic type, or electrical type, the 
specifications of the actuator shall match the valve 
operation criteria. 


Control valves shall be suitable for the pressures, 
temperatures and environment imposed on them. They 
shall be in accordance with the acceptance criteria of 
the essential features of the tests as per their listing. 
The valve shall be made of corrosion resistant material, 
or having corrosion resistant finishing. The valve 
shall have a clear mark to indicate the correct way of 
installation. Further, the valves shall be installed such 
that they are not subject to mechanical, chemical or 
other damage that would render them inoperative. 


9.4.2 Shut-off Valves 


Shut-off valves used in systems shall be used for design 
pressures upto 12.5 bar and shall meet the requirements 
of the relevant standards. If shut-off valves are installed 
for systems operating above 12.5 bar, the shut-off valve 
shall be suitable for the applicable pressure class, and 
they shall be listed for such use. 


Valves shall include an ‘open—shut’ indicator, which 
cannot be tampered with. Valves shall be protected 
against unauthorized tampering. 


9.4.3 Check Valves 


Check valve shall be installed between the system and 
the point of permanent connection to a potable water 


IS 15519 : 2020 


supply. They shall be installed in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s listing and relevant Indian standards. 
Where additives are used in the water mist system, 
either by injection into flowing lines or by premixing 
into stored water sources, a backflow preventer shall 
be installed between the system control valve or stored 
water supply and a permanent connection to a potable 
water supply. 


Check valves shall be installed in the main feed 
lines, near the control valves of both the water and 
pneumatic system piping of a twin fluid system, to 
prevent the backflow of water or atomizing fluid into 
the companion piping. Where the water and atomizing 
fluid are separated by an air gap, check valves shall be 
permitted to be omitted. 


9.4.4 Safety Valves 


Safety valves or pressure relief valves are to be 
designed to withstand a pressure equal to 1.5 times the 
design pressure of the system. 


9.4.5 Pressure Regulating Valves (Water) 


Pressure regulating valves shall be installed in any 
portion of the system where the potential exists for the 
system pressure to exceed the maximum rated working 
pressure of the system or system components or both. 
These valves shall open when the system pressure 
reaches 95 percent of the system rated pressure. 


Arelief valve of not less than 13 mm shall be provided on 
the discharge side of the pressure regulating valve that 
is set to operate at a pressure not exceeding the system- 
rated pressure. A water flow test valve that is sized to 
produce the designed flow of the pressure reducing 
valve shall be installed on the downstream side of the 
pressure reducing valve. A sign indicating the correct 
discharge pressure for static and residual pressures shall 
be attached to the pressure reducing valve. 


9.4.6 Pressure Regulating Valves (Gas) 


Pressure regulating valves shall be installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations 
and shall be installed when the supply pressure is 
higher than the design operating pressure of the water 
mist system. Such valves shall be capable of providing 
a stable regulated output at the rated flow capacity and 
design setting, over the full range of input pressures that 
will be experienced over the course of the discharge 
period. 


Downstream pressure creep under no-flow conditions 
shall not exceed the lesser of the downstream 
components pressure rating or the pressure relief valve 
set point, if provided. Pressure set, point adjusting 
mechanisms on the pressure regulating valves shall be 
tamper resistant and the adjustment shall be indicated 
by a permanent marking. A means to indicate evidence 
of tampering shall be provided. The set point of these 


24 


valves shall be set by the manufacturer. Permanent 
markings shall indicate the inlet and outlet connections 
of the valves. 


9.5 Pressure Gauge 


9.5.1 Pressure gauges shall be installed in the following 
locations: 


a) On both sides of a pressure regulating valve; 

b) On the pressurized side of all supply connections; 
c) System control valves; 

d) On all pressurized storage containers; 


e) On all air supplies for dry pipe and pre-action 
systems; and 


f) When multiple gas cylinders are employed 
with their individual cylinder valves sealed or 
supervised in the open position and connected to 
a pressurized manifold, a single pressure gauge on 
the pressurized section of the manifold shall be 
permitted for indicating the pressure in all the gas 
cylinders. 


9.5.2 The required pressure gauges shall be compatible 
with their intended use and shall have an operating 
range not less than twice the working pressure of the 
system. 


9.6 Storage Containers 


9.6.1 Gas Cylinder 


Gas cylinders used for the storage and transportation of 
gas at high pressures shall conform to the requirements 
of IS 7285 (Parts 1 and 2) and IS 8198. 


9.6.2 Pressurized Containers 


Containers used for water storage that are normally 
pressurized or that are pressurized when the system is 
activated, shall conform to the requirements of relevant 
standards. 


9.6.3 Storage containers shall be located as close as 
possible to the protected hazard but in different fire 
compartment. It shall be possible to locate them in the 
same compartment provided they are not exposed to 
undue hazards. 


9.6.4 Storage containers shall be located otherwise, 
fixed and/or manifolded as per the requirements 
specified in IS 15493 for clean agent systems. 


9.7 Flow Switches 


Flow switches shall be selected in such a way to detect 
flow from even a single mist nozzle. The nominal 
flow of activation of the flow switch shall, therefore, 
be not higher than 75 percent of the nominal flow of 
the smallest nozzle in the system operating at the rated 
pressure. 


10 REVIEW, COMMISSIONING, 
ACCEPTANCE AND MAINTENANCE 


10.1 General 
Test for all systems shall comply with the following. 


10.1.1 The completed system shall be reviewed and 
tested by qualified personnel to meet the approval of 
authorities concerned. Tests shall be conducted as part 
of the nozzle or system to address the compartment 
geometry, fire hazard and performance objectives, 
of the application specified. Tests shall be designed 
to replicate most or all of the application parameters 
associated with a given installation and any variations 
in these parameters shall be substituted using the worst 
case conditions. The listing of the system hardware 
shall be consistent with the intended system application. 
Tests shall be designed and conducted to stress the 
system in order to determine the working limits and 
parameters of the system, and to incorporate adequate 
severity to minimize the effects of test parameter 
variations. The results of the test shall be documented. 
The documentation shall be such that they can identify 
the working limits and parameters of the system, the 
fire hazard and the range of compartment parameters. 


10.1.2 The results of the investigation shall identify, but 
not be limited to the following: 


a) Fire protection objectives of the system (control, 
suppression or extinguishment), type of application 
(total flooding, zoned or local application), classes 
and types of fire (pool, running and spray), and 
types of fuel. 


b) Protected enclosure volume limitations, allowable 
openings and ventilation conditions. 


c) Maximum and minimum system flow rates, that 
is, the flow rate per unit volume or the flow rate 
per unit area as applicable to the specific risk. 


d) Maximum and minimum system operating 
pressure, the nozzle operating range, the pump or 
cylinder operating pressure range, as applicable, 
and the pump inlet and outlet pressure and flow 
requirements. 


e) Quality, temperature, quantity and duration of the 
water supply. 

f) Nozzle performance characteristics including 
spray angle, droplet size and distribution, 
momentum and velocity. 

g) Nozzle installation requirements including the 
maximum and minimum distances above the 
floor of the hazard and below the ceiling, nozzle 
spacing, orientation, minimum distance from 
walls and obstructions or shielding. 


h 
j 


wm 


Activation device type or model number. 


wa 


Specification of the distribution system and pump 
or storage cylinder. 


25 


IS 15519 : 2020 


10.2 Acceptance Criteria 


10.2.1 The completed water mist system shall be 
commissioned in accordance with the check list given 
in Annex B and the system’s performance shall be 
proven by the following methods: 


a) All pipe work that could potentially contain water 
shall be hydrostatically tested to 1.5 times the 
normal working pressure for 10 min followed by 
testing for 110 min at system working pressure. 
Any loss shall be determined by a drop in gauge 
pressure or visible leakage. 


b) For dry and pre-action systems, an air pressure 
leakage test shall be conducted at 3 bar pressure 
for 24 h in addition to routine hydraulic test. 


NOTE — When cold weather does not allow testing with 
water, an interim air test shall be conducted. Any leakage 
observed during the test shall be corrected and system 
re-tested. 


10.2.2 Discharge Test 


a) Water mist systems shall be tested either by a 
full discharge test with recording of system and 
supply pressure, performance observation; or by a 
validation of pressure and flow of the water supply 
and free passage to all water mist nozzles by 
utilising alternative ways, provided this is allowed 
by the authorities concerned. 

b) The minimum rate of flow shall be one of the 
following, whichever is greater: 

1) Hydraulically calculated water demand rate of 
the system; or 

2) Maximum rate of flow available to the system 
under fire conditions. 


NOTE — On completion of the acceptance procedure, a 
certificate of compliance shall be issued by the installation 
contractor. 


Cc 


ma 


After full flow testing, all filters and strainers shall 
be inspected, cleaned and replaced, if necessary. 


d) Where practicable, full flow tests of the system 
piping, using water, shall be made as a means of 
checking the nozzle layout, discharge patterns and 
any obstructions, determining the relationship 
between design criteria and actual performance, 
and ensuring against the clogging of the smaller 
piping and nozzles by foreign matter carried by 
the water. 


e 


nN 


Where practicable, the maximum number of 
systems that are expected to operate in case of 
fire shall be in full operation simultaneously when 
checking the adequacy and condition of the water 
supply. 

f) All operating parts of the system shall be tested 
fully to ensure that they function as intended. The 
proper function and sequence of all devices shall 
be verified. 


IS 15519 : 2020 


10.2.3 Flushing or Cleaning of Piping 


a) System piping shall be flushed completely before 
connection is made to water mist piping. The 
flushing operation shall continue for sufficient 
time to ensure thorough cleaning. 


b 


wm 


Pipes shall be cleaned internally after preparation 
and before assembly as per the manufacturer’s 
installation manual. Piping network shall be free 
of particulate matter and oil residue before the 
installation of the nozzles. 


10.2.4 Review of Mechanical Components 


The following review point shall be carried out for the 
components: 


a) Piping system shall be inspected to determine that 
it is in compliance with the design and installation 
documents and hydraulic calculations. 


b) Nozzles and pipe size shall be in accordance with 
system drawings. 


c) Means of pipe size reduction and the attitudes 
of tees shall be checked for conformance to the 
design. 

d) Piping joints, discharge nozzles, and piping 
supports shall be restrained to prevent unacceptable 
vertical or lateral movement during discharge. 


e) Discharge nozzles shall be installed in such a 
manner that piping cannot become detached 
during discharge. 


f) Discharge nozzle shall be oriented in such a 
manner that optimum water mist application can 
be effected. 


g) Ischarge nozzles, piping, and mounting brackets 
shall be installed in such a manner that they do not 
cause injury to personnel. 


h) All water and gas storage containers shall be 
located in accordance with an approved set of 
system drawings. 

j) All containers and mounting brackets shall be 
fastened in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
requirements. 


10.2.5 Review of Electrical Components 


The electrical components also need periodic review as 
indicated below: 


a) All wiring systems shall be checked for proper 
installation in conduit and in compliance with the 
approved drawings. 

b) It shall be confirmed that a.c. wiring and d.c. 
wiring are not combined in a common conduit or 
raceway unless properly shielded and grounded. 

c) All field circuits shall be confirmed to be free of 
ground faults and short circuits. 

d) Where measuring field circuitry, the following 
shall apply: 


26 


1) All electronic components, such as smoke and 
flame detectors or special electronic equipment 
for other detectors or their mounting bases, 
shall be removed. 


2) Jumpers shall be installed properly to prevent 
the possibility of damage within these devices. 


3) All components shall be replaced after 
measuring. 
e) The detection devices shall be checked for proper 


type and location as specified on the system 
drawings. 


f) The detectors shall be installed in a professional 
manner and in accordance with technical data 
regarding their installation and relevant clauses in 
IS 2189. 

Manual pull stations shall be confirmed as 
accessible, accurately identified, and properly 
protected to prevent damage. 


wa 


8 


h) Design the system to be automatically actuated. 
Provide a method for manual actuation. 


j) Automatically shut-off or close interlocked 
devices, such as exhaust fans or doors before 
operation of the water mist system 


k) Ensure abort switches, if used, are of the ‘dead 
man’ type requiring constant manual pressure. 


10.2.6 It is recommended to comply with following 
additional requirements: 


a) Provide an adequate quantity of water and 
compressed gas (if applicable) to meet the 
demand. Ensure the quantity is adequate for the 
largest single hazard or group of hazards protected 
by one system distributed through the appropriate 
manifolded selector valve. If water discharge 
continues after the compressed gas supply has been 
exhausted, it is not effective for fire suppression. 


b 


wm 


Provide agent supply dependent on whether the 
water mist system is used as a special protection 
or primary protection system. 


Cc 


wm 


Water mist may be used as a special protection 
system when it is able to extinguish all of the fire 
scenarios for the hazard protected and where the 
installation has a limited agent supply. Double 
the agent quantity needed to extinguish the 
worse-case fire scenario or 10 min, whichever is 
greater. 


10.3 System Maintenance 


10.3.1 The responsible user shall maintain the water mist 
fire protection system. Maintenance shall be performed 
to keep the system equipment operable or to make 
repairs. As built system installation drawings, original 
acceptance test records, and device manufacturer’s 
maintenance bulletins shall be retained to assist in the 
proper care of the system and its components. 


10.3.2 Preventive maintenance, such as lubricating 
control valve stems, adjusting packing glands on valves 
and pumps, bleeding moisture and condensation from 
air compressors and air lines, and cleaning strainers 
shall be carried out specific maintenance activities, 
where applicable to the type of water mist system, 
shall be performed in accordance with the schedules 
provided in the installation and design manual. 


10.3.3 Corrective maintenance includes, but is not 
limited to, replacing loaded, corroded or painted 


27 


IS 15519 : 2020 


nozzles, replacing missing or loose pipe hangers, 
cleaning clogged fire pumps, replacing valve seats 
and gaskets, and restoring heat in areas subject to 
freezing temperatures where water-filled piping is 
installed. 


10.3.4 Emergency maintenance includes, but is not 
limited to, repairs due to piping failures caused by 
freezing or impact damage, repairs to broken water 
mains and replacing. 


IS 15519 : 2020 


IS No. 
5 : 2007 
2189 : 2008 


7285 
(Part 1) : 2004 
(Part 2) : 2004 


8198 : 2004 
15105 : 2002 
15325 : 2003 


15493 : 2015 
SP 30 : 2011 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 1) 
: 2007 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 2) 
: 2003 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 3) 
: 2012 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 4/ 
Sec 1) : 2012 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 4/ 
Sec 2) : 2011 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 4/ 
Sec 3) : 2011 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 5/ 
Sec 1) : 2009 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 5/ 
Sec 2) : 2007 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Colours for ready mixed paints and enamels (sixth revision) 


Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of automatic fire detection 
and alarm system ( fourth revision) 


Refillable seamless steel gas cylinders 
Normalized steel cylinders 


Quenched and tempered steel cylinders with tensile strength less than 1 100 MPa 
(112 kgf/mm?) 


Steel cylinders for compressed gases (atmospheric gases, hydrogen, high pressure 
liquefiable gases and dissolved acetylene gases) — Code of practice 


Design and installation of fixed automatic sprinkler fire extinguishing systems — 
Code of practice 


Code of practice for design and installation of fixed automatic high and medium 
velocity water spray system 


Gaseous fire extinguishing systems — General requirements 
National electric code 2011 


Low-voltage switchgear and controlgear: Part 1 General rules 
Low-voltage switchgear and controlgear: Part 2 Circuit breakers 


Low-voltage switchgear and controlgear: Part 3 Switches, disconnectors, switch- 
disconnectors and fuse-combination units ( first revision) 


Low-voltage switchgear and controlgear: Part 4 Contactors and motor-starters, 
Section 1 Electromechanical contactors and motors-starters 


Low-voltage switchgear and controlgear: Part 4 Contactors and motor-starters, 
Section 2 a.c. semiconductor motor controllers and starters (first revision) 


Low-voltage switchgear and controlgear: Part 4 Contactors and motor-starters, 
Section 3 a.c. semiconductor motor controllers and contactors for non-motor loads 
(first revision) 

Low-vltage switchgear and controlgear: Part 5 Control circuit devices and switching 
elements, Section 1 Electromechanical control circuit devices ( first revision) 


Low-voltage switchgear and control gear: Part 5 Control circuit devices and switching 
elements, Section 2 Proximity switches 


28 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 10.2.1) 


COMMISSIONING CHECK LIST 


IS 15519 : 2020 


Visual Inspection 


Clause Reference 


Compliance 
Verified 


Type of Test 
Carried out, 
if Applicable 


Remark 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


Do the plans accurately illustrate 
the hazard configuration? 


7.7 


Are all components of the 
system in compliance with this 
standard? 


7.9 


iii) 


Check all flow calculations and 
verify that the containers, piping 
and operational equipment 
are installed and sized in 
accordance with the plans 


7.7, 9, 12 and 15 


iv) 


v) 


Are dimensions of unclosable 
openings in accordance with the 
plans? 


Check protected area for 
openings other than those in iv) 


7.7 and 8.1 


7.7 and 9 


vi) 


Does the nameplate data on 
storage containers correlate 
with the submitted details? 


16.1.3 


vii) 


Check quantity and mass of 
containers 


viii) 


Check protected area volume 


ix) 


Check need for and adequate 
provisions of post-fire 
ventilation 


x) 


Physically check the pipework. 
Are pipe joints sound and is 
pipework adequately secured? 


xi) 


Ensure that storage containers 
are disconnected 


xii) 


Perform a full functional check 
of system (by operation of 
detectors) auxiliary electrical 
shutdown function (for example, 
doors released, dampers shut, 
air-handlers shutdown, etc. 
(see NOTE 1) 


7.4, 8 and 13 


xiii) 


Ensure that any non-fire 
shutdown plant capable of 
affecting system performance is 
operating during the test 


7.4 


xiv) 


Ensure system  release(s) 
operates correctly (see NOTE 2) 


13 


29 


IS 15519 : 2020 


SI 
No. 


Visual Inspection 


Clause Reference 


Compliance 
Verified 


Type of Test 
Carried out, 
if Applicable 


Remark 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


xv) 


Activate each detector head or 
system in turn by employing 
heat, products of combustion, 
etc. Ensure each manual alarm 
point operates and transmits 


xvi) 


Ensure that the detection and 
control equipment complies 
with configuration and 
operation 


13 


xvii) 


Ensure that visual and audible 
alarms operate 


13.4 


xviii) 


Ensure that each alarm registers 
on CIE and mimic panels, if any 


13.3 


xix) 


Check that air-handling plant 
shutdown relay is activated 


7.4 and 13.2 


XX) 


Where multiple alarms are 
required for system operation, 
ensure that first and subsequent 
level alarms operate, including 
audible and visual indications, 
auxiliary equipment, and 
gas released mechanisms, if 
installed 


13.4 


XXi) 


Check that directional values are 
fitted where required and ensure 
that they operate correctly 


4.7, 5.4 and 12.2 


xxii) 


Reset the system and check all 
manual released devices 


xxiii) 


Reconnect storage container. 
Ensure that all caps, plugs and 
locking pins are removed and 
that the system is left in an 
operable condition (see NOTE 3) 


14.5 


NOTES: 


1 The objective is to check that the entire system operates, while avoiding unwanted discharging of the system. 


2 The objective is to determine that the system operation mechanism functions when required and does not function under any other 


circumstance. 


3 This should always be the last commissioning function. 


30 


IS 15519 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


Organization 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety 
(DIFR), New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 
Chhatariya Rubber & Chemicals Industries, 


Mumbai 
Controllerate of Quality Assurance, Pune 
Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 
Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Goa 
Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 
F. M. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


Fire & Emergency Services, J & K, Srinagar 


Fire & Security Association of India, Mumbai 
Fire Protection Association of India, Mumbai 
GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Chennai 
H. D. Fire Protect Pvt Limited, Thane 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 


Johson Controls (I) Private Limited, Noida 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI (Chairman) 
SHRI D. BALACHANDRAN 


SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 
Suri P. K. DESHMUKH (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


Dr R. S. CHIMOTE 
SHRI SUVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
Sarı N. H. Rout (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. Turanı (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. SHARMA 
Suri M. K. Jan (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. HEPAT 


SHRI S. A. HAVELIWALA 
Suri H. S. HAVELIWALA (Alternate) 


CoL V. V. KADAM 
CoL N. K. N. Rao (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK MENON 
Suri NITIN V. RAIKER (Alternate) 


DR SANJAY SHARMA 
Suri A. K. Dusey (Alternate) 


Suri R. B. BHUTDA 
SHRI Viran GoEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SRIKANTH Y AJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KrisHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. SINGH 
Suri BASHIR SHAH (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
PRESIDENT 


SHRI S. P. GARG 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR KALKAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


Suri HARISH N. DHARAMSHI 
Suri K. T. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI AASHISH R. GOKHALE 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTHOSH MUZUMDAR 
Suri Nitin Rastoai (Alternate) 


31 


IS 15519 : 2020 


Organization 


K. V. Fire Chemicals (India) Pvt Ltd, 
Navi Mumbai 


Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services, 
Bengaluru 
Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


NBCC (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RESQ Technologies, Ahmedabad 


Safex Fire Services Limited, Mumbai 
Shah Bhogilal Jethalal & Bros, Ahmedabad 


State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Surex Production and Sales Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Swastik Synergy Engineering Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services 
Department, Chennai 


UL India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 
Uttar Pradesh Fire Services, Lucknow 


West Bengal Fire and Emergency Services, 
Kolkata 


In personal capacity (B-152, Ist Floor, East of 
Kailash, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (A-45, Sector-70, NOIDA) 


In personal capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, 
Nirman Vihar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (27 A, Tapovan Senior 
Citizens Foundation, Karadimadai Road, 
Coimbatore 641010) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Suri RAJESH H. SABADRA 
Suri Upay K. Surorr (Alternate) 


SHRI K. U. RAMESH 
Suri K. Srinivasa (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Suri S. S. Warick (Alternate) 


Suri P. S. RAHANGDALE 
Sarı H. D. Paras (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SUNITA PURSWANI 
Suri R. K. AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ISHWAR IYER 
SHRI NEERAJ SEHGAL (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. NANDY 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


Suri Ronit V. SHAH 


SHRI JITENDRA SHAH 
SHRI SANDIP SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI MuKesH M. SHAH 
Suri ABHAY D. PuRANDARE (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 


SHRI DEBASHIS NEOGI 


SHRI MukKesH D. SHAH 
SHRI KUNAL ZATAKIA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. VIJAYASEKAR 
SHRIMATI N. PRIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAGDISH V. 
Suri S. P. Tey Kumar Benara (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Rao 
SHRI AMAN SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHIJIT PANDEY 
SHRI KAMAL Nanny (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


SHRI S. K. DHERI 


Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


Suri R. C. SHARMA 


Sarı T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 


SclENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


32 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (7959). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


