***•••*•**•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 11627 (1986) : Method for determination of apparent 
density of metallic powders by Scott volumeter [MTD 25: 
Powder Metallurgical Materials and Products] 




>^XiVff7^^^b^ja^^ssa^^^^FSggg 



5?5?-m |7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledg 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS t i I61T - t9S6 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



Indian Standard 



-METHOD FOR DETERMINATION 
OF APPARENT DENSITY OF METALLIC 
POWDERS BY SCOTT VOLUMETER 



UDC 66M92*2; 543-24 [531-755 I] 




© Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARUS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAilADUR SHAH ZAFAR l^fARG 

NEW DELHI 1I00O2 

Cr 2 January 1987 



IS : 11627 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION 

OF APPARENT DENSITY OF METALLIC 

POWDERS BY SCOTT VOLUMETER 



Powder Metallurgical Materials and Products 
Sectional Committee, SMDC 30 



Chairman Representing 

Dr R. Vjjayaraghavan Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Members 

Shri V. G. Date ( Alternate to 
Dr R. Vijayaraghavan ) 
Shri S. L. N. Acharyulu Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri N . Maitra ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Banerjee Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) 

Shri S. K. Basu Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. D, Bhargava Assotex Engineering Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Anoop Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. G. Bhatt Flexicons Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. G. Bhaxi ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. T. George Powder Metallurgy Association of India, Hyderabad 

Shri Anup Chandra ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. R. Gupta India Hard Metals Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Hazra Ministry of Defence { DGI ) 

Shri R. N. Paul ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. M. Kataria Mahindra Sintered Products Ltd, Pune 

Shri K. Kcsavan Metal Powder Co Ltd, Thirumangalam 

Dr p. R. Krishnamurthy Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri G. K. Rajhans Mishra Dhatu Nigam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri K. Ramesh ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Ramasubramanian Directorate General of Technical Develonment 

New Delhi 

Shri Y. H. Raut ( Alternate ) 
Representative Small Scale Metal Powder Manufacturing Asso- 

ciation, Bombay 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 
the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11627 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Representative Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Dr N. p. Sanjana Sandvik Asia Ltd, Pune 

Dr R. M, Pardeshi { Alternate ) 
Shri Anil R. Shah Khosla Metal Powders Pvt Ltd, Pune 

Shri B. H. Shetty ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. J. Shahani National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 

Shri J. P. Tiwari ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Srinivasan Widia ( India ) Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. Sadanand ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Srinivasan Central Electro-Chemical Research Institute (CSIR), 

Karaikudi 

Shri P. V. Vasudevarao ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Raghavendran, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Metals ) 

Secretary 

Shri Jagmohan Singh 
Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 



IS : 11627 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION 

OF APPARENT DENSITY OF METALLIC 

pnwnFRS RY ^rnTT vni hmftrr 



0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 24 March 1986, after the draft finalized by the Powder Metallurgical 
Materials and Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 With the growth of powder metallurgical industry, an increasing need 
has been felt to bring out standards on the methods of tests for various 
characteristics of metallic powder in order to obtain satisfactory and 
comparable results. This standard is one of the series on this subject. It 
is hoped that the formulation of this standard will be of considerable use 
to the industry. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
ISO: 3923/2-1981 Metallic powders — Determination of apparent density — 
Part 2 : Scott volumeter method, issued by the International Organization 
for Standardization ( ISO ). 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, 
if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS : 2- 1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the Scott volumeter method for the determina- 
tion of the apparent density of metallic powders. It is applicable to 
powders that will not flow freely through a 5 -mm orifice. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 Measurement of the mass of a certain quantity of powder which in a 
loose condition exactly fills a cup of known volume. 

2.2 The loose condition is obtained, when filling the cup, by cascading the 
powder over a series of inclined plates in a Scott volumeter ( see Fig. 
1 and 2 ). 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 11627 - 1986 



LARGE FUNNEL- 



SMALL FUNNEL 



INNER 
DIAMETER 



TWO WOODEN SIDES 
APPROXIMATELY 
8X58X 152 



TWO GLASS SIDES 
APPROXIMATELY 
2X UUX U2 



LOWER SQUARE FUNNEL 

APPROXIMATELY 

45 TO 12.5 — 



CYLINDRICAL CUP 




All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Test Apparatus — Front View 

4 



IS : 11627 - 1986 



BRASS 
SIEVE 



GLASS SIDE 



LOWER CROSS 
MEMBER 



LOWER SQUARE 
FUNNEL 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
FiG. 2 Test Apparatus — Side View 



IS : 11627 - 1986 

2.3 The ratio between the mass and the volume represents the apparent 
density. 

3. SYMBOLS AND DESIGNATION 

3.1 The description of the various symbols used in this standard are given 
below: 



Symbol 


Designation 


Unit 


pa 


Apparent density of metallic powders 
(general term) 


g/cm^ 


pas 


Apparent density obtained by the 
Scott volumeter method 


g/cm^ 


m 


Mass of the powder 


g 


V 


Volume of the cup 


cm^ 


4. APPARATUS 





4.1 Scott volumeter -— It comprises the parts given in 4.1.1 to 4.1.3. 

4.1.1 Fnnnel — having a large and a small conical section separated by a 
cylindrical section and incorporating a brass sieve of aperture size 1-18 mm 
(16 mesh ). 

4.1.2 Baffle Box — having a square section, and containing four glass 
baffles which may be located and retained by grooves in opposite sides of 
the box and may thus be removed for ease of cleaning. The baffles are 
arranged so that the powder falls on each of them in turn, thereby 
breaking. the fall and reducing the velocity of the stream of powder. It is 
important that none of the powder can pass between the upper edge of the 
glass baffles and the sides of the baffle box. It is also important that the 
lower edges of the glass baffles are either in line or slightly overlap in a 
vertical plane. 

4.1.2.1 A typical design of Scott volumeter is shown in Fig. 1 and 2. 
Dimensions given with tolerances are mandatory. The other dimensions 
represent those most frequently used and may vary slightly, provided that 
the principal requirement previously mentioned are maintained. 

4.1.3 Stand and Horizontal Vibration-Free Base — to support the cup, 
box and funnel coaxially at the heights indicated in Fig. 1 and 2. 

4.2 Cylindrical Cup — having a capacity of 25 ± 0-05 cm^ and an internal 
diameter of 30 ± 1 mm. 

Note — The cup and funnels should be made of non-magnetic, corrosion-resistant 
metallic material having sufficient wall thickness and hardness to avoid distortion and 
excessive wear. The inner surfaces of the cup and funnels should be polished. 



18:11627-1986 

4.3 Balance — of sufficient capacity, permitting weighing to an accuracy of 
± 005 g. 

5. SAMPLING 

5.1 The test sample shall be of at least 100 cm^ volume to allow the 
determination to be carried out on three test portions. 

5.2 In general the powder should be tested in the as-received condition. In 
certain instances the powder may be dried. However, if the powder is 
susceptible to oxidation, the drying shall take place in vacuum or in inert 
gas. If the powder contains volatile substances it shall not be dried. 

6. PROCEDURE 

6.1 Pour or feed the powder carefully by means of a spatula into the 
funnel until the cup is completely filled and powder flows over. 

6.2 If the powder is not free flowing, its passage through the sieve may be 
aided by light brushing with a soft brush. 

Note — If light brushing is not sufficient to make the powder flow through the 
sieve, the Scott volumeter method is not applicable to this powder. 

6.3 Level the powder with a straight-edge, taking care not to compress or 
pull out powder and not to disturb or vibrate the cup. 

6.4 After levelling the powder, tap the cup to settle the powder in order to 
avoid spilling it during transport. Make sure that there are no adhering 
particles on the exterior of the cup. 

6.5 Determine the mass of the powder to the nearest 0-05 g. 

6.6 Carry out the determinations on three test portions. 

7. TEST RESULTS 

7.1 The apparent density is given by the formula: 

_ m m 

7.2 Report the arithmetical mean of three determinations to the nearest 
0-01 g/cm3, and the highest and the lowest results if the scatter between 
results exceeds 1 percent of the mean. 



18:11627-1986 

8. TEST REPORT 

8.1 The test report shall include the following information: 

a) Reference to this standard; 

b) All details necessary for the identification of the test sample; 

c) The drying procedure, if the powder has been dried; 

d) The result obtained; and 

e) Details of any occurrence which may have aSected the result. 



