NAT Alan IS 14772 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ma ST Ua Bt caret rera HEAT 
& feu STATA SAT TABT SA 
ama arrears — ANI 


( Teel JAGO ) 


Boxes and Enclosures for 
Electrical Accessories for 
Household and Similar Fixed 
Electrical Installations — 
General Requirements 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 29.120.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2020 Price Group 12 


Electrical Wiring Accessories and Sectional Committee, ETD 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Electrical Wiring Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 2000, which was based on IEC 60670 : 1989. This revision has been undertaken 
to make it in line with the latest international practices. The significant technical changes with respect to the 
previous edition are as follows: 

a) Changes in ambient test and installation condition; 

b) Additional definitions included; 

c) New classifications added (see 7.3 and 7.4); 

d) Test for dimension added; 


e) New test added to ensure that the non-accessibility of live parts after the boxes when they installed for 
normal use (see 10); 


f) Test for protection against electric shock added; 

g) Test for insulation resistance and electric strength added; 

h) Test for creepage distance, clearances and distance through sealing compound added; 
j) Clause 11 has been modified to include the following requirements: 


1) Boxes and enclosures of insulating material (Plastic boxes) classified according to 1.2.2.2 and 7.2.2.3 
(see 11.2); 


2) Boxes or enclosures with removable sides according to 7.1.2 (see 11.3); and 
3) Earthing terminal threads (see 11.4). 


The enclosure specified in the standard are intended to contain electrical accessories, such as, switches, socket- 
outlets, etc, providing after assembling an appropriate degree of protection of the accessory and the cables and/or 
conductors against external influences, and a defined degree of protection against contact with enclosed live parts 
for any direction. 


While formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from IEC 60670-1 : 2015 ‘Boxes 
and enclosures for electrical accessories for household and similar fixed electrical installations — Part 1: General 
requirements’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


BOXES AND ENCLOSURES FOR ELECTRICAL 
ACCESSORIES FOR HOUSEHOLD AND SIMILAR 
FIXED ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS — 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard applies to boxes, enclosures 
and parts of enclosures (hereafter called “boxes” 
and “enclosures”) for electrical accessories with a 
rated voltage not exceeding 440 V a.c. intended for 
household or similar fixed electrical installations, 
either indoors or outdoors. 


1.2 Boxes and enclosures complying with this standard 
are suitable for use at ambient temperatures not 
normally exceeding +40°C, but their average over a 
period of 24 h does not exceed +35°C, with a lower 
limit of the ambient air temperature of - 5°C. 


1.3 During the installation, the temperature may be 
outside the above temperature range according to the 
classification of the boxes and the enclosures. 


1.4 This standard is intended to apply to enclosures for 
electrical accessories but is also intended 


to serve as a reference document for other Indian 
Standards. 


A box or an enclosure, which is an integral part of an 
electrical accessory and provides protection for that 
accessory against external influences (for example 
mechanical impact, ingress of solid objects or water, 
etc.) is covered by the relevant standard for such an 
accessory. 


1.5 This standard does not apply to: 
a) Ceiling roses; 
b) Luminaries supporting couplers; and 


c) Boxes, enclosures and parts of enclosures 
specifically designed to be used for cable trunking 
and ducting systems complying with IEC 61084, 
and which are not intended to be installed outside 
of these systems. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 


encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated 
below: 


IS/IEC No. Title 
1401 : 2008 Protection of persons and 
equipment by enclosures — Probes 
for verification 
2824 : 2007 Method for the determination of 
the proof and the comparative 
tracking indices of solid insulating 
materials 
9000 (Part 7/ Basic environmental testing 
Sec 7) procedures for electronic and 
: 2006 electrical items: Part 7 Impact test, 
Section 7 Test Eh: Hammer tests 
14763 : 2000 Conduit systems for cable 
management — Outside diameters 
of conduits for electrical 
installations and threads for 


conduits and fittings 


IS/IEC 60529 Degrees of protection provided by 


: 2001 enclosures (IP Code) 

IS/ISO/IEC Safety aspects — Guidelines for 
Guide 51 their inclusion in standards 
: 2014 

IS/TEC 60695- Fire hazard testing — Part 2-11: 
2-11 :2014 Glowing/hot-wire based test 


methods — Glow-wire flammability 
test method for end-products 


IS/TEC 60695- Fire hazard testing — Part 10-2: 


10-2 : 2003 Abnormal heat — Ball pressure test 
IEC 60981 Extra-heavy duty rigid steel 
: 2004 conduits 
IEC 61140 Protection against electric shock — 
: 2001 Common aspects for installation 
and equipment 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions shall apply. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


3.1 Enclosure — Combination of parts, such as boxes, 
covers, cover-plates, lids, box extensions, accessories, 
etc., providing after assembly and installation as in 
normal use, an appropriate protection against external 
influences, and a defined protection against contact 
with enclosed live parts from any accessible direction. 
See Annex A. 


3.2 Box — Part of an enclosure provided with means 
for fixing a cover, cover -plate, accessory, etc., and 
intended to receive accessories (such as socket-outlets, 
switches, etc.) 


3.3 Box Extension — Part of an enclosure, which 
is, intended to extend a box for the purpose of either 
increasing the internal volume of the box or enclosure 
or to adjust for mounting the box flush or semi-flush 
with the finished surface of a wall or the like. 


3.4 Lid Cover /Cover-plate — Part of an enclosure, 
not integral with or part of an accessory, which may 
either retain an accessory in position or enclose it. 


3.5 Raised Cover — Cover intended for mounting 
directly onto a box to provide for the attachment of 
accessories and to increase the internal volume of the 
enclosure. 
NOTE — The center portion of the cover is raised to 
accommodate a specific wall or ceiling thickness and to permit 


the mounting of the accessory on it, flush with the surface of 
the wall or ceiling. 


3.6 Exposed Conductive Part — Conductive part of 
electrical equipment, which can be touched and which 
is not normally live, but which can become live when 
basic insulation fails. 


3.7 Surface Mounting Box or Enclosure — Box or 
enclosure which is intended for mounting on a surface. 
See Annex A. 


3.8 Flush-Mounting Box or Enclosure — Box or 
enclosure, which is intended for mounting flush with 
the surface. See Annex A. 


3.9 Semi-flush Mounting Box or Enclosure — Box 
or enclosure which is intended to fit within a mounting 
surface and partially projects from the mounting 
surface. 


3.10 Cable Gland — Device designed to permit the 
entry of a cable, flexible cable or insulated conductor 
into an enclosure, and which provides sealing and 
retention and eventually may also provide other 
functions such as earthing, bonding, insulation, cable 
guarding, strain relief or a combination of these. 


3.11 Seal — Material used to fill up the space between 
the inside of a gland and the cable passing through, 
usually compressed by the gland and thereby forming 
a joint. 


3.12 Gasket — Material introduced between mating 
surfaces of an enclosure, which in compression forms 
a joint. 


3.13 Grommet — Component used to support and 
protect the cable or conduit at the point of entry, 
which may also prevent the ingress of moisture or 
contaminants. See Fig. 1. 


oT] od 


Key 
1 box 
2 entry membrane 
3 enclosure 
4 protective membrane 
5 grommet 


Fic. 1 EXAMPLES OF MEMBRANES AND GROMMETS 


3.14 Entry Membrane — Component or an integral 
part of an enclosure used to protect the cable, which 
may be used to support the cable or conduit at the point 
of entry. 

NOTE— An entry membrane may also prevent the ingress 


of moisture or contaminants and may be part of a grommet 
(see Fig. 1). 


3.15 Protecting Membrane — Component or an 
integral part of an enclosure that is not intended to be 
penetrated in normal use and is intended to provide 
protection against ingress of water or solid objects and/ 
or to allow the operation of an accessory (see Fig. 1). 


3.16 Composite Material — Combination of metal 
and insulating material. 


3.17 Spout Hub — Open entry of a box permitting the 
insertion and containment of a conduit. 


3.18 Cable Retention — Ability to limit the 
displacement of a fitted cable against pull forces. 


3.19 Cable Anchorage — Ability to limit the 
displacement of a fitted flexible cable against pull and 
push forces and torques. 


3.20 Blanking-Plug — Component used to close an 
open inlet or an open knock out. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


Boxes and enclosures shall be so designed and 
constructed that, in normal use, their performance is 
reliable and safety is achieved by reducing risk to a 
tolerable level, as defined in IS/ISO/IEC Guide 51. 


Compliance is checked by meeting all the relevant 
requirements and tests specified. 


5 GENERAL NOTES ON TESTS 


5.1 Tests According to this Standard are Type Tests 


5.1.1 Unless otherwise specified, boxes and enclosures 
are tested as delivered. 


5.1.2 Accessories complying with other standards are 
not tested again. 


5.1.3 Tests on boxes and enclosures of insulating 
material shall be performed after a preconditioning of 
at least 10 days at ambient temperature and relative air 
humidity of between 45 percent and 85 percent. 


5.1.4 Unless otherwise specified, the tests are carried 
out in the order of the clauses, at an ambient temperature 
between +15°C and +35°C on a set of three specimens. 


5.1.5 In case of doubt, the tests are made at an ambient 
temperature of + (27 + 5)°C on a set of three new 
specimens. 


5.2 The specimens are submitted to all the relevant tests 
and the requirements are satisfied if all the tests are met. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


If one of the specimens does not satisfy a test due to 
an assembly or a manufacturing fault, that test and 
any preceding ones which may have influenced the 
results of the test shall be repeated and also the tests 
which follow shall be made in the required sequence on 
another full set of specimens, all of which shall comply 
with the requirements. 
NOTE — When submitting the first set of specimens, the 
applicant can also submit the additional set of specimens 
which may be necessary, should one specimen fail. The 
testing station will then, without further request, test the 
additional set of specimens and will only reject if a further 
failure occurs. If the additional set of specimens is not 
submitted at the same time, the failure of one specimen will 
entail rejection. 


6 RATINGS 


6.1 The preferred values of the rated voltage of the 
integrated or incorporated connecting devices are 250 V 
and 400 V a.c. 


6.2 The standard rated connecting capacities 
are 0.55 mm’, 0.75 mm’, 1 mm’, 1.5 mm’, 
2.5 mm’, 4 mm’, 6 mm’, 10 mm’, 16 mm’, 


25 mm’, 35 mm’. 


7 CLASSIFICATION 


Boxes and enclosures are classified according to Table 1 
(All classification references used in this document 
directly refer to Table 1). 


Table 1 Classification of Boxes and Enclosures Classification Criteria 


7A The Nature of 7.1.1 Insulating 
their Material 
7.1.2 Metallic 
7.1.3 Composite 
7.1.4 Natural or Synthetic Rubber or a 
Mixture of both 
7.2 The Type of 7.2.1 Flush, Semi-flush in Solid Walls, | 7.2.1.1 | Not suitable for installation into 
Installation Ceilings or Floors concrete 
7.2.1.2 | Suitable for installation into concrete 
with a maximum temperature during 
the casting Process of +60 °C 
7.2.1.3 | Suitable for installation into concrete 
with a maximum temperature during 
the casting process of +90 °C 
7.2.2 Flush or Semi-flush in Hollow Walls, | 7.2.2.1 | Class Ha 
Hollow Ceilings, Hollow Floors 
or Furniture 
7.2.2.2 | Class Hb for walls 
7.2.2.3 | Class Hb for ceilings 
7.2.3 Surface Mounting on Walls, 
Ceilings, Floors or Furniture 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


7.5.3 


7.3 The Type (s) of 7.3.1 With Inlets for Sheathed Cables for 
Inlets (Outlets)* Fixed Installations 
7.3.2 With Inlets for Flexible Cables 
7.3.3 With Inlets for Plain 
Or corrugated Conduits 
7.3.4 With Inlets for Threaded Conduits 
7.3.5 With Inlets for Other Types of 
Conductors/Cables or Conduits 
7.3.6 With Spouts (hub) 
TaT Without Inlets — Inlet openings will 
be made during installation 
7.4 The Clamping 7.4.1 With Cable Retention 
Means 
7.4.2 With Cable Anchorage 
7.4.3 With Clamping Means for Flexible 
Conduit 
7.4.4 Without Clamping Means 
7.5 The Minimum 7.5.1 -5 °C 
Temperature 
during 
installation 
7.5.2 -15 °C 


—25 °C 


7.6 The degree of protection against access to hazardous parts and against harmful effects due to the ingress of solid foreign objects 
according to IS/IEC 60529 with a minimum degree of IP2X 


7.7 The degree of protection against harmful effects due to the ingress of water according to IS/IEC 60529 


7.8 The degree of protection 7.8.1 IP2X 
of the part mounted inside 
the hollow walls of the boxes 
classified according to 7.2.2.1 
7.8.2 > IP2X 
7.9 The provision for fixing 7.9.1 Boxes Supplied with Screws 
accessories to boxes 
7.9.2 Boxes Intended to Receive Screws 
7.9.3 Boxes Intended to Receive Claws 
7.9.4 Boxes Intended to Receive Other 
Means 
7.10 The method of fixing 7.10.1 With integrated clamping units 
the terminals or connecting 
devices in the connecting box 
7.10.2 With incorporated terminals or 


connecting devices 


7.10.3 With provisions for subsequent 
incorporation of terminals or 
connecting devices 

7.10.4 Without fixing (for floating 


terminals or connecting devices) 


*Boxes and enclosures may have more than one type of inlet. 


8 MARKING 


8.1 Boxes and enclosures shall be marked with, 
the name, trademark or identification mark of the 
manufacturer or the responsible vendor. 


In addition, enclosures shall also be marked with the 
following: 


a) the first characteristic numeral for the degree of 
protection against access to hazardous parts and 
against harmful effects due to ingress of solid 
foreign objects, if declared to be higher than 4 in 
which case the second characteristic numeral shall 
also be marked; 


b 


wm 


the second characteristic numeral for the degree of 
protection against harmful effects due to ingress 
of water, if declared to be higher than 2 in which 
case the first characteristic numeral shall also be 
marked; IPXX 


The following marking A/\/\ on the cover of 
flush enclosures intended to be mounted on rough 
surfaces and where the IP is dependent on the 
surface (see Fig. 5). The IP code, if applicable, 
shall be marked on the outside of the enclosure so 
as to be easily discernible when the enclosure is 
mounted and wired as for normal use; 


c 


wa 


d 


wa 


The type reference, which may be a catalogue 
number; and 


For boxes and enclosures classified as in 7.2.2.2 
and 7.2.2.3, the minimum internal volume in cm? 
as determined by the test in 12.16. The internal 
volume shall be marked on the inside of the box or 
enclosure. The marking on a box or enclosure shall 
be such that the value can be read after installation 
of the box in the normal manner but before the 
installation of the wiring devices and wiring; 


e 


Saia 


The following information shall be marked on the 
boxes and enclosures or provided by the manufacturer 
on the smallest package unit or in the manufacturer ’s 
instructions, which need not be provided with the 
product: 


f) +90°C for boxes and enclosures classified 
according to 7.2.1.3; 


g) the necessary information concerning the openings 
which can be made during installation in the case 
of boxes and enclosures classified according 
to 7.3.7; 


h) the minimum temperature during installation for 
boxes classified according to 7.5.2 and 7.5.3; and 


j) the symbol Ha for boxes classified according 
to 7.2.2.1 and the symbol Hb for boxes classified 
according to 7.2.2.2 and 7.2.2.3. 


Unless self-evident, further information for the correct 
use of the enclosure shall be given in the manufacturer’s 
instructions which need not be provided with the 
product. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


In special cases, in order to achieve a higher degree 
of protection by the use of special parts an instruction 
sheet should be provided and should indicate the higher 
degree of protection. In such a case, the marking covers 
the initial degree of protection. 


8.2 The marking on the boxes and enclosures shall be 
durable and easily legible. 


Compliance with 8.1 and 8.2 is checked by inspection 
and by the following test. 


The test is made by rubbing the marking by hand for 15 s 
with a piece of cloth soaked with water and again for 15 s 
with a piece of cloth soaked with petroleum spirit. 

NOTE — Marking made by moulding, pressing or engraving 

is considered durable and is therefore not subjected to this test. 
It is recommended that the petroleum spirit used 
consist of a solvent hexane with an aromatic content 
of maximum 0.1 percent by volume, a kauributanol 
value of approximately 29, an initialboiling-point of 
approximately + 65°C, a dry point of approximately 
+ 69°C and a density of approximately 0.68 g/cm’. 


After the test, the marking shall still be legible. 
8.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


9 DIMENSIONS 


9.1 Boxes and enclosures shall comply with the 
appropriate standard sheets, if any. 


9.2 Compliance 
measurement. 


is checked by inspection and 


10 PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC 
SHOCK 


10.1 Boxes and enclosures shall be so designed that, 
when they are assembled, equipped and installed as 
for normal use in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions, live parts are not accessible. 


10.2 Where enclosures are supplied without a cover, 
cover-plate or an accessory they are tested with the 
appropriate parts fitted according to the information 
given in the manufacturer’s instructions. 


10.3 Compliance is checked by inspection and in case 
of doubt by the following test. 


10.4 Enclosures shall be tested with test probe 11 
according to IS 1401 applied for 1 min with a force 
of 20 N, and the test probe shall not penetrate in the 
internal volume of the enclosure, as shown in Fig. 2. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Fic. 2 DEMONSTRATION OF THE NON-PENETRATION 
OF THE INTERNAL VOLUME 


10.5 Tests shall be carried out on parts that are accessible 
after installation. 


10.6 In addition, all enclosures according to 7.1.1, 
7.1.3 and 7.1.4 with parts made of thermoplastic or 
elastomeric material shall be subjected for 1 min to a 
force applied through the tip of test probe 11 of IS 1401 
but at an ambient temperature of +(35 + 2)°C, the 
enclosure being at this temperature. 


10.7 The probe is applied to all places where yielding 
of insulating material could impair the safety with 
a force of 75 N except to membranes, grommets and 
knock-outs or the like. 


10.8 Knock-outs are tested according to 12.9.2. 
11 PROVISIONS FOR EARTHING 


11.1 Boxes and Enclosures with Exposed Conductive 
Parts 


Boxes and enclosures with exposed conductive parts 
shall be provided with an earthing means of low 
resistance or have provision for the fitting of such an 
earthing means. For the purpose of this requirement, 
small screws and the like, for fixing bases, covers 
or cover plates, etc. isolated from live parts, are not 
considered as exposed conductive parts. 


Exposed conductive parts of covers or cover-plates 
shall be connected through a low resistance connection 
to the earthing means when fitted as for normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


A current derived from an a.c. source having a no-load 
voltage not exceeding 12 V and equal to (25 + 1) A is 
passed between the earthing terminal and each exposed 
conductive part in turn. The voltage drop between the 
earthing terminal and each of the exposed conductive 
parts is measured, and the resistance calculated from 
the current and this voltage drop. 


In no case shall the resistance exceed 0.05 Q. 


Care should be taken that the contact resistance 
between the tip of the measuring probe and the exposed 
conductive part under test does not influence the test 
results. 


NOTE — In insulating boxes and enclosures having an IP 
degree higher than IPX0, provisions can be made for the 
addition of means for the effective continuity of the earthing 
conductor, when more than one inlet is provided. 


The earthing means or the provision for the fitting of 
such an earthing means shall be located so that: 


a) the means is readily accessible through the open 
face of the box, 


b) the removal of an accessory mounted in the box 
does not disturb the continuity of the earthing 
circuit, and 


c) the means is not part of a removable cover, back, 
or side of the box or enclosure. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


11.2 Boxes and Enclosures of Insulating Material 
Classified According to 7.2.2.2 and 7.2.2.3 


Boxes and enclosures of insulating material shall 
be provided with a minimum of one earthing strap 
having one screw terminal for earthing purposes 
with a connecting capacity of at least 4 mm’. The 
design of the earthing strap shall ensure that the 
metal mounting yokes of accessories mounted inside 
the box and metallic covers mounted on the box are 
connected to the earthing conductors (see Fig. 3 and 
Fig. 4). 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


The earthing strap shall be securely fastened to the box 
or enclosure. 


Compliance is checked by the test in 16.3.2. 


11.3 Boxes or Enclosures with Removable Sides 
According to 7.1.2 


A box or enclosure classified according to 7.1.2 that 
has removable sides shall be constructed so that the 
electrical bond between separable parts includes at 
least one threaded screw connection. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


11.4 Earthing Terminal Threads 


The threads of the earthing terminal delivered with or 
integrated in boxes and enclosures shall not be stripped 
when the torque shown in the relevant column of Table 
4 is applied. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the 
following test. 
The screws are tightened and loosened 5 times. 


The test is made by using a suitable screwdriver or 
an appropriate tool applying a torque as indicated in 
Table 4. 


Ifa screw has a hexagonal head with a slot, only the test 
with the screwdriver is made, with the relevant torque 
given in column II of Table 4. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Key 
1 earthing strap 
2 earthing terminal screw 
3 plastic box 
4 accessory 


Section A-A 


5 metal cover 

6 accessory’s metal mounting yoke 
7 accessory earthing terminal 

8 bonding jumper 


Fic. 3 EARTHING STRAP 


Fic. 4 Test STRAP 


Greater values of torque may be used if so stated by 
the manufacturer, when the relevant information is 
provided. 


Column I applies to screws which cannot be tightened 
by means of a screwdriver with a blade wider than the 
nominal diameter of the thread of the screw. 


Column II applies to other screws which are tightened 
by means of a screwdriver. 


Column III applies to screws and nuts which are 
tightened by means other than a screwdriver. 


Column IV applies to screws which are tightened by 
means of a square blade screwdriver. 


During the test, there shall be no damage, such 
as breakage of screw or damage to the head slot 
(rendering the use of the appropriate screwdriver 
impossible) or to the threads or to then closure 
impairing the further use of the fixing means. The 
screws shall be gradually tightened in one smooth 
and continuous movement. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


12 CONSTRUCTION 


12.1 General 


Boxes and enclosures shall be constructed without 
sharp edges. Burrs shall be removed from mould lines 
of interior surfaces so that there are no sharp edges or 
undue obstructions to the passage of wiring or coupling 
of parts in the intended use of the product. 


The inner and outer surfaces of a box or cover shall not 
be subject to peeling, scaling or flaking and shall be 
smooth and free from blisters, cracks, and other defects. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 
12.2 Lids, Covers or Cover-Plates or Parts of Them 


12.2.1 General 


Lids, covers, or cover-plates or parts of them, such as 
protective membranes, which are intended to ensure 
protection against electric shock, shall be held in place 
effectively. 


It is recommended that the fixing means of covers or 
cover-plates be captive. The use of tight-fitting washers 
of cardboard or the like is deemed an adequate method 
for securing screws intended to be captive. 


12.2.2 Screw-type Fixing 


A box or enclosure intended to accept a lid, cover, or 
cover plate by means of screw fixing shall be provided 
with means to accommodate the intended screws. 


For lids, covers or cover plates whose fixing is of the 
screw type, compliance is checked by inspection. 


12.2.3 Non-screw-type Fixing Operable Without the 
Use of a Tool or a Key 


12.2.3.1 General 


A box or enclosure intended to accept a lid, cover, 
or cover plate with non-screw- type fixing operable 


without the use of a tool or a key shall be provided with 
means to fix the lid, cover, or cover plate. 


For lids, covers or cover-plates whose removal 
is obtained by applying a force according to the 
requirements in Table 2 in a direction approximately 
perpendicular to the mounting/supporting surface when 
their removal may give access with test probe B of 
IS 1401: 


a) to live parts; 
b) to non-earthed conductive parts separated from 
live parts by basic insulation; 
c) only to: 
1) insulating parts, 
2) earthed conductive parts, 
3) conductive parts separated from live parts by 
double or reinforced insulation, or 
4) live parts of SELV circuits according to IEC 
61140 having a voltage not greater than 25 V 
a.c. or 60 V d.c. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 12.2.3.2 
and 12.2.3.3. 


Boxes and enclosures are mounted as for normal use. 


Flush-type boxes and enclosures are fixed and installed 
as for normal use. If they are provided with locking 
means which can be operated without the aid of a tool, 
these means are unlocked. 


12.2.3.2 Verification of the non-removal of the lids, 
covers or cover-plates 


Forces are gradually applied in one smooth and 
continuous movement in a direction perpendicular to 
the mounting surfaces, in such a way that the resulting 
force acting on the center of the lids, covers or cover- 
plates, or parts of them, is as specified in the relevant 
column of Table 2. 


Table 2 Forces to Be Applied to Lids, Covers, Cover-plates or 
Actuating Members Whose Fixing is Not Dependent on Screws 


( Clause 12.2.3.1, 12.2.3.2, 12.2.3.3 ) 


Accessibility with the Test Probe B of IS 1401 after Removal 
of Lids, Covers or Cover-plates or Parts of Them 


with 12.2.3.4 and 12.2.3.5 


Force to Be Applied N 


Enclosures Not Complying 
with 12.2.3.4 and 12.2.3.5 


Enclosures Complying 


Shall Not Shall Come Shall Not Shall Come 
Come Off Off* Come Off Off* 
To live parts 40 120 80 120 
To non-earthed conductive parts separated from live parts by 10 120 20 120 
basic insulation 
To insulating parts, earthed conductive parts, or conductive parts 10 120 10 120 


separated from live parts by double or reinforced insulation or 
live parts of SELV circuits according to IEC 61140 having a 
voltage not greater than 25 V a.c. or 60 V d.c. 


* This column does not apply for 12.2.4. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Key 


1 sheet of hard material 


2 cover-plate 


3 supporting frame 


4 wall 


5 mounting box 


Fic. 5 ARRANGEMENT FOR TEST ON COVERS OR 
Cover-PLatEs (SEE 12.2.3.2 AND 12.2.3.3) 


The force is applied for 1 min. 
The lids, covers or cover-plates, shall not come off. 


For flush-mounting boxes or enclosures, the test is 
then repeated on new specimens, the lid, cover or 
cover- plate is mounted on the box, after a sheet of hard 
material (1 + 0.1) mm thick, has been fitted on the wall 
around the supporting frame, as shown in Fig. 5. 


The sheet of hard material is used to simulate wallpaper 
and may consist of a number of pieces. 


12.2.3.3 Verification of the removal of the lids, covers 
or cover-plates 


A force not exceeding that specified in the relevant 
column of Table 2 is gradually applied in one smooth 
and continuous movement, in a direction perpendicular 
to the mounting/supporting surfaces, to lids, covers 
or cover-plates, or parts of them by means of a hook 
placed in turn in each of the grooves, holes, spaces or 
the like, provided for removing them. 


The lids, covers or cover-plates shall come off. 


The test is made 10 times on each separable part the 
fixing of which is not dependent on screws (equally 
distributing as far as practicable the application points); 


the removal force is applied each time to the different 
grooves, holes or the like provided for removing the 
separable part. 


For flush-mounting boxes or enclosures, the test is then 
repeated on new specimens. 


The lid, cover or cover-plate is mounted on the box 
after a sheet of hard material (1 + 0.1) mm 


thick has been fitted on the wall around the supporting 
frame, as shown in Fig. 5. 


After the test, the specimens shall show no damage 
within the meaning of this standard. 


12.2.3.4 Verification of the outline of lids, covers and 
cover-plates 


The gauge shown in Fig. 6 is pushed towards each side 
of each lid, cover or cover-plate, which is fixed without 
screws on a mounting or supporting surface, as shown 
in Fig. 7. The face B resting on the mounting/supporting 
surface, with the face A perpendicular to it, the gauge is 
applied at right angles to each side under test. 


In the case of a lid, cover or cover-plate fixed without 
screws to another lid, cover or cover-plate or to a 
mounting box, having the same outline dimensions, the 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Face A 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 6 GAUGE FOR THE VERIFICATION OF THE OUTLINE OF LIDS, COVERS OR COVER-PLATES 


face B of the gauge shall be placed at the same level as 
the junction; the outline of the lid, cover or cover-plate 
shall not exceed the outline of the supporting surface. 


The distances between the face C of the gauge and 
the outline of the side under test, measured parallel 
to face B, shall not decrease (with the exception of 
grooves, holes, reverse tapers or the like, placed at a 
distance less than 7 mm from a plane including face 
B and complying with the test of 12.2.3.5) when 
measurements are repeated starting from point X in the 
direction of the arrow Y (see Fig. 8). 


12.2.3.5 Verification of grooves, holes and reverse 
tapers 


A gauge according to Fig. 9, applied with a force of 
(1 + 0.2) N, shall not enter more than 1.0 mm from the 
upper part of any groove, hole or reverse taper or the 
like when the gauge is applied parallel to the mounting/ 
supporting surface and at right angles to the part under 
test, as shown in Fig. 10. 


NOTE — The verification of whether the gauge according to 
Fig. 10 has entered more than 1.0 mm is made with reference to 
a surface perpendicular to face B and including the upper part 
of the outline of the grooves, holes, reverse tapers or the like. 


12.2.4 Non Screw-type Fixing Operable with the Use of 
a Tool or a Key 


For lids, covers or cover-plates whose fixing is not 
dependent on screws and whose removal is obtained 
by using a tool and/or a key, in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions, compliance is checked by 


10 


the same tests of 12.2.3 except that the lids, covers or 
cover-plates or parts of them need not come off when 
applying a force not exceeding 120 N in directions 
perpendicular to the mounting/supporting surface. 


12.3 Drain Holes 


Surface and semi-flush mounting enclosures with a 
degree of protection IPX1 to IPX6 shall be designed 
to allow the opening of a drain hole of at least 5 mm in 
diameter or 20 mm? in area with a minimum width or 
length of 3 mm. 


Drain holes shall be so located and available in such 
a number that one of the holes can always become 
effective in any intended mounting position of the 
enclosure. 
NOTE — A drain hole in the back of the enclosure is deemed 
to be effective if the design of the enclosure ensures a clearance 


from the wall to provide a drainage space for the water of at 
least the size specified for the drain hole. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and measurement. 


12.4 Mounting of Enclosures 


Enclosures shall have provisions for their suitable 
attachment according to the type of installation 
(see 7.2). 


Enclosures of insulating material shall be constructed 
in such a way that any conductive parts of fixing means 
inside the box or enclosure intended to be used for 
mounting the enclosure are surrounded by insulation 
which projects above the top of the fixing means by 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Key 

1 mounting surface 

2 cover 

3 surface support 

4 spacing piece with the same thickness as that of the supporting part 


Fic. 7 EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION OF THE GAUGE OF FIG. 6 ON COVERS FIXED WITHOUT 
SCREWS ON A MOUNTING SURFACE OR SUPPORTING SURFACE 


IS 14772 : 2020 


a 
| 


a) 


a L 
| 


Y Y 
b) e) 


r 4 


Y 


c} f 
Cases a) and b) do not comply. 


Cases c), d), e) and f) comply (compliance shall, however, also be checked with the 
requirements of 12.2.3.5 using the gauge shown in Fig. 9). 


Fic. 8 COMPLIANCE CRITERIA OF APPLICATION OF THE GAUGE OF FIG. 6 


= 
= 


100 min. 
Dimensions in millimetres 
Key 
1 test rod (metal) 
2 right-angled sharp edges 


Fic. 9 GAUGE For VERIFICATION OF GROOVES, 
HOLES AND REVERSE TAPERS 


12 


Key 
1 


2 mounting support 


cover 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Fic. 10 SKETCH SHOWING THE DIRECTION OF 
APPLICATION OF THE GAUGE OF FIG. 9 


an amount of not less than 10 percent of the maximum 
width of the cavity for the fixing means. 


Compliance is checked by 


measurement. 


inspection and by 


12.5 Boxes and Enclosures with Inlets for Flexible 
Cables 


Inlets (outlets) provided in boxes and enclosures 
classified according to 7.3.2 shall be so designed 
and constructed that the flexible cables can be easily 
introduced, and will not damage the flexible cable 
where it enters the box or enclosure impairing its 
further use. 


Compliance is checked by manual test. 


12.6 Boxes and Enclosures with Inlets for 


Applications other than Flexible Cables 


Inlet openings classified according to 7.3 other 
than 7.3.2, if any, shall allow the introduction of: 


a) a conduit or suitable fitting connecting it to the 
box or enclosure, and 


b) the protective covering of the cable. 


Soas to provide mechanical protection of the conductors 
where they enter the box or enclosure. 


An inlet opening for conduit entries, or at least two 
of them if there is more than one, shall be capable of 


13 


accepting either conduits of sizes, or a combination of 
sizes, in accordance with the requirements of IS 14763 
and/or IEC 60981. 


Compliance is checked by inspection with the 
appropriate cables or conduits installed. 


Inlet openings of adequate size may also be obtained by 
the use of knock-outs or suitable insertion pieces or by 
means of an appropriate cutting tool. 


12.7 Boxes and Enclosures with a Cable Anchorage(s) 


Clamping means of boxes and enclosures classified 
according to 7.4.2 shall be such that theconnection of 
the conductors of the flexible cable are relieved from 
strain when this flexible cable is accessible and likely 
to be stressed after installation. 


It shall be clear how the relief from strain and the 
prevention of twisting are intended to be effected. 


Cable anchorages shall be: 


a) suitable for the different types of flexible cable for 
which the box is intended to be used; 


b) constructed in such a way that at least one part of 
it is integral with, or permanently fixed to, one of 
the component parts of the box; and 


c) of insulating material or be provided with an 
insulating lining fixed to the metal parts. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Compliance is checked by inspection and the following 
test. 


The effectiveness of the cable anchorage is checked by 
means of an apparatus as shown in Fig. 11. 


The cable anchorage is applied as in normal use, 
clamping screws, if any, being tightened with a torque 
equal to the 2/3 of the relevant torque specified in 
Table 4 or, for glands, equal to the relevant torque 
specified in Table 5. 


After reassembly of the specimen, it shall not be 
possible to push the flexible cable into the specimen 
by more than | mm with the relevant force as specified 
in Table 3. 


The cable is then subjected 50 times for 1 s to a 
pull force as specified in Table 3 and immediately 
afterwards the flexible cable is subjected to a torque 
not less than the relevant value specified in Table 3 for 
(15 + 1) s applied as near as practicable to the cable 
entry. 


After the tests, the flexible cable shall not have been 
displaced by more than 2 mm and the cable anchorage 
(strain relief) shall not show any damage which leads to 
non-compliance with this standard. 


Key 
1 box 
2 crank 


3 eccentric 


Fic. 11 APPARATUS FOR TESTING THE CABLE 
ANCHORAGE 


14 


Table 3 Forces and Torques to be 
Applied to Cable Anchorages 


External Dimensions of Force Torque 
Flexible Cable N Nm 
mm 

Up to and including 5.2 x 7.6 40+2 0.05 

Up to and including 8 50+2 0.1 

Above 8 up to and including 11 60+2 0.15 

Above 11 up to and including 16 80 +2 0.35 

Above 16 100 + 2 0.42 


12.8 Boxes and Enclosures with Cable Retention 
Means 


Cable retention means of boxes and enclosures 
classified according to 7.4.1 shall retain the cable in 
place. 


Compliance is checked by the following test, which is 
carried out on three specimens of retention means. 


For boxes and enclosures classified according to 7.5.2 
or 7.5.3, the test shall be carried out at (-15 + 2)°C and 
(-25 + 2)°C respectively. 


First a cable of the maximum nominal cross -sectional 
area and, subsequently, a cable with the minimum 
nominal cross-sectional area as declared by the 
manufacturer shall be used. 


The cable is fitted in the cable retention means according 
to the manufacturer‘s instructions. 


The cable is loaded with an axial force of (20 + 1) N. 


The load is maintained for 1 min and at the end of this 
period, the displacement of the cable shall not exceed 
3 mm following the removal of the load. 


12.9 Knock-outs Intended to be Removed by 
Mechanical Impact 


12.9.1 General 


It shall be possible to remove knock-outs intended to 
be removed by mechanical impact without damaging 
the box. 


Knock-outs intended for use with cables shall be free 
from chips or burrs. 


In knock- outs intended for use with conduits and/ 
or a grommet or a membrane, chips and burrs are 
disregarded. 


In order to close an open knock-out in a box or an 
enclosure classified according to 7.1.2 a blanking-plug 
can be used. 


This blanking-plug used without a locknut: 
a) shall not become dislodged or damaged, 
b) its effectiveness shall not be impaired, and 
c) it shall fulfil all requirements for knock-outs. 


This requirement does not apply to a blanking-plug 
which is assembled by threading into a threaded inlet. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests as 
specified in 12.9.2 and 12.9.3. 

12.9.2 Knock-out Retention 

For boxes and enclosures having knock-outs that: 


a) do not provide access to live parts and are 
accessible after installation, a force of (30 + 1) N 
shall be applied to a knock-out for (15 + 1) s, 


b) provide direct access to live parts after installation, 
a force of (40 + 1) N shall be applied to a knock- 
out for (60 + 1)s, 


by means of a 6 mm diameter mandrel with a flat end. 


The force is to be applied without a blow in a direction 
perpendicular to the plane of the knock-out and at a 
point most likely to cause movement. 


When the box is provided with a multi-stage knock-out, 
the force shall be applied to the smallest knock-out. 


The knock-out shall remain in place and the degree of 
protection of the box or enclosure shall be unchanged 
when measured 1 h after the force has been removed. 


12.9.3 Knock-out Removal 


The knock -outs shall be removed by means of a tool, 
as stated by the manufacturer. The side edge of a 
screwdriver may be run along the edge of the knock- 
out opening once to remove any fragile tabs remaining 
along the edge. 


For boxes or enclosures according to 7.1.1 or 7.1.3, 
the test is repeated with one previously untested box or 
enclosure which has been conditioned for 5 h + 10 min 
in air maintained at the minimum temperature during 
installation as specified according to 7.5. Immediately 
following this conditioning, the knock-out is to be 
removed as above. 


For a box or enclosure employing multi-stage knock- 
outs, there shall be no displacement of a larger stage 
when a smaller stage is removed. 


After the test, there shall be no sharp edges, except for 
knock-outs for conduits and/or for use with a grommet 
or a membrane and the box and enclosure shall not be 
damaged. 


12.9.4 Flat Surfaces Surrounding Knock-outs 


Knock-outs intended for the use of grommets, glands 
or fittings shall be located in flat surfaces to permit 
grommets, glands or fittings to be seated fully against 
these surfaces when installed as intended. 


Projections or indentations in the flat surface area 
shall be prohibited, however holes shall be allowed. 
The flat surface areas of adjacent knock-outs that 
partially or wholly overlap meet the intent of this 
requirement. 


15 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
measurement according to the appropriate national 
standard sheet, if any. 


12.10 Screw Fixings 


Fixing means for lids, covers, cover plates, 
accessories, terminals, connecting devices, strain 
reliefs, etc. effected by screws shall be so designed 
and constructed that these means withstand the 
mechanical stresses occurring during installation and 
normal use. 


Screws or other fixing means made from insulating 
material similar to screws without standardized thread 
which have to be tightened by any tool for fixing 
covers shall be tested according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 


Thread-forming and thread-cutting screws intended 
only for mechanical assembly may be used provided 
they are supplied together with one of the pieces with 
which they are intended to be assembled. 


For thread-forming and thread-cutting screws, the 
screw assembly operation shall be done before carrying 
out the tests. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the 
following test. 


The screws of the fixing means are tightened and 
loosened: 


a) 10 times for metal screws in engagement with a 
thread of insulating material; and 


b) 5 times in all other cases. 


Screws and nuts in engagement with a thread of 
insulating material and screws of insulating material 
are completely removed and reinserted each time. 
The test is made by using a suitable screwdriver or 
an appropriate tool applying a torque as indicated in 
Table 4. 


Ifa screw has a hexagonal head with a slot, only the test 
with the screwdriver is made, with the relevant torque 
given in column II of Table 4. 


Greater values of torque may be used if so stated by 
the manufacturer, when the relevant information is 
provided. 


Column I applies: 


a) to screws which cannot be tightened by means of 
a screwdriver with a blade wider than the nominal 
diameter of the thread of the screw, 


b) to non-metallic screws, and 


c) to metallic screws in a thread of insulating 
material. In this latter case, the width of the profile 
of the recess to tighten the screw is chosen instead 
of the diameter of the thread when this profile 
width is smaller than the nominal diameter of the 
thread with a minimum of 3 mm. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Column II applies to other screws which are tightened 
by means of a screwdriver. 


Column III applies to screws and nuts which are 
tightened by means other than a screwdriver. 


Column IV applies to screws which are tightened by 
means of a square blade screwdriver. 


During the test, there shall be no damage, such 
as breakage of screw or damage to the head slot 
(rendering the use of the appropriate screwdriver 
impossible) or to the threads or to the enclosure 
impairing the further use of the fixing means. The 
screws shall be gradually tightened in one smooth 
and continuous movement. 


Table 4 Tightening Torques for the Verification of 
the Mechanical Strength of Screws 


( Clause 11.4) 


Nominal Diameter of 
Screw Thread 


Torque for Metallic and 
Non-metallic Screws 


mm Nm 

I Il MI IV 
Up to and including 2.8 0.20 0.40 0.40 0.70 
Over 2.8 up to and 0.25 0.50 0.50 0.90 
including 3.0 
Over 3.0 up to and 0.30 0.60 0.60 1.10 
including 3.2 
Over 3.2 up to and 0.40 0.80 0.80 1.40 
including 3.6 
Over 3.6 up to and 0.70 1.20 1.20 1.80 
including 4.1 
Over 4.1 up to and 0.80 1.80 1.80 2.30 
including 4.7 
Over 4.7 up to and 0.80 2.00 2.00 4.00 
including 5.3 
Over 5.3 up to and 1.20 2.50 3.00 4.40 
including 6.0 
Over 6.0 up to and 2.50 3.50 6.00 4.70 
including 8.0 
Over 8.0 3.00° 4.00 10.00 5.00 


* Or to be specified by the manufacturer. 


12.11 Fixing of Boxes and Enclosures Classified 
According to 7.2.1 


Flush type boxes and enclosures other than for hollow 
walls, and as otherwise indicated below, shall be 
provided with fixing means for their suitable attachment 
to the wall, ceiling or floor. Screws intended to fix the 
box or enclosure to the building structure need not be 
supplied with the box or enclosure but can be provided 
by the installer according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 


16 


Separately supplied fixing means for a box or enclosure 
shall comply with the requirements for the fixing means 
of the box or enclosure with which they are intended to 
be used and shall include a means for fixing to the box 
or enclosure. 


Screws, additional mechanical supports or design 
features, which prevent the displacement of the box 
or the enclosure, are considered to be adequate fixing 
means. 

NOTE — Edges, ribs, recesses, partial edges and the like 


are examples of design features intended to prevent the 
displacement of the box or the enclosure. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


Boxes and enclosures not fulfilling at least one of the 
above requirements and having an internal volume less 
than 400 cm?, shall be tested as follows. 


The internal volume of the box or enclosure shall be 
checked by inspection or by the test in 12.16. 


For boxes and parts of enclosures to be embedded in 
masonry the specimen is mounted into the mounting 
block shown in Fig. 12 and fixed according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


CL LS 


2 1 


Key 
1 specimen 
2 plaster 
3 block of wood 


* The gap between the main external profile of the box and the 
internal profile of the recess in the mounting block shall be at least 
20 mm, and for parts which project from the main profile never less 
than 10 mm. 


Fic. 12 EXAMPLE oF MOUNTING BLOCK FOR BOXES 
TO BE EMBEDDED IN Masonry (FLUSH TYPE 
AND SEMI-FLUSH TYPE) 


The gap between the main external profile of the 
specimen and the internal profile of the recess in the 
mounting block shall be at least 20 mm and for parts 
that project from the main 


profile never less than 10 mm. The block is filled by the 
material specified in the manufacturer’s instructions, or 
by plaster where the manufacturer’s instructions do not 
specify the material. 


The assembly is kept at ambient temperature for 
(10 + 1/0) days. 


The auxiliary device described in Fig. 13 is mounted on 
the specimen and the screws are tightened with a torque 
equal to two thirds of the applicable torque given in 
Table 4. 


The assembly is then fixed to the mounting plate (A) of 
an apparatus shown in Fig. 14, so that the axes of the 
screws are normal to the mounting plane. 


The total weight of the device including the 
principal weight (PW) shall be (72 + 0.1) N, and the 
supplementary weight (SW) shall be (8 + 0.1) N. 

The supplementary weight (SW) and the principal 


weight (PW) are introduced on the axis of the device 
and fixed by the carrier (C) (see Fig. 14). 


The supplementary weight shall fall from a height of 50 
mm onto the principal weight 10 times. 


After the test the specimen shall not have been displaced 
by more than 0.5 mm from the mounting block. 


Key 
1 auxiliary device 
2 specimen 
Fic. 13 EXAMPLE OF THE FIXING OF THE AUXILIARY 
DEVICE MOUNTED ON A SPECIMEN 


17 


IS 14772 : 2020 


a 


/ 


supplementary weight (SW) 


principal weight (PW) 
carrier (C) 


mounting plate (A) 


Fic. 14 EXAMPLE OF TEST APPARATUS FOR THE TEST 


12.12 Fixing of Flush Type and Semi-flush Type 
Boxes and Enclosures Classified According to 7.2.2.1 


Boxes and enclosures for hollow walls or the like 
classified according to 7.2.2.1 shall have suitable 
means for fixing the box or the enclosure to hollow 
walls, hollow ceilings, hollow floors or furniture. 


The fixing means shall not rely on the cable management 
system. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


A specimen of the box or enclosure is mounted in a test 
wall in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 
Where the manufacturer’s instructions are not specific 
regarding the type of wall, a sheet of plywood 
(10 + 1) mm thick, 500 mm wide and 500 mm high 
shall be used. 


a) Checking pull and torque 


Alever shall be fixed with the fixing means for accessories 
or covers to the specimen, as shown in Fig. 15. 


This lever is loaded for one minute with a force F1 as 
shown in Fig. 15 a) in such a way that a torque (F1 x a) 
of 3 Nm is applied to the box and simultaneously with 
a force F2 as shown in Fig. 15 b) of 100 N applied on 
the main axis of the box perpendicular to the mounting 
surface. 


After this test, the specimens shall show no damage 
impairing their further use and the displacement of the 
lever shall be no more than 2°. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


b) Checking displacement 


The end of the lever is subjected for 1 min to a force F3 
applied to the same point where F1 was applied in such 
a way that a torque (F3 x b) of 3 Nm is applied to the 
box as shown in Fig. 15 c). 


After the test, the edge of the box shall not have been 
displaced by more than 1 mm in comparison to the 
mounting surface. 


12.13 Boxes and Enclosures Classified According to 
7.2.2.2 and 7.2.2.3 


12.13.1 General 


Boxes and enclosures for hollow walls or the like 
classified according to 7.2.2.2 and 7.2.2.3 shall have 
suitable means for fixing the box or the enclosure to 
hollow walls and hollow ceilings. 


The fixing means shall notrely on the cable management 
system. 


Compliance is checked by the tests in 12.13.2, 12.13.3, 
12.13.4 or 12.13.6 as applicable. 


12.13.2 Boxes Intended for Mounting on a Wood 
Structural Member of a Wall 


The box shall be mounted as in normal use to a (38 mm 
x 90 mm) wood structural member of any convenient 
length so that the plane of the front of the box is in 
vertical position. 


a) 
Key 


1 test specimen 


2 sheet of plywood 


The assembly shall withstand a force of 225 N gradually 
applied centrally from the base of the box for a period 
of 5 min. 


After the removal of the force, there shall be no pulling 
out of the nails or screws used to mount the box or 
movement of the face of the box in the horizontal plane 
of more than 3 mm. 


12.13.3 Boxes Intended for Mounting to a Wooden 
Structural Member of a Ceiling 


The box shall be mounted as in normal use to a (38 mm 
x 190 mm) wood structural member of any convenient 
length so that the plane of the front of the box is in 
horizontal position. 


The assembly shall withstand a force of 225 N gradually 
applied centrally from the face of the box for a period 
of 1 min. 


With the force still applied, the deflection of the face 
of the box shall not exceed 6 mm measured from a 
plane parallel to the horizontal face of the structural 
member. 


12.13.4 Boxes Intended for Mounting to a Steel-stud 
Structural Member of a Wall 


The box shall be mounted as in normal use to a steel- 
stud structural member as shown in Fig. 16. 


The assembly shall withstand a force of 180 N gradually 
applied centrally from the face of the box for a period 


3 lever 


4 main axis of the box 


Fic.15 VERIFICATION OF FIXING MEANS FOR BOXES AND 
ENCLOSURES CLASSIFIED ACCORDING TO 7.2.2.1 


18 


of 5 min, first in a direction tending to push the box 
into the wall opening and then in the opposite direction, 
tending to pull the box out of the opening. 


With the force still applied, the deflection of the box 
shall not exceed 2 mm in either direction. 


NOTE — Additional support for the box can be necessary to 
minimize deflection. 
Application of the force and measurement of the 
displacement are shown in Fig 16. 


12.13.5 Internal Volume of Boxes and Enclosures 
Classified According to 7.2.2.2 and 7.2.2.3 


For boxes, enclosures, raised covers and box extensions 
classified according to 7.2.2.2 and 7.2.2.3, the declared 
internal volume of a box, enclosure, raised cover or box 
extension shall be verified. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


A box or enclosure provided with a partition shall have 
the volume of each partitioned section verified. 


Compliance is checked by the test of 12.16. 


12.13.6 Boxes Intended for Mounting in a Finished 
Structure 


The supporting means of a box intended for 
installation in a finished structure shall not crack or 
break nor shall the face of the box be permanently 
displaced more than 3.2 mm from the plane of the face 
of the test surface when measured 1 min after the test 
load is removed. 


NOTE — In a finished structure, structural framing members 
are not typically accessible for mounting and supporting boxes 
or enclosures flush or semi-fiush in hollow walls. 


180 N 


Box with permanently attached additional support 


180 N 


300 mm 


400 mm 


Front view 


Key 
1 box 
2 steel stud 
3 additional support 


4 maximum deflection 


5 plywood 
6 bracket 


7 three screws per side per panel 


Fic. 16 TEST OF THE FORCE AND MEASUREMENT OF THE DISPLACEMENT 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Compliance is checked by the following test: 


Six boxes intended for use in walls or eight boxes 
intended for use in ceilings shall be installed in a 9.5 
mm thick plywood sheet reinforced with a support 152 
mm from one edge of the opening for the boxes, or ina 
finished surface in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 


Screws for the box supporting means shall be tightened 
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. In 
the absence of instructions, screws shall be tightened 
in accordance with column IV of Table 4. A screw that 
strips before being tightened to the torque specified 
shall not over ride more than once. 


Following installation, a force of 222 N shall be 
applied for 5 min consecutively to each of two boxes 
in a direction normal to the plane of the face of the test 
surface along the centerline of the box, and tending to 
push the box into the opening. The same force is to be 
applied to each of two previously untested boxes in a 
direction tending to pull the box out of the opening. 
Following this test, the screw shall be capable of being 
removed by a screw driver. 


Two additional samples of a box secured so that the 
plane of the front of the box is vertical, shall be subjected 
to a force of 222 N applied for 5 min suspended from 
the lower rear corner of the outer back edge of the box. 


12.14 Cable Gland Entry 


Cable glands shall not damage the box or enclosure 
when used as intended. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


Cable glands are fitted with a cylindrical metal rod 
having a diameter, in milli metres, equal to the internal 
diameter of the gasket rounded to the nearest whole 
number as specified in the first colof Table 5. The cable 
glands are then tightened and loosened 10 times by 
means of a suitable tool with the torque specified in 
Table 5 with a tolerance of percent, the relevant torque 
being applied for 1 min 5 s. 


Table 5 Torque Test Values for Cable Glands 


Diameter of Test Rod Torque 
mm Nm 
Metal Glands Glands of 
Insulating 
Material 
Up to and including 8 4.0 2.5 
Over 8 up to and 6.3 3.8 
including 14 
Over 14 up to and 75 5.0 
including 20 
Over 20 10.0 ES 


20 


After the test, the boxes and enclosures shall show no 
damage within the meaning of this standard. 


12.15 Boxes and Enclosures with Inlets (Outlets) or 
Spouts (hubs) for Conduits 


12.15.1 Boxes and enclosures classified according 
to 7.3.4 and conical spouts as in 7.3.6 shall withstand 
the tests of 12.15.2, 12.15.3 and 12.15.4. 


Threaded spouts are not submitted to the tests of 
12.15.2 and 12.15.3. 


Boxes and enclosures classified according to 7.4.3 shall 
withstand the tests of sub clauses 12.15.2 and 12.15.3. 


The tests are carried out with conduits of minimum 
nominal size according to IS 14763 or IEC 60981 after 
installation as in normal use or assembly according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions. 


12.15.2 Enclosures with the inlet spout for conduits, 
if any, shall be tested so that a minimum size piece 
of conduit is pressed for 1 min + 5 s with a force of 
(100 + 2) N. The inlet spout shall prevent further entry 
of the conduit into the box. 


12.15.3 A pull-out test shall be carried out after the 
test according to 12.15.2, as follows. The conduit with 
the minimum size corresponding to the insert opening 
shall be loaded axially for 1 min with a tensile force of 
(20 + 2) N. The conduit shall not come loose from the 
inlet spout of the enclosure. 


12.15.4 The resistance to bending strain of an 
inlet spout shall be tested as follows. A piece of a 
conduit shall be inserted into the inlet spout with a 
compressible force of (100 + 2) N andloaded with a 
bending moment of 3 Nm. The strain shall slowly rise 
from zero to full value and the test shall be done in 
six different directions through the centre line of the 
inlet spout with an interval of (60 + 2)°. At each angle 
position the inlet spout shall be loaded for 1 min. The 
inlet spout shall not come loose or be damaged and the 
conduit shall stay within the inlet spout. 


NOTE — An inlet stop can be designed as a rib on the inside of 
the inlet spout. 


12.16 Internal Volume of Boxes and Enclosures 


When referred to in this standard, the declared internal 
volume of the box or enclosure, each partitioned section 
of a box or enclosure, raised covers and box extensions 
shall be measured in the following manner: 


a) All internal screws, clamps, etc, shall be removed 
except earthing terminals and assembly screws. 


b) Any projections such as a cover or flush-mounting 
ears that extend beyond the normal edge of the 
box or enclosure shall be ground flush with the 
edge. 


c) All knock-outs shall be left as punched and shall 
be sealed externally. 


d) All openings shall be plugged with modelling 
clay, putty, wax or other material(s) and shall be 
filled flush with the internal surface. 


The box, enclosure, or raised covers shall be 
covered with a flat plate of any convenient 
transparent material not more than 3.2 mm thick. 
In the centre of the plate a hole with a nominal 
diameter of 13 mm shall be provided (see Fig. 17). 
If necessary, the gap between the box, enclosure 
or raised cover and the plate shall be sealed with 
the material used to seal the other openings. 


e) 


Using any convenient graduated cylinder or 
measuring flask filled with water at room 
temperature, the box, enclosure, or raised cover 
shall be filled without over flowing. The difference 
in the volume of water in the measuring cylinder 
measured before and after the filling of the box, 
enclosure or raised cover indicates the volume of 
the box. 

The volume of a side pocket provided to increase the 
volume of a box or enclosure shall be calculated using 
a depth-of-pocket not more than the smallest dimension 
of the opening into that side pocket. 


13 inal 3 
nomina 
+O o § 
V f 


Dimensions in millimetres 


box 3 opening for water fill 


cover 4 seal if necessary 


Fic. 17 VoLUME MEASUREMENT 


13 RESISTANCE TO AGEING, PROTECTION 
AGAINST INGRESSOF SOLID OBJECTSAND 
AGAINSTHARMEFUL INGRESS OF WATER 


13.1 Resistance to Ageing 


13.1.1 Insulating and composite boxes and enclosures, 
glands, grommets and replaceable membranes shall be 
resistant to ageing. 


Compliance is checked as follows. 


Boxes and enclosures of insulating or composite 
material with provision for glands or grommets are 
mounted and assembled as in normal use or according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions. 


21 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Boxes and enclosures of insulating or composite 
material without provision for glands, grommets, 
or membranes are assembled according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


Parts intended for decorative purposes which can be 
removed without the aid of a tool, shall be removed 
before the tests. 


For boxes and enclosures provided with glands or 
grommets, approximately half of the number of glands 
or grommets of each of the boxes and enclosures are 
fitted with seals together with cylindrical metal rods 
having a diameter equal to the lower limit specified 
for the mean overall diameter of the smallest cable as 
declared by the manufacturer. The remainder of the 
glands or grommets of the same boxes and enclosures 
are fitted with seals together with cylindrical metal rods 
having a diameter equal to the upper limit specified 
for the mean overall diameter of the largest cable as 
declared by the manufacturer. 


Where the number of glands or grommets in a box is 
greater than six, the test is made with three glands or 
grommets equipped for the smallest cable size and 
three glands or grommets equipped for the largest cable 
size on each box. 


In the case of grommets, the rod shall be kept in place 
in such a way that the rod cannot move. The means to 
keep the rod in place shall have no influence on the 
results of the tests. 


The glands are tightened with a torque equal to two- 
thirds of that applied during the test of 12.14 (Table 5) 
any other openings being closed. Greater values of 
torque may be used if so stated by the manufacturer. 


The temperature in the heating cabinet is (70 + 2)°C 
The specimens are kept in the cabinet for (168%) ) h. 


After the treatment, the specimens are removed from 
the cabinet and kept at room temperature for (96) h. 


After the test, the specimen shall show no harmful 
deformation or similar damage, which may impair their 
further use within the meaning of this standard. 


13.1.2 Grommets, blanking plugs and entry membranes 
in inlet openings and protectingmembranes shall 
be reliably fixed and shall not be displaced by the 
mechanical and thermal stresses occurring in normal 
use. 


Compliance is checked by the following test, which 
shall be applied to all grommets, blanking plugs, 
replaceable and non-replaceable membranes. 


Grommets, blanking plugs and membranes are tested 
while fixed to the enclosures. 


First, the enclosures that have been subjected to the 
treatment specified in 13.1.1 are placed for 2 h + 15 
min in a heating cabinet as described in 13.1.1, the 
temperature being maintained at (40 + 2)°C. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Immediately after this period, a force of (30 9) N is 
applied for (5 + 1) s to various parts of the grommets, 
blanking plugs and/or membranes by means of the tip 
of test probe 11 according to IS 1401. 


During these tests, the grommets, blanking plugs and/or 
membranes shall not be deformed to such an extent that 
live parts of any included accessory become accessible. 


For grommets, blanking plugs and/or membranes likely 
to be subjected to an axial pull in normal use, an axial 
pull of (30_)) N shall be applied for (5 + 1) s. 


The test is then repeated on the same enclosures fitted 
with grommets, blanking plugs and/or membranes 
which have not been subjected to any treatment. 


After the test, grommets, blanking plugs and/or 
membranes shall show no harmful deformation, cracks 
or similar damage which would lead to non-compliance 
with this standard. 


13.1.3 Grommets, blanking plugs and entry membranes 
in inlet openings of boxes and enclosures classified 
according to 7.5.2 and 7.5.3 shall be so designed and 
made of such material that the introduction of the cables 
and conduits is permitted when ambient temperature 
is low. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


The enclosure is fitted with grommets, blanking plugs 
and/or entry membranes which have not been subjected 
to any ageing treatment. 


After being left to cool down to the ambient temperature, 
the boxes and enclosures are then kept for 2 h in a 
refrigerator 


a) at a temperature of (-15 + 2)°C for boxes and 
enclosures classified according to 7.5.2, or 


b) ata temperature of (-25 + 2)°C for boxes classified 
according to 7.5.3. 


Immediately after conditioning, while the boxes and 
enclosures are still cold and in the refrigerator, it shall 
be possible to pierce any blind grommets, blanking 
plugs and entry membranes and to introduce cables 
and conduits of the maximum diameter intended, the 
cables and conduits having been submitted to the same 
conditioning as the boxes and enclosures. 


After the test, the grommets, blanking plugs or entry 
membranes shall show no harmful deformation, cracks 
or similar damage which would lead to non-compliance 
with this standard. 


13.2 Protection Against the Ingress of Solid Objects 


Enclosures shall provide a degree of protection against 
the ingress of solid objects in accordance with their 
declared IP Code. 


For boxes and enclosures classified according to 7.2.2.1, 
the above requirement applies also to the part mounted 
inside the hollow wall according to classification 7.8. 


22 


Compliance is checked by the appropriate test of 
IS/TEC 60529 under the following test conditions. 


Enclosures are mounted as for normal use according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions 


For boxes and enclosures classified according to 7.2.2.1, 
the test on the part mounted inside the wall is made on 
a box mounted so that the rear part is accessible for the 
test. 


Unless otherwise stated herein, where the enclosure 
has drain holes, at least one open drain hole shall be in 
the lowest position. Enclosures with screwed glands or 
grommets are fitted with cables having the smallest and 
the largest cross-sectional area and/or conduit having 
the smallest and the largest diameter/dimensions, if 
any, as declared by the manufacturer. 


Fixing screws of the cover or cover-plate of the box are 
tightened with a torque equal to two-thirds of the values 
from Table 4 used for the test of 12.10. 


Greater values of torque may be used if so stated by 
the manufacturer, when the relevant information is 
provided. 


Other fixing means shall be fastened as in normal 
use or, if provided, according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 


Cable and/or conduit entry means are made according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions. 


Parts which can be removed without the aid of a tool 
are removed. 


Glands are not filled with sealing compound or the like. 


For degree of protection IP5X, the test is carried out 
according to IS/IEC 60529 category 2 and the drain 
holes, if any, shall not be open. 


For degrees of protection up to and including IP4X, 
the protection is satisfactory if the full diameter of the 
probe does not pass through any opening other than 
through drain holes, in which case the probe shall not 
touch live parts within the enclosure. 


For degree of protection IP5X, the protection is 
satisfactory if the dust does not cover the whole inner 
surface. 


For degree of protection IP6X, the test is carried out 
according to IS/IEC 60529 and the drain hole, if any, 
shall not be open. The protection is satisfactory if there 
is no dust inside the box or enclosure. 


13.3 Protection Against Harmful Ingress of Water 


13.3.1 Enclosures with a degree of protection higher 
than IPX0 shall provide a degree of protection against 
harmful ingress of water in accordance with the 
declared IP Code. 


Compliance is checked by the appropriate tests of 
IS/TEC 60529 under the following test conditions. 


For surface enclosures and flush and semi-flush 
enclosures with dimensions S < 0.04 m° or perimeter 
<0.8 m, see 13.3.2 and 13.3.3. 


For surface enclosures and flush and semi-flush 
enclosures with dimensions S > 0.04 m? and perimeter 
> 0.8 m, see 13.3.2 and 13.3.4. 


The reference surface S to be chosen for verification is 
calculated as follows: 


a) For square and rectangular boxes and enclosures, 
the surface to take into account is the smallest 
interior width (1) multiplied by the depth (h) 
(see Fig. 18 a)). 


IS 14772 : 2020 


b) For round boxes and enclosures, the surface to take 
into account is the interior depth (h) of the box or 
enclosure multiplied by the smallest diameter (d) 
divided by 4 (see Fig. 18 b). 

Enclosures with screwed glands or grommets are fitted 
with cables having the smallest and the largest cross- 
sectional area and/or conduit having the smallest and 
the largest diameter/dimensions, if any, as declared by 
the manufacturer. 


Fixing screws of the cover or cover-plate of the box are 
tightened with a torque equal to two thirds of the values 
from Table 4 used for the test of 12.10. 


St=/lxh 
Key 


h depth I internal width 


* For a rectangular box placed horizontally, the surface S to take into account is the smallest one. 


a) Reference surface for square boxes and enclosures 


Key 


h internal depth d smallest diameter 


b) Reference surface for round boxes and enclosures 


Fic. 18 REFERENCE SURFACES FOR BOXES AND ENCLOSURES 


23 


IS 14772 : 2020 


13.3.2 Surface-mounting enclosures are mounted as for 
normal use according to themanufacturer’s instructions 
with any open drain holes in the lowest position unless 
otherwise specified. 


Flush type and semi-flush type enclosures are fixed 
in a test wall in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 


In this case, the manufacturer’s instructions shall 
specify a type of wall, as well as the mounting. 
These shall be described in sufficient detail to ensure 
reproducible tests. 


Where the manufacturer’s instructions do not specify a 
type of wall, the test wall according to Fig. 19 is used. 


The test wall of Fig. 19 is made with bricks having 
smooth surfaces. When the box is mounted in the test 
wall, it shall fit tight against the wall so that water 
cannot enter between the box and the wall. 


If sealing material is used in order to seal the box into 
the wall, the sealing compound should not influence the 
sealing properties of the specimen to be tested. 

NOTE — Fig. 19 shows an example where the edge of the box 


is positioned in the reference plane, other positions are possible 
according to the instructions of the manufacturer. 


The test wall is placed in a vertical position. 


Enclosures are mounted as in normal use and fitted with 

cables having conductors of the largest and smallest 

cross-sectional area as declared by the manufacturer. 
NOTE — For IPX3 and IPX4, the oscillating tube according 
to Fig. 4 of IS/IEC 60529 is used unless the dimensions of the 


enclosure imply the use of the spray nozzle according to Fig. 5 
of IS/IEC 60529. 


During the tests of enclosures of degree of protection 
higher than IPX4, drain holes, if any, shall not be 
opened. 


Key 
1 


box 
2 brick 


* Or in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions All mortar joints are 10 mm thick unless otherwise specified. 


Fic. 19 Test WALL 


24 


Section A-A 


3 mortar 


4 surface reference 


Care shall be taken not to disturb, for example, to knock 
or shake, the enclosure, in such a manner that the test 
result will be affected. 


13.3.3 Immediately after the test, there shall be no more 
than 0.2 ml x S (cm?) water in the enclosure. 


NOTE — For a degree of protection higher than IPX4, it can 
be necessary to open the drain holes for inspection. 


If the enclosure is not provided with drain holes, 
consideration should be given to any accumulation of 
water which may occur, for example, condensation. 


After the test, the specimens of boxes and enclosures 
classified according to 7.1.1, 7.1.3 and 7.1.4, as 
appropriate, shall withstand an electric strength test 
specified in 14.3, which shall be started within 5 min 
of the completion of the test according to this sub 
clause. 


13.3.4 Ingress of water is verified by the use of dry 
absorbent paper positioned to cover the base area of the 
protected volume. 

NOTE — The base is always the bottom of the protected area 

when installed. 
Unless it is decided otherwise by the manufacturer the 
protected volume shall correspond to the total internal 
space of the box reduced by 5 percent on each face of 
the box, that is, 10 percent on each dimension of the 
enclosure (See Fig. 20). 

V,= 0.9 Lx 0.9 D x 0.9 H 
where, 
V is the protected volume; 

is the length; 
is the depth; and 


is height. 


Tors 


NOTE — In case of a round box the protected volume is equal 

to V, = 0.9 H x n (0.9 x d}?/ 4. 
In order to construct the protected volume in absorbent 
paper the manufacturer should provide for the test a 
specimen where the absorbent paper is suspended by a 
reliable suspension means. 

NOTE — The formula is only an explanation of the protected 


volume which is decreased by 5 percent on each side of the 
enclosure. No calculation is required. 


For doors or covers a strip of paper, bent to form a 
90° angle profile, is attached to the cover or lid in the 
lowest position in order to protrude inside the box until 
it reaches the internal protected volume of the box 
(see Fig. 20). 


If the enclosure could have more than one position of 
installation the test shall be carried out in all cases of 
installation. 


Immediately after the test, the indicator paper shall still 
be dry. 


25 


IS 14772 : 2020 


A 


‘ss 


Key 


1 
2 absorbent paper 
NOTE — The base is always the bottom of the protected area 


3 box 


4 protected volume 


cover 


when installed. 


Fic. 20 EXAMPLE OF THE PROTECTED VOLUME 


14 INSULATION RESISTANCE AND ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH 


14.1 The insulation resistance and the electric strength 
of enclosures classified according to 7.1.1, 7.1.3 
and 7.1.4 shall be adequate. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 14.2 and 14.3, 
these tests being made immediately after the following 
humidity treatment. 


The specimens are placed in a humidity cabinet 
containing air with a relative humidity maintained 
between 91 percent and 95 percent. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


The temperature of the air where the specimens are 
placed is maintained within +1°C of any convenient 
value t between + 20°C and +30°C. 


Before being placed in the humidity cabinet, the 
specimens are brought to a temperature between t and 
(t+ 4)°C. 


The specimens are kept in the cabinet for: 
a) 2 days (48,"* ) h for enclosures classified IPX0; and 
b) 7 days (168,* ) h for other enclosures. 


NOTE — In most cases, the specimens can be brought to the 
specified temperature by keeping them at this temperature for 
at least 4 h before the humidity treatment. A relative humidity 
between 91 percent and 95 percent can be obtained by placing 
a saturated solution of sodium sulphate (Na, SO,) or potassium 
nitrate (KNO,) in water having a sufficiently large contact 
surface with the air in the humidity cabinet. 


After this treatment, the specimen shall show no 
damage impairing its further use and shall pass the 
following tests. 


14.2 When a solid material is intended to provide 
electrical insulation between live parts and the body, 
the insulation resistance between the body and a 
metal foil in contact with the internal surface of the 
box and enclosure, is measured with a d.c. voltage of 
approximately 500 V, the measurement being made 
1 min after application of the voltage. 


The term “body” includes all accessible metal parts, 
metal foil in contact with the outer surface of accessible 
external parts of insulating material, fixing screws of 
bases or covers and external assembly screws. 


If metal foil is used for testing the insulation resistance 
and the electric strength, one metal foil is placed in 
contact with the inner surfaces and another metal 
foil, having a size not exceeding 200 mm x 100 mm, 
is placed in contact with the external surfaces and, if 
necessary, is moved so as to test all parts. 


Care shall be taken that during the test the distance 
between the inner and the outer metal foil shall be 
arranged in such a way that there is no flashover in 
the surroundings of holes, premoulded knock-outs, 
membranes, etc. 


The insulation resistance shall be not less than 5 MQ. 


14.3 The electric strength is tested by applying a 
voltage of a substantially sinusoidal waveform, having 
a nominal frequency of 50 Hz or 60 Hz and a value as 
specified in Table 6, for 1 min between the parts listed 
in 14.2. 


The test voltage is taken from Table 6 according to the 
rated insulation voltage as declared by the manufacturer. 


For enclosures having class II protection, the test 
voltage according to Table 6 is multiplied by 1.5. 


Initially, not more than half the prescribed voltage is 
applied, then it is raised rapidly to the full value. 


No flashover or breakdown shall occur during the test. 


26 


Table 6 Test Voltage for Electric Strength Test 


SI No. Rated Insulation Test 
Voltage Voltage 
Vv Vv 
(1) (2) 6) 
i) < 130 1250 
ii) > 130 and < 250 2 000 
ili) > 250 and < 440 2 500 


The high-voltage transformer used for the test is so 
designed that, when the output terminals are short- 
circuited after the output voltage has been adjusted to 
the appropriate test voltage, the output current is of at 
least 200 mA. The overcurrent relay shall not trip when 
the output current is less than 100 mA. 


The r.m.s. value of the test voltage applied is measured 
within + 3 percent. 


Glow discharges without a drop in voltage are 
disregarded. 


During the test a metal foil, as described in 14.2, is 
placed in contact with the inner surfaces and another 
metal foil is placed in contact with the external surfaces 
and, if necessary, moved so as to test all the parts. 


15 MECHANICAL STRENGTH 


15.1 General 


Boxes and enclosures shall have adequate strength to 
withstand the mechanical stresses occurring during 
installation and normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the appropriate tests of 15.2 
to 15.5 as follows: 


a) for non-metallic boxes and enclosures intended 
for use in cast concrete classified according 
to 7.2.1.2 or 7.2.1.3, by the test of 15.2; 


b) for non-metallic boxes and enclosures intended 
for use in cast concrete and able to withstand 
90°C during the casting process classified 
according to 7.2.1.3, by the test of 15.3; 


c) for non-metallic boxes and enclosures classified 
according to 


1) 7.2.3, or 


2) 7.2.1.1 or 7.2.2 and also classified according to 
7.5.2 or 7.5.3,by the test of 15.4 


d) for non-metallic boxes and enclosures, the parts 
which are intended to be accessible after the 
completion of the building process, by the test 
of 15.4 


e) for boxes and enclosures classified according 
to 7.1.4 by the test of 15.5. 


When an enclosure is too large to fit the test apparatus 
shown in Annex D of IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 7), or where 
it is impractical to use the pendulum hammer for tests 


at low temperature, the tests are carried out in the same 
conditions as those specified in 15.2 or 15.4, but using 
the spring hammer according to IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 7) 
calibrated to the impact energy corresponding to the 
impact required by the relevant sub clause 15.2 or 15.4. 


15.2 Impact Test at Low Temperature 


The specimen shall be subjected to an impact test 
with a vertical hammer test apparatus (see Fig. 21) 
placed on a pad of closed cell expanded sponge rubber 
40 mm thick when uncompressed and having a density 
of approximately 538 kg/m’, 


The whole arrangement together with the specimens 
shall be placed in a refrigerator, the temperature within 
being maintained for 2 h + 15 min at 


a) (-5 + 2)°C for types as classified according 
to 7.5.1; 

b) (-15 + 2)°C for types as classified according 
to 7.5.2; and 

c) (-25 + 2)°C for types as classified according 
to 7.5.3. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


At the end of this period, each specimen is subjected to 
an impact by means of a mass of | kg falling vertically 
from a height of 100 mm. 


One blow is applied on the back and four equally 
spaced on the side walls. 


After the test, the specimens shall show no damage 
leading to non-compliance with the standard. 


Damage to the finish, small dents and small chips 
which do not adversely affect the protection against 
electric shock or harmful ingress of water are 
disregarded. 


Cracks passing through the material not visible with 
normal or corrected vision without magnification, 
surface cracks in fibre-reinforced mouldings and small 
indentations are disregarded. 


15.3 Compression Test 


The boxes and enclosures are placed in a heating 
cabinet for ( 60°" ) min at a temperature of (+90 + 5)°C. 


The boxes and enclosures are then allowed to cool 
down to ambient temperature. 


8, 
Section A-A Ma Us . 


Dimensions, in millimetres 


Key 


1 falling weight (1 000 + 1) g 
2 steel intermediate piece 100 g 


3 slightly rounded edges 


4 specimen 
5 steel support (10 + 1) kg 


Fic. 21 APPARATUS FOR IMPACT TEST AT Low TEMPERATURE 


IS 14772 : 2020 


After the test, the boxes and enclosures shall show 
neither deformation nor damage leading to non- 
compliance with the standard. 


The boxes and enclosures are then placed between 
two flat hardwood plates each having a surface area 
sufficient to cover the face and back of the box. The 
plates are then loaded without impact with a force of 
(500 + 5) N for 1 min +5 s which is applied away from 
the front face of the box towards the back. 


After the test, the box and the enclosure shall show 
no deformation or damage leading to non-compliance 
with the standard or affecting its further intended use. 


During these two tests, the boxes and enclosures shall 
be fitted according to the manufacturer’s instructions 
with the special part (if any) intended to improve the 
mechanical behavior of the boxes and enclosures 
during the casting of the concrete. 


For the test, any special part shall be delivered together 
with the box and the enclosure. 


15.4 Impact Test for Boxes and Enclosures 


The specimens are checked by applying blows by 
means of the pendulum hammer test apparatus as 
described in IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 7) (test EHA), with an 
equivalent mass of 250 g. 
NOTE — The impact test apparatus described in Annex D of 
IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 7) is the pendulum hammer. 
For boxes classified according to 7.5.2 or 7.5.3, this test 
shall be performed by placing the assembly including 
the specimen and the mounting block to which it 
is attached in arefrigerator, the temperature within 
being maintained for 2 h + 15 min at the following 
temperature: 


a) (-15 + 2)°C for types as classified according 
to 7.5.2; and 
b) (-25 + 2)°C for types as classified according 
to 7.5.3. 
At the end of this period the specimens are removed 
from the refrigerator and immediately submitted to the 
impact test. 


Specimens classified according to 7.2.1.1 or 7.2.2 
intended to be flush -mounted in normal use are 
reverse-mounted for the purpose of the test, so that the 
rear surface of the specimen is accessible as shown in 
Fig. 22. 


Test specimens are mounted on a mounting block made 
from a 8 mm thick,!175 mm x 175 mm plywood sheet 
which is secured at its top and bottom edges by a rigid 
bracket. Inlet/outlet openings without knock-outs are 
left open. Where inlet/outlet openings are provided 
with knock-outs, one is opened. 


Specimens classified according to 7.2.3 are mounted in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instruction. 


28 


The mounting support as shown in Fig. 22 shall 
be designed to allow the specimen to be moved 
horizontally and turned about an axis perpendicular to 
the surface of the plywood sheet. 


Key 
1 box 
2 mounting plate 


Fic. 22 MouNTING BLOCK FOR FLUSH - 
Type BOXES AND ENCLOSURES IN ORDER TO 
APPLY BLOWS ON THE REAR SURFACE 


The design of the mounting support shall be such that: 


a) the mounting support has a mass of (10 + 1) kg 
and is mounted on a rigid frame; 


b) the specimen can be mounted so that the point of 
impact lies in the vertical plane through the axis of 
the pivot; 

c) the plywood sheet can be turned about a vertical 
axis. 


Parts are submitted to an impact energy and a specified 
number of blows dependent on the distance of the 
accessible surface of the specimen from the surface of 
the plywood sheet when mounted as above. Distances 
A, B, C, D, E, F and G are defined as indicated in 
Table 7. 


The height of fall is the vertical distance between the 
position of the checking point, when the pendulum 
is released, and the position of that point at the 
moment of impact. The checking point is marked 
on the surface of the striking element where the line 
through the point of intersection of the axis of the 
steel tube of the pendulum and the striking element, 
perpendicular to the place through both axes, meets 
the surface. 
NOTE — Theoretically, the centre of gravity of the striking 
element should be the checking point. As the centre of gravity 
in practice is difficult to determine, the checking point is 
chosen as described above. 
The specimens are subjected to blows, which are evenly 
distributed over the specimen. 


Table 7 Determination of Parts A, B, C, D, 


E, F and G 
Part to Be Tested Distance (d) from Parts 
the Surface of the 
Plywood Sheet mm 
Front surfaces of covers and Not applicable A 
cover-plates of enclosures 
which are intended to be 
accessible after installation, 
and Rear surfaces of boxes 
and enclosures classified 
according to 7.5.2 or 7.5.3 
Parts of boxes and 5<d<15 B 
enclosures intended to be 15<d<25 c 
accessible after installation 
and classified according 
to 7.2.1 semi-flush, 7.2.2 
semi- flush or 7.2.3, with 
the exception of front 
surfaces already tested as 
parts A 
25<d<50 D 
50<d< 100 E 
100 < d < 200 F 
200<d G 


The striking element shall fall from a height which is specified 
in Table 8. 


Table 8 Height of Fall for Impact Test 


SI No. Height of Fall Parts of Enclosures to Be 

mm Subjected to the Impact 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 80 A 
ii) 120 B 
iii) 160 C 
iv) 200 D 
v) 240 E 
vi) 320 F 
vii) 400 G 


The tolerance on the value of the height of fall is 1 percent. 


The following blows are applied: 
a) for each part A (as far as applicable), five blows as 
below: 
1) one blow in the centre, then after the specimen has 
been moved horizontally; 


2) one on each of the two least favourable points 
between the centre and the edges; 


3) and then, after the specimen has been turned 90° 
+ 2° about its axis perpendicular to the plywood; 
and 


4) one on each of two similar points. 


29 


IS 14772 : 2020 


b) for parts B (as far as applicable), C , D, E, F and G, 
four blows (see Fig. 23) as below: 

1) one blow is applied on the side of the specimen on 

which the blow can be applied after the plywood 

sheet has been turned 60° + 2° about a vertical 


axis; 


2) one blow is applied on the opposite side on which 
the blow can be applied after the plywood sheet 
has been turned 60° + 2° about a vertical axis in 


the opposite direction; 


3) 


after the specimen is turned 90° + 2° about its axis 
perpendicular to the plywood; 

4) one blow is applied on one of the sides of the 
specimen on which the blow can be applied after 
the plywood sheet has been turned 60° + 2° about 


a vertical axis; 


5) one blow is applied on the opposite side of the 
specimen on which the blow can be applied after 
the plywood sheet has been turned 60° + 2° about 


a vertical axis in the opposite direction. 


The blows shall not be applied to: 


a) 
b) 


knock-outs or to an area within 10 mm of them, 


other parts not necessary to achieve the declared 
IP of the enclosure, 

c) accessories and equipment complying with the 
other relevant standards, and 

d) fixing means recessed below the surface, that are 
not subject to impacts in normal use. 


If inlet openings are provided, the specimen is so 
mounted that the two lines of blows are as nearly as 
possible equidistant from these openings. 


After the test, the specimens shall show no damage 
leading to non-compliance with the standard. 


There shall be no cracks passing through the material 
which are visible to normal or corrected vision without 
magnification. Surface cracks in fibre-reinforced 
mouldings and small indentations are ignored. 


15.5 Compression Test for Enclosures Made of 
Natural or Synthetic Rubber or a Mixture of Both 


Boxes and enclosures classified according to 7.1.4 shall 
withstand a load which can be expected in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the following test: 


The enclosure shall be mounted according to the 
instructions of the manufacturer in a_ horizontal 
position in or on a sheet of plywood. Then, the cover 
of the enclosure and special parts, if any, are loaded as 
follows (see Fig. 24). 


a) The cover is loaded with a force of 50 N, applied 
gradually on an area of 1 cm? at the foreseeable 
point of maximum deflection of the cover. 


The enclosure shall support the test load for 1 min 
without deflecting more than 3 mm. The deflection is to 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Key 


1 mounting support 2 pivot 3 specimen 


Application of the Blows 


Sketch | Total Number Points of Parts to 
of Blows Application Be Tested 
a) 3 One at the centre Front surfaces and rear surfaces of 
One between O and P* boxes or enclosures classified 
One between O and Q* according to 7.2.1.1 
b) 2 One between O and R* 
One between O and S* 
c) 2 One on the surface T* Accessible parts of boxes or 
One on the surface U* enclosures intended to be surface- 
d) 2 One on the surface V* mounted in normal use except front 
One on the surface Z* surfaces and rear surfaces of boxes 
or enclosures classified according 
to 7.2.1.1 


* The blow is applied to the most unfavourable point. 


Fic. 23 SEQUENCE OF BLows For Parts A, B, C, D, E, F AND G 


30 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Key 

1 test force 4 boxes made of natural or synthetic 
2 cylinder rubber or a mixture of both 

3 plywood panel 5 support 


a) For test a (flush-mounted enclosures) 


Key 

1 test force 4 boxes made of natural or synthetic 
2 cylinder rubber or a mixture of both 

3 solid surface 5 support 


b) For test a (surface-mounted enclosures) 


Fic. 24 Test DEVICES FOR LOAD COMPRESSION TEST FOR ENCLOSURES MADE OF 
NATURAL OR SYNTHETIC RUBBER OR A Mixture OF Boru ( Continued ) 


31 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Key 

test force 4 boxes made of natural or synthetic 
2 weight rubber or a mixture of both 
3 solid surface 5 plywood (9 + 1) mm thick 


6 support 


c) For test b (flush-mounted enclosures) 


LLLILLLLLLLLLLLL LLL LLL 


Key 

1 test force 4 boxes made of natural or synthetic 
2 weight rubber or a mixture of both 

3 solid surface 5 plywood (9 + 1) mm thick 


NOTE — In order to achieve the specified conditions within the cabinet, it may be necessary to 
ensure constant circulation of the air within and, in general, to use a cabinet which is thermally 


insulated. 


d) For test b (surface-mounted enclosures) 


Fic. 24 Test DEVICES FOR LOAD COMPRESSION TEST FOR ENCLOSURES MADE OF 
NATURAL OR SYNTHETIC RUBBER OR A MIXTURE OF BOTH. 


32 


be measured when the force reaches the specified value, 
excluding any influence resulting from the deflection of 
the plywood and gasket compression. 


The permanent deformation at any point on the cover, 
excluding the deflection of the plywood and gasket 
compression, shall not exceed 1 mm, measured 1 h 
after the load is removed. 


b) A pressure of 50 N/cm? is gradually applied (up 
to a maximum force of 1 000 N) by means of a 
sheet of plywood with a thickness of (9 + 1) mm, 
in contact with the whole area of the cover. 


The enclosure shall support the test load for 1 min and 
there shall be no damage to the enclosure. 


After the test, the boxes or enclosures shall show no 
damage leading to non-compliance with this standard. 


16 RESISTANCE TO HEAT 


16.1 Parts of Insulating Material Necessary to 
Retain Current-carrying Parts 


Parts of insulating material necessary to retain current- 
carrying parts and/or parts of the earthing circuit in 
position are subjected to a ball-pressure test by means of 
the apparatus according to IEC 60695-10-2 except that 
insulating parts necessary to retain earthing terminals 
in position shall be tested as specified in 16.2. 


When it is not possible to carry out the test on the 
specimens, the test should be carried out on a piece at 
least 2 mm thick which is cut from the specimen. If 
this is not possible, no more than four layers, each cut 
from the same specimen, may be used, in which case 
the total thickness of the layers should be not less than 
2.5 mm. 


The part under test shall be placed on a steel plate at 
least 3 mm thick and in direct contact with it. 


The surface of the part to be tested is placed in the 
horizontal position and a steel ball of 5 mm diameter is 
pressed against the surface with a force of (20 + 0.5) N. 


The test is made in a heating cabinet at a temperature 
of (125 + 2)°C. After (60, ) min, the ball is removed 
from the specimen which is then cooled down within 
10 s to approximately room temperature by immersion 
in cold water. 


The diameter of the impression caused by the ball is 
measured and shall not exceed 2 mm. 


16.2 Parts of Insulating Material not Necessary to 
Retain Current-carrying Parts 


Parts of insulating material not necessary to retain 
current- carrying parts and/or parts of the earthing 
circuit in position, even though they are in contact with 
them, except for parts made of natural or synthetic 
rubber or a mixture of both are subjected to a ball 
pressure test in accordance with 16.1, but the test is 
made at a temperature of (70 + 2)°C. 


33 


IS 14772 : 2020 


Parts of insulating material of flush-mounted enclosures 
classified according to 7.2.1.3 are subjected to the test 
described in 16.1 but at a temperature of (90 + 2)°C. 


If the test cannot be made on a complete enclosure, a 
suitable part may be cut from it for the purpose of the 
test. 


16.3 Boxes and Enclosures of Insulating Materials 
Classified According to 7.2.2.2 or 7.2.2.3 


16.3.1 Mechanical Strength 


Boxes and enclosures of insulating material(s) classified 
according to 7.2.2.2 or 7.2.2.3 shall have adequate 
mechanical strength at high temperature. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


A specimen of a box of each type and size involved, 
each having at least two threaded or unthreaded holes 
shall be tested. 


Arigid crossbar (Fig. 25) shall be secured across the face 
of each box with the size and type of screws normally 
provided by the box or wiring device manufacturer. The 
screws shall be secured in the threaded or unthreaded 
holes located at the face of the box by applying a torque 
according to the relevant column of Table 4. 


A total force of 180 N, including the force exerted by 
the crossbar and any associated suspension means, 
shall be applied to the face of the box. 


The boxes and enclosures shall be mounted, with the 
open face downward, in an air-circulating oven for 24 
h at the following temperatures: 
a) (80 + 2)°C for boxes and enclosures classified 
according to 7.2.2.2; 


b) (105 + 2)°C for boxes and enclosures classified 
according to 7.2.2.3. 


The box shall be supported at its open face by a flat 
plate that does not obstruct the test load support 
bracket. 


After the oven ageing, the assembly shall be allowed 
to cool down to approximately ambient temperature 
in the oven, with the power switched off and the door 
opened. 


The screws securing the crossbar to the box shall not 
have pulled out more than 6.3 mm. The screws shall be 
able to be removed by a screwdriver using a torque not 
exceeding 2.3 Nm. 


16.3.2 Parts of Insulating Material Necessary to Retain 
Parts of the Earthing Circuit 


Parts of insulating material necessary to retain the 
earthing strap described in 11.2 shall be subjected to 
a pull test before and after ageing. After each test, the 
earthing strap shall not become loose or detached from 
the specimen. 


Compliance is checked by the following tests. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


A. To align with the holes located at the face of the box. 


Fic. 25 RIGID CROSSBAR 


The test shall be conducted on one specimen in the 
condition as delivered and on one specimen after it has 
been conditioned in an air-circulating oven for 168 h at 
90°C and then cooled to room temperature. 


The test strap shown in Fig. 4 shall be attached to the 
earthing strap by placing the slotted end under the 
earthing terminal screw. The threads of the earthing 
terminal shall not be stripped when the torque shown in 
the relevant column of Table 4 is applied. 


For testing of the conditioned sample the test strap shall 
be attached prior to the conditioning. 


With the specimen secured, a force of 45 N shall be 
applied to the test strap for 5 min in the direction 
perpendicular to the open face of the specimen. 


The force shall be gradually applied in one smooth and 
continuous movement. If a tensile machine is used, a 
jaw separation speed of 10mm/min shall be applied. 


17 CREEPAGE DISTANCES, CLEARANCES AND 
DISTANCES THROUGH SEALING COMPOUND 


Creepage distances, clearances and distances through 
sealing compound shall not be less than the value as 
shown below: 


Rated Voltage Creepage distances, clearances 
V and distances through sealing 
compound (mm) 
< 250 3 
> 250 and 4 
< 440 


This test does not apply to boxes for floating terminals 
or connecting devices classified according to 7.10.4. 


Compliance is checked by measurement between the 


34 


following parts: 
a) Creepage distances and clearances: 
1) between live parts of different polarity; and 
2) between live parts . 


b) metal covers and boxes without insulating lining; 
or 


c) the surface on which the box is mounted. 
Distances through sealing compound: 


Between live parts covered with sealing compound and 
the surface on which the box is mounted. For multi- 
way terminal devices and terminals without fixing 
means but with protection, distances are measured 
between live parts and any opening, which represents 
the closest point liable to touch any other part when 
the terminal is fitted with conductors having the largest 
cross-sectional area. 


In cases where various terminals or connecting devices 
may be mounted in the box, the most unfavourable 
combinations shall be tested. 


18 RESISTANCE OF INSULATING MATERIAL 
TO ABNORMAL HEAT AND FIRE 


Parts of insulating material which might be exposed to 
thermal stresses due to electric effects, the deterioration 
of which might impair safety, shall not be unduly 
affected by abnormal heat and by fire. 


Compliance is checked by means of the glow-wire test 
performed according to clauses 4 to 10 of IEC 60695- 
2-11 under the following conditions: 

a) By the test made at 850°C: 


1) for parts of insulating material necessary to 
retain current-carrying parts and/or parts 
of the earthing circuit in position (with the 


exception of parts of insulating material 
needed to retain the earth terminal in position 
in a box), and 


2) for parts of insulating material of boxes and 
enclosures classified according to 7.2.2, with 
the exception of parts protruding from the 
wall. 


b) By the test made at 650°C: 


1) for parts of insulating material not necessary to 
retain current-carrying parts in position (even 
though they are in contact with them), and 


2) for parts of insulating material retaining 
earthing terminal in position; and 


3) for parts of insulating material of boxes and 
enclosures classified according to 7.2.2, 
protruding from the wall. 


A current-carrying part or a part of the earthing circuit 
retained by a mechanical means is considered to be 
retained in position. The use of grease or the like is not 
considered to be mechanical means. 


External conductors cannot be considered as retaining 
the current-carrying parts. 


In case of doubt, to determine whether an insulating 
material is necessary to retain current-carrying parts 
and parts of the earthing circuit in position, the device 
is examined without conductors while held in positions 
with the insulating material in question removed. 


If the tests specified have to be made at more than one 
place on the same specimen, care shall be taken to 
ensure that any deterioration caused by previous tests 
does not affect the result of the test to be made. 


Small parts, where each surface lies completely within 
a circle 15 mm in diameter, or where any part of the 
surface lies outside a 15 mm diameter circle and where 
it is not possible to fit a circle 8 mm in diameter on any 
of the surfaces, are not subjected to the test of this sub 
clause (see Fig. 26 for a diagrammatic representation). 


When checking a surface, projections on the surfaces 
and holes which are not greater than 2 mm on the 
largest dimension are disregarded. 


The tests are not made on parts of ceramic material. 


The glow-wire test is applied to ensure that an electrically 
heated test wire under defined test conditions does not 
cause ignition of insulating parts or to ensure that a 
part of insulating material, which can be ignited by the 
heated test wire under defined conditions, has a limited 
time to burn without spreading fire by flame or burning 
parts or droplets falling down from the tested parts onto 
the pinewood board covered with a tissue paper. 


If possible, the specimen should be a complete box 
or enclosure.If the test cannot be made on a complete 
box or enclosure, a suitable part may be cut out for the 
purpose of the test. 


IS 14772 : 2020 


The test is made on one specimen. 


In case of doubt, the test shall be repeated on two 
further specimens. 


The test is made by applying the glow wire once for 
(30+ 1)s. 


The specimen shall be positioned during the test in the 
most unfavourable position of its intended use (with the 
surface tested in a vertical position). 


The tip of the glow wire shall be applied to the 
specified surface of the specimen taking into account 
the conditions of the intended use under which a heated 
or glowing element may come into contact with the 
specimen. 


The specimen is regarded as having passed the glow- 
wire test if: 
a) there is no visible flame and no sustained glowing, 
or if 
b) flames and glowing at the specimen extinguish 
within 30 s after the removal of the glow wire. 


There shall be no ignition of the tissue paper or 
scorching of the board. 


Dimensions in millimetres 


Key 


1 specimen 
2 to be tested 


3 no test is required 


Fic. 26 DIAGRAMMATIC REPRESENTATION 
OF THE GLOW-WIRE TEST 


IS 14772 : 2020 


19 RESISTANCE TO TRACKING 


For boxes and enclosures with protection degree higher 
than IPX0, all parts of the insulating material retaining 
live parts in position shall be made of a material 
resistant to tracking. 


For materials other than ceramic and where the creepage 
distances are less than twice the values specified in 17, 
compliance is checked by the test of IS 2824 on three 
specimens. 


A flat surface of the part to be tested, if possible at least 
15 mm x 15 mm and at least 3 mm thick, is placed in 
the horizontal position. 


The material under test shall pass a proof-tracking 
index of 175 using test solution A with a time interval 
between drops of (30 + 5) s. 


No flashover or breakdown between electrodes shall 
occur before a total of 50 drops has fallen. 


Alternatively, the CTI value for the material may be 
used. The CTI value shall not be less than 175. 


20 RESISTANCE TO CORROSION 


Ferrous parts of boxes and enclosures shall be 
adequately protected against rusting. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 


All grease is removed from the parts to be tested by 
immersion in a degreasing agent for (10 + 1) min. 


The parts are then immersed for (10 + 1) min in a 10 
percent solution of ammonium chloride in water at a 
temperature of (27 + 5)°C. 


Without drying, but after shaking off any drops, the 
parts are placed for (10 + 1) min ina box containing air 
saturated with moisture to a level of 91 percent to 95 at 
a temperature of (27 + 5)°C. 


After the parts have been dried for (10 + 1) min ina 
heating cabinet at a temperature of (100 + 5)°C, their 
surface shall show no sign of rust. 


NOTE — Traces of rust on cut edges and any yellowish film 
removable by rubbing are ignored. Cut edges also include 
punched holes and thread surfaces of tapped holes. 


21 ELECTROMAGNETIC COMPATIBILITY 
(EMC) 


Products covered by this standard are, in normal 
use, passive in respect to electromagnetic influences 
(emission and immunity).Therefore, no tests are 
necessary. 


22 SCHEDULE OF TEST 


23 CATEGORY OF TEST 


36 


23.1 Type Test 


The tests specified in Table 9 shall constitute the 
type tests and shall be carried out on two sample of 
enclosure for accessories of the same type selected 
preferably at random from a regular production lot. 
Before commencement of the test, the samples shall 
be visually examined and inspected for obvious visual 
defects in respect of component, part and their assembly 
construction, marking mechanical hazards, earthing, 
etc. The external surface finish shall be even and free 
from finishing defects 


Table 9 Schedule of Tests 


Clause Description No. of No. of 
specimens Additional 
Specimens 
6 Ratings 
7 Classification 
8 Marking 
9 Dimensions 
ABC DEF 
10 Protection against electric 
shock 
11 Provision for earthing 
12 Construction 
13 Resistance to 
ageing,protection against 
ingress of solid objects and 
against harmfull ingress of 
water 
14 Insulation resistance and 
electric strength 
15 Mechanical strength 
16 Resistance to heat 
17 Creepage distance, 
clearance and distance 
through seating compound 
18 Resistance to insulating 
material to abnormal heat 
and fire 
19 Resistance to tracking 
20 Resistance to corrosion 
21 Electromagnetic 
compatibility (EMC) 


23.1.1. Criteria of Acceptance 


Both samples shall successfully pass all the type tests 
for providing conformity with the requirements of the 
standard. If any of the sample fails in any of the type 
tests, the testing authority, at its discretion, may call for 
fresh sample not exceeding twice the original number 
and subject them again to all test or to the test(s) in 


which failure(s) had occurred. No failure should be 
permitted in the repeat test (s) (see also 5.2). 


SI No. Test Clause 
a) (2) (3) 
i) Marking 8 
ii) Dimensions 9 
ili) Protection against electric shock 10 
iv) Provision for earthing 11 
v) Construction 12 
vi) Resistance to ageing, protection against 13 
ingress of solid objects and against 

harmfull ingress of water 

vii) Insulation resistance and electric 14 
strength 

viii) Mechanical strength 15 

ix) Resistance to heat 16 

x) Creepage distance, clearance and 17 
distance through seating compound 

xi) Resistance to insulating material to 18 
abnormal heat and fire 

xii) Resistance to tracking 19 

xiv) Resistance to corrosion 20 

xv) Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) 21 


37 


IS 14772 : 2020 


23.2 Acceptance Test 
The following shall constitute the acceptance test: 
SI No. Test Clause 
a) (2) (3) 
i) Marking 8 
ii) Dimensions 9 
iii) Protection against electric shock 10 
iv) Provision for earthing 11 
v) Construction 12 
vi) Resistance to ageing,protection against 13 
ingress of solid objects and against harmfull 
ingress of water 
vil) Mechanical strength 15 


23.2.1 For acceptance test the sampling procedure 
given in IS 2500 (Part 1) shall be followed. 


23.3 Routine Test 


SI No. Test Clause 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Dimensions 9 
ii) Protection against electric shock 10 


IS 14772 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( informative ) 


EXAMPLES OF ENCLOSURES AND PARTS THEREOF 


A-1 SHOWS EXAMPLES OF ENCLOSURES AND PARTS THEREOF 
7 (4) © 
©) 


het N 


a b1 b2 
Key 
1 box 4 pattern 
2 cover-plate 5 accessory 
3 cover 


a pattern + cover (only surface-type) b1 box + cover-plate (surface-type) b2 box + cover-plate (flush-type) 


Fic. A-1 EXAMPLES OF ENCLOSURES AND PARTS THEREOF 


38 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 14 (11790). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


