(Reaffirmed 2000)

IS :1811-1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING FOUNDRY SAND
)

( First Revision
Methods
Chairman DnK.G.

of Sampling

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

SMDC

4

RM,TILMURTHY
Members

Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta

SHRI R. J. PANDEY ( AZternate to Dr K. G. Ramamurthy ) S-1 R. K. ABROL Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganaur SHRI K. J. SINQH Atzo~a ( Alternate) SHRI S. K. BA~~III Steel Authority of India Ltd, Rourkela SHAI J. BANERJEE Steel Authority of India Ltd, Durgapur SHRI S. S. BISWAS ( Alternate ) Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI M. G. BHADE SHRI H. L. CHADEA ( Alternate ) SHRI M. B. BHADURI Steel Authority of India Ltd, Bhilai SHRI M. L. GUPTA ( Alternate ) DR M. M. CHAKRABORTY The Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur SHRI PRABRAT D~su ( Alternate ) Government of India Mint ( Ministry of Finance ) &RI A. W. CHAWATHE Ministry of Railways CHEMIST & MET.\L~~~RGIST Fcrro Alloys Corporation Ltd, Shrceramnagar SHRI C. N. HAR~~AN Italab Private Ltd, Bombay Srrm S. S. HO~AVAR S HKTJ. P. PATEL ( Alternate ) SHRI V. B. KH.~NNA Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi SERI C. N. KOYAL Bharat Aluminium Co Ltd, New Delhi SRRI C. S. SASTRI ( Alternate ) Indian Bureau of Minrs, Nagpur SHRI K. S. MAHAPATRA SRRI U. N. SAR~AR ( Alternate ) Mitra S. K. Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. N. MITRA SHRI R. N. BANEI~JEI*: ( Alternate ) SHRI B. R. PATEL Therapeutics Chemical Research Corporation, Bombay SHRI M. V. VAI~YA ( Afternate ) DIL Pnmt NARAIN Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute ( 1CAR ), New Delhi DR K. G. ANEJA ( Alternate )

f Confinued on baee 2 1
@ Copyright 1985 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1S:1811- 1984
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI M. RAI

Representing

National Test House, Calcutta Essen'& Co, Bangalore Dn J. RAJARAM SHRI V. SHANKAR NARAYAN ( Alternate I ) SRRI K. N. GURURAJACHAR ( Alternate II ) Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi (R & D DR M. RANGA RAO Organization ), Ranchi SRRI A. K. SATSANGI (Alternate) Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur DR B. R. L. Row SHHI A. K. BAJAJ ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of SHRI P. M. SENGUP~A Defence ) SARI T. K. B~ATTACHARJEE ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Plant ), SHRI B. D. SIXGH Bokaro SHRI R, P. SINGH ( Alternate ) Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi DR A. K. YOGI Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI D. S. AHLUWALIA, Director ( Stat )

.

Secretary SERI N. SANKAR Senior Deputy Director ( Stat ), ISI

2

IS :1811 - 1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING FOUNDRY SAND

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 September 1984, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Sampling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was originally issued in 1961. Since then a number of Indian Standards on sampling of bulk materials have been prepared. Based on the experience gained in the implementation of these standards, the present revision contains modified pr&sions on the number of The section on sampling in quarries has sublots and increment mass. been deleted since it requires a different approach altogether. The For drawing procedures for sampling no-bake sand have been included. increment, shovels as well as sand sampler have been recommended. 0.3 For the determination of particle sizes sieves conforming to IS : 460 If these ( Part 1 )-1978* or IS : 460 ( Part 2 )-1978* should be used. sieves are not available, other equivalent standard sieves may be used. 0.4 In reporting the result of a test or ana!ysis, if the calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall observed or accordance with IS : 2-1960f. final value, be done in

1. SCOPE
1.1 This sta,ndard lays down the and preparmg samples from a properties of the sand sampled. and packed and on foundry floor procedure to be followed in drawing bulk of sand in order to determine the Sampling from consignments both bulk have been considered separately.
Perforated plate

*Test sieves: Part 1 Wire cloth test sieves ( second ruuision), Part 2 test sieves ( mend revision ). iRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS : 1811-

1984 also includes a method for reporting the
quality

1.1.1 This standard of the sand sampled. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the apply. purpose

of

this

standard,

the

following

definitions

shall

2.1 Sand - Grain? of mineral matter which range in size approximately from 0'05 to 2 mm. Sands for foundry purposes generallY have size range up to 4 mm. 2.2 Lot - The quantity of sand indicated to be of the same type and grade offered for inspection at one time; a lot may consist of the whole or a part of the quantity ordered for. 2.3 Bed mined. of Sand A layer of sandy strata ( ready-made ) which is to be quarried used or for

2.4 Floor Sand - Prepared floor moulding purposes.

moulding

sand

or prepared sand used for a 2.5 System Sand - A naturally occurriyg specific class of jobs in a foundry operation, from a central and control point. 2.6 Foundry Moulding Sand - The term may include high sand, natural moulding sand, synthetic moulding sand imixtures reclaimed sand placed in heaps on the foundry floor for reuse. 2.7 Sub-lot - The quantity of sand in each of the groups into a lot or a bed of sand is divided for the purpose of sampling. 2.8 Increment - The quantity of sand collected sampling scoop to its capacity in a single motion using a sand sampler one or more times. 2.9 Gross Sample crushing together all same sub-lot. silica and

which

by filling up the of the SCOOP or by

The quantity of sand obtained by mixing or the increments or specimens collected from the

2.10 Laboratory Sample - The reducing a gross sample following for laboratory testing.

quantity a specified

of sand procedure,

obtained by and intended

4

IS : 18113. SAMPLING BEDS 3.1 While shall be estimated done only OF SAND FROM SAND DUNES AND

1984

RIVER`

sampling from sand dunes or river beds, each dune or bed treated as a lot and the quantity of sand in each lot shall be Sampling shall be with the help of physical measurements. at the time of loading the sand into transport vehicles.

3.2 Sub-lots - The bulk of sand to be sampled shall be divided into number of sub-lots of approximately equal quantities shown in Table 1 by suitably marking the line of demarcation on the surface of the bed.
TABLE 1 NUMBER OF SUB-LOTS INTO WHICH LOT IS TO BE DIVIDED

( Clauses 3.2, 4.2 and 5.1.1 ) LOTQUANTITY TO-ES Up to 26 to 25 50 MINIMUM NO.OF SUB-LOTS 2 3 4 5 6 8

51 to 100 101 to 300 301 to 600 601 and above

3.3 Gross Samples - From each sub-lot, the number of increments. specified in Table 2 each weighing about 1.5 kg shall be collected making use of a sampling scoop ( Fig. i ). The increments shall be drawn at equal intervals during the course of loading the sand in the sub-lot. 3.4 All the increments collected from the same sub-lot shall constitute a gross sample. Thus, the bed of sand or the sand dune sample shall be represented by as many gross samples as the number of sub-lots into which it has to be divided. Each gross sample shall be separately, reduced in accordance with 6.2 and the number of tests shall be in, accordance with 8. 4. SAMPLING

OF SAND

FROM

CONSIGNMENTS

4.1 A consignment

of sand which may be delivered at one time or over a period of time is to be sampled as one lot if the sand is from the same source and of the same grade or type. It is always advisable to collect samples, when the material is in motion, that is, during loading or unloading. 5

IS : 1811 - 1984

`-WOODEN

nkNDLE

~OHrNAL OF THE

c.APAClTY SCOOP

DIMENSIONS OFTTIIESA~PLINCJ SCOOP (mm) ~-.__--_-___-_---_---h--__-_ -------7 A B c D E F 150 150 7.5 SAMPLING 130 90

G

l-5 kg

optional dimensions

FIG. 1

SCOOP

TABLE

2

NUMBER

OF INCREMENTS TO BE COLLECTED FROM A SUB-LOT ( Clauses 3.3, 4.3 and 5.2.3 ) OF INCREMENTS FROM EACH SUB-LOT h---_-----_--7

QUANTITY 0F SANT) OF TlrR SuL+Lol~ (TONNES)

MINIMUM NUMBER ~~--__--_-_---_-

Containing Lumps (2) 10 15 20 50

No Lumps (3) 4 6 8 10

il) up to 10 11 to 25 26 to 50 51 and above

-

The quantity of sand in a consignment shall be divided into the number of sub-lots of approximately equal quantities, specified in Table 1. If, for instance, a consignment consists of a number of trucks or wagons a sub-lot may consist of a specified number of trucks or wagons satisfying the stipulations in Table 1. If the consignment is in the form of a stockpile, each sub-lot may be properly demarcated before starting sampling operations. 6

4.2 Sub-lots -

IS : 1811- 1984
the number of increments 4.3 Gross Samples - From each sub-lot, Wherever specified in Table 2, each weighing 1*5 kg, shall be collected. possibie, the increments are to be collected at regular intervals when the quantity of sand classified into a sub-lot is being loaded into or unloaded from wagons, ships or trucks. In all the cases, it is necessary to scrap off the top 10 cm to remove the contaminated layer by means of a Where it is not possible to collect samples during loading or scoop. unloading, increments shall be collected from the front, centre and rear of each wagon, truck, etc, from varying depths but not at a depth of less than 15 cm from the sand surface. 4.4 Generally, it is found that silica sand supplies are received in open lorries both in wet and dry condition and pre-graded sand would be in dry condition either in loose form or packed in bags. For wet sand suPplies of above one percent moisture sampling scoop as shown in Fig. 1, would be adequate for drawing increments since the load will be fairly homogeneous and there is no possibility of segregation even during dried pre-graded sand supply requires special transportation. But, An design of sand sampler in order to obtain a representative sample. example of sand sampler is shown in Fig. 2. The apparatus consists of a steel tube with diameter 4 cm, length 150 cm with 13 cm tapering at one end and a slit opening of 1.5 cm right from bottom of the pipe up to 55 cm. There will be another tube inside with closing and locking system with a corresponding slit opening. The sampler will have an handle for facilitating easy operation. 4.5 All the increments collected from the same sub-lot shall constitute Thus the consignment of sand sampled shall be a gross sample. represented by as many samples as the number of sub-lots into which it Each gross sample shall be separately reduced in has been divided. accordance with 6.1 and tested in accordance with 8. 5. SAMPLING

OF SAND IN FOUNDRIES of Floor Sand

5.1 Sampling

5.1.1 Sub-lots - The quantity of sand on the floor shall be divided into the number of sub-lots, of approximately equal quantities, specified in Table 1 by suitably marking the line of demarcation on the surface of the sub-lot.
5.1.2 Gross Samples - From each sub-lot, the number of increments specified in Table 2 each weighing about 1.5 kg shall be collected making use of a scoop or sand sampler the increments shall be collected from the front, centre and rear at a depth of not less than 15 cm below the surface of the sand. The increments shall be collected just immediately after the floor sand has been prepared to avoid variation in moisture, permeability, strength and such other physical properties as would be affected by the exposure. 7

IS f 1811- 1984

ARRANGEMENT APtER US INNER ROTATION TUBE BY 186

/-CONE

C0MPLEW.V

FIG. 2

SAND SAMPLER 8

IS: Wl-1984 5.1.2.1 All the increments collected from the same sub-lot shall Thus the quantity of floor sand sampled constitute a gross sample. shall be represented by as many gross samples as the number of sub-lots Each gross sample shall be separately into which it has been divided. reduced in accordance with 6.1 and tested in accordance with 8. 5.2 Sampling of System Sands from each system of sand mixed sand has gone through the sand be collected from hoppers at conveyor is generally preferable ascertained more quickly.

5.2.1 Gross samples shall be collected at one time from the conveyor after the mixer and aerator; samples could also moulding station. But sampling from because any changes in the sand can be

5.2.2 Sub-lots - The quantity of sand in the system shall be divided into the number of sub-lots, of' approximately equal quantities, specified in Table 1. 5.2.3 Gross Sample -- From each sub-lot the number of increments specified in Table 2 each weighing 1.5 kg shall be collected. When the increments are to be collected from the conveyors belt, they shall be collected at regular intervals of time during transit of the quantity of sand in the sub-lot. If it is not practicable to collect samples on the conveyor, they shall be collected at discharge point or suitable transfer point at equal intervals of time. 5.2.3.1 All the increments collected from the same sub-lot shall constitute a gross sample. Thus the system of sand sampled shall be represented by as many gross samples as the number of sub-lots into which it has been divided. Each gross sample shall be separately reduced in accordance with 6.1 and tested in accordance with 8. 5.3 Sampling of No-Bake Sand

5.3.1 No-bake sand is prepared by adding binders and accelarators. The sand prepared at one time in one mixing shall be treated as a lot. Samples of such sand shall be collected within IO minutes after the preparation. The number of increment each weighing about 1'5 kg shall be taken according to the following table from different location of the lot of the prepared sand:

Lot Size kg
up to 100 101 to 200 201 to 500

Minimum

JVumber of Increments

4
5 6 9

IS : 1811 - 1984

5.3.2 Gross Sample - All the increments collected from the lot shall constitute gross sample. This gross sample shall be thoroughly mixed before using it for checking properties such as setting time and shear strength.
6. REDUCTION 6.1 Graded OF GROSS SAMPLE Sand, System Sand, etc ) Samples

Sand ( Like Floor

6.1.1 For reducing a gross floor sand, system sand, etc divider can be used. In case of coning and quartering may

sample of graded sand ( for example, ) into a laboratory sample, a riffle sample suitable riffle is not available, the method be used.

6.1.2 For this purpose the gross sample shall be thoroughly mixed by heaping it into a cone and dismantling it and again forming a fresh cone. These operations may be repeated three times. Each conical heap may be formed by depositing scoopful of material on the apex of the cone so that the portions which slide down the sides are distributed evenly. The cone finally obtained may be flattened by means of a wooden board of sufficient thickness. The flattened material of uniform thickness shall then be quartered along two diameters intersecting at right angles. The use of quartering cross made up of sheet metal of 0.5 cm thickness may be used for this purpose. One pair of diagonally opposite quarters shall be scooped and discarded; the remaining two quarters shall be retained. By this way gross sample shall be reduced to half at every stage and the number of stages depends on the mass of original gross sample and the final sample required. 6.1.3 From each gross sample a laboratory sample of 2 kg shall be obtained by the above procedure for carrying out routine tests as per IS : 1918-1966*. 6.2 Naturally-Bonded Sand or Wet Sand Samples

6.2.1 The gross sample from a lot of naturally bonded sand or wet sand, are likely to contain lumps. Therefore, each gross sample shall be crushed and reduced in different stages as indicated below: a) The material in the gross sample shall be crushed, over a hard and clean surface protected from rains and free from cracks, to pass through the sieve of square mesh 11.2 mm. This crushed material shall be well mixed and then scooped into a cone shaped pile. Care shall be taken to drop each scoopful exactly over the same spot, otherwise the central axis of the cone will be
*Methods of physical tests for foundry sands.

10

IS:1811

-1984

slackened and an uneven distribution of lumps and fines will This cone shall be disturbed and made into a long pile, result. which is later halved by the alternate scoop methods. Scoopfuls 1, 3, 5, etc, shall constitute the cone Al, and scoopfuls 2,4,6, etc, shall constitute the cone B,; cone Br shall be rejected and cone A, shall be processed through the second stage. b) The material in the cone A, shall be further crushed to pass through the sieve of square mesh 9.50 mm and made into a cone again. This cone shall be disturbed and made into a long pile which shall be halved by the alternate scoop method to form cones As and B2; cone A2 shall be retained and cone B2 shall be rejected. c) The material in cone A shall then be reduced to the requisite quantity as detailed in 6.1.2, to constitute a laboratory sample. 7. PACKAGING

OF LABORATORY

SAMPLES
laboratory samples are sent enough to withstand rough damages as result in the loss preferably be used to store change in moisture. Tin lids are securely fixed. Each without applying pressure

that containers in which to testing laboratories should be strong treatment without being susceptible to such Polythene bags may of fines, dust, etc. laboratory samples to avoid any substantial containers may also be used provided the laboratory sample shall be loosely packed in separate containers.

7.1 It is important

7.2 Each of the containers in which the laboratory samples are packed shall be labelled with full details of identification, namely the source, the type and grade of sand in the lot, sub-lot number. The supplier's name, the date of sampling, the mass of the sample, etc. When the sampling is done from sand dunes or river beds additional details regarding the location of the source may also be included in the label. 8. NUMBER

OF TESTS

samples shall be tested individually for important characteristics of the sand sampled. The decision in this regard may depend on the type of sand and also the end use. For the remaining characteristics, a composite sample of mass equal to at least three times the mass required for the tests shall be prepared by mixing equal quantities of material from each of the laboratory samples. 9. REPORTING where a composite sample has been tested only one test result will be available and that result shall be reported as the value of the characteristic for the bulk of sand sampled. li

8.1 All the laboratory

9.1 For those characteristics,

IS : 1811- 1984
9.2 For those characteristics where only one laboratory sample has been tested, the result of testing that sample shall be reported as the value of the characteristic for the bulk of sand sampled. 9.3 When only two laboratory samples have been analysed individually, the average of the two available test results shall be reported as the value of the characteristic for the bulk of sand sampled. The individual result shall also be reported to give an indication of the range variation in quality. 9.4 When three or more laboratory samples from a lot have been analysed individually with reference to any characteristic, the following procedure shall be followed to assess the average quality and its limits of variation. Let x1, x2, x3... . . . samples for a particular Calculate, Average Range ( ( x ) = (Xl +x2+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Xn) n
. . . ..xn

be the results characteristic.

of analysing

` n ' laboratory

, and
and the

R ) = the

between the difference minimum value of the results.

maximum

The average as equal to ( ;3 ).

level of that characteristic

in the lot shall

be reported

The limits of variation in the average level of the bulk of sand sampled shall be reported as ( Z + hR ), where `h' is a factor, whose The appropriate value depends upon the number of samples analysed. value of the factor ` h ' shall be taken from Table 3.
TABLE 3 VALUES OF THE FACTOR `h' l-30 O-72 o-51 0.40 0.33 0.29 c /a'

NUMBEROFLABORATORY S.~PLE~ ANALYZED
3 4 5

VALUEOFTHE

FACTOR

6
7 8

12

