Indian Standard

IS 12699 : 1989 (Reaffirmed 2009)

SELECTION, INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF JET CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION -- CODE OF PRACTICE

U D C 621.671 : 621.694 : 006.76

� BIS 1989

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 November 1989 Price Group 3

Pumps Sectional Committee, HMD 20

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 12 June 1989, after the draft finalized by the Pumps Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard has been prepared on the basis of information received from industry. The technical requirements are covered in IS 12225 : 1987 'Jet centrifugal pump combination'.

AMENDMENT NO. 2 OCTOBER 2007 TO IS 12699 : 1989 SELECTION, INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF JET CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION -- CODE OF PRACTICE
(First cover page) -- Substitute the following for the existing Hindi title:

(ME 20)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 1997 TO IS 12699 : 1989 SELECTION, INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF JET CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION -- CODE OF PRACTICE
( First cover page and page 1, title ) -- Substitute the following for the existing title:

'SELECTION, INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF CENTRIFUGAL JET PUMP -- CODE OF PRACTICE'
Also substitute 'Centrifugal jet pump' for 'jet centrifugal pump combination' wherever appear in this standard. ( Page 1, clause 3.0 ) -- Substitute the following for the existing matter '3.0 The selection criteria are listed below:
a) Water well size and capacity,

b) c)

Maximum depth from which water is lifted, Performance requirements, namely, quantity, jet setting depth and discharge head (delivery head of centrifugal pump), Type of installations, and Quality of water.'

d) Type of prime mover, e) f)

( Page 1, clause 3.1.2 ) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: '3.1.2 Bore Well In bore wells, the sizes of pipe lines depend on the diameter of the bore. For the same bore well, if more quantity of water is to be pumped, in order to accommodate bigger flow area for the pressure pipe and delivery pipe ( suction pipe of centrifugal pump ) of the jet pump (assembly) packer/duplex type of jet pumps (assemblies) are preferred to twin type jet pumps (assemblies). In all bore wells for ease of erection, maximum jet unit outer dimension shall be Price Grovp 1 1

Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 always 6 mm (minimum) less than the clear bore well size. The maximum quantity of water that can be pumped by using these jet pumps ( assemblies ) with optimum percentage loss of friction in both pressure and delivery pipes ( suction pipe of centrifugal pump ) of the jet pumps ( assemblies ) shall be as given in Tables 1 and 2.' ( Page 1, Table 1, column headings ) -- Substitute 'Jet pump ( Assembly )
Maximum Dimeasion' for 'Jet Pump Maximum Dimension', 'Delivery Pipe (Suction Pipe of Centrifugal Pump ) Diameter' for 'Discharge Pipe' and 'Pressure Pipe Diameter' for 'Pressure Pipe'.

( Page 1, Table 2, column headings ) -- Substitute 'Inner Pipe (Suction Pipe of
Centrifugal Pump) Diameter' for 'Discharge Pipe Diameter'.

( Page 2, clause 3.2, sixth line ) -- Substitute 'IS 210 : 1993' for 'IS 210 : 1978'. ( Page 2, clause 3.3.1 ) -- Substitute 'Quantity' for 'Quality' wherever appears in the clause. ( Page 2, clauses 4 and 5 ) -- Designate clauses ' 4 ' and ' 5 ' as ' 3.4 ' and ' 3.5 ' and renumber the subsequent clauses. [ Page 2, clause 4 (b) ] -- Substitute the following for the existing matter 'b) Electric Motor, shall be according to IS 996 : 1979 for single phase and IS 7538 :1975 for three phase.' ( Page 2, clause 6.1 , last sentence ) -- Substitute the following for the existing sentence: 'Farther the pipe tapping to the jet pump (assembly) shall be provided in the centrifugal pump casing itself.' ( Page 2, clause 6.1 ) -- Insert the following note at the end:
'NOTE -- Typical field installations for twin type ceatrifugal jet pump, packer type centrifugal jet pump, and duplex type centrifugal jet pump ate given in Fig. 1, Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 respectively.'

( Page 2, clause 6.1.1A, first and third lines ) -- Insert the words 'pump (assembly)' after the word 'jet'.

2

Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 ( Page 2, clause 6.2 ) -- Substitute the following for the existing: '6.2 Installation of Twin Type Centrifugal Jet Pump ( see Fig. 1 )

FIG. 1 TYPICAL FIELD INSTALLATION FOR TWIN TYPE J E T

CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION 3

Attend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 ( Page 2, clause 6 2.1, second sentence ) -- Substitute the following for the existing sentence: 'Air shall be blown through the jet assembly to ensure that no dirt or foreign particles are trapped inside.' ( Page 2, clause 6.2.2 ) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: '6.2.2 Pipe Assembly Clean all pipes from foreign particles before tightening with jet pump (assembly). Tighten the delivery (suction of centrifugal pump) and pressure pipes, applying suitable pipe compound to the proper threads with the jet pump (assembly). While tightening the delivery pipe ( suction of centrifugal pump ) care shall be taken to see that it does not on any account strike the protruding portion of the venturi tube. Do not overtighten the pipe in the jet body and while tightening the pressure pipe do not move away the two pipes too much as both the above actions may lead to breakage of the jet assembly. After tightening each length pour water and see that there is no leakage in the joints. A chain block of minimum two tonne capacity with tripod consisting of 6-metre long 50-mm dia pipes, can be used for deep well erection. The delivery (suction of centrifugal pump) and pressure pipes shall be clamped with proper size clamp securely, and while one clamp is for lowering (or lifting), the nuts of the other clamp be loosened and positioned in the proper place and secured to fit the chain block hook for the subsequent operation. Tighten each end of pipe length by a binding wire to avoid damage to the jet assembly due to pipe chattering during subsequent pipe tightening. When the pipes have been fitted up to full length, fit two elbows with the delivery ( suction of centrifugal pump ) and pressure pipes with the proper centre distance between the pipes and fit them to the delivery (suction of centrifugal pump) and pressure pipe lines in the common flange of the centrifugal pumpset. The slip coupling in the pressure pipe line ( see Fig. 1 ) facilitates easy erection. Then insert the slip coupling in the pressure line such that the cut is in the centre of the coupling. Then tighten pump common flange without any leakage with a rubber washer to the pump body. In vertical mounting Gt directly the delivery pipe ( suction of centrifugal pipe ) to the common flange and assemble the slip coupling in the pressure pipe line vertically. For horizontal mounting the slip coupling can be conveniently Gtted in the horizontal portion of the pressure pipe line.'

4

Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 ( Page 3, clause 6.2.3) -- Substitute the following for the existing: '6.2.3 Assembly of Discharge Pipe ( Delivery of Centrifugal Pump ) to the Monopump Fit the discharge ( delivery of centrifugal pump ) flange to the pump body using the rubber washer. To the discharge flange (delivery of centrifugal pump) using a nipple, tighten a T-coupling. To the top of the T-coupling, tighten the priming unit. To the other side, tighten the pressure regulating valve. Connect the discharge line (delivery of centrifugal pump) to the overhead tank on the other side of the pressure regulator valve. The arrow mark on the valve body shall point toward the direction of the flow of water in the discharge line ( delivery of centrifugal pump ). Tighten the delivery ( suction of centrifugal pump ) and pressure pipe lines in the horizontal portion by a twin clamp before starting. Give a proper support to the pipe lines so that they do not give any pressure on the pump body. Screw down the pressure guage to the threaded opening provided in the pump casing/pressure regulator valve body.' ( Page 3, clause 6.3 ) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: '6.3 Installation of Packer Type Cetntrifugal Jet Pump ( see Fig. 2) The main components of packer type jet centrifugal pump combination are: a) Centrifugal monoblock pump/coupled pump/belt driven pump; 1) Packer type jet assembly with foot-valve, packer and strainer assembly, 2) 3) 4) c) Packer housing contained in a sealing pipe with stopper coupling, Packer head/well adopter, Flanges to connect pump and packer head, and b) Jet assembly components:

5) Clamps for outer pipe, inner pipe and well. Discbarge (delivery of centrifugal pumps) assembly components: 1) Pressure regulating valve, 2) 3) Priming unit, Pressure gauge, 5

Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 4) Air releasing cock, and 5) Discbarge flange (delivery of centrifugal pump).

FIG. 2 TYPICAL FIELD INSTALLATION FOR PACKER TYPE JET CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION 6

Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 ( Page 3, clause 6.3.2 ) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: '6.3.2 Assembly of Inner Pipe to the Jet Assembly and Locating it Within the Outer Pipe All the jet assemblies fitted with foot-valve, packer assembly and a strainer are to be tested for proper operation before leaving the works. The complete assembly of jet, foot-valve, packer assembly and strainer are to be supplied as a single unit. They contain two bucket washers at the bottom fitted to the packer assembly. Screw down the packer jet assembly to the first length of inner pipe by using proper pipe compound so that there shall not be any leakage. During the operation, care shall be taken to see that the pipe is clean. During tightening operation, the bucket washer shall not be allowed to touch any surface which will lead to their damage. Lower the inner pipe with jet assembly into the outer pipe so that the rubber packer do not strike the walls of the outer pipe during lowering operation. A good suggestion is to use small lengths after cleaning them thoroughly. Care shall be taken to see that the joints are leakproof. During the tightening operation of successive lengths of inner pipe, the bottom portion of the pipe lowered inside the casing pipe shall not be allowed to turn. As soon as the bottom portion of the jet assembly has touched the stopper coupling, see that the inner pipe protrudes above the outer pipe flange by 0.2 m. At the top, inner pipe shall not be threaded. Do not allow the inner pipe or jet assembly to strike the stopper couplings suddenly. This may lead to damage of the complete unit itself. Use chain block with tripod to lower the inner pipe.' (Page 4, clause 6.3.3, line 2) -- Delete the word '( delivery )'. ( Page 4, clause 6.3.3 ) -- Insert the follwing Note at the end:
*NOTE -- The inner pipe becomes che suction line of the centrifugal pump annular space between the inner and outer pipes functions as pressure pipe line.'

(Page 4, clause 6.3.4) -- Substitute the following for the existing matter '6.3.4 Assembly of Discharge ( Delivery of Centrifugal Pump ) Pipeline to the Monopump See 6.2.3 for details.' ( Page 4, clause 6.4) -- Substitute the following for the existing heading: '6.4 Installation of Duplex Type Jet Pump ( see Fig. 3 )' 7

Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989

FIG. 3 TYPICAL FIELD INSTALLATION FOR DUPLEX TYPE JET CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION

8

Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 [ Page 4, clause 6.4.1(a) ] -- Substitute the following for the existing matter. 'a) Assembly of outer pipe and inner pipe to the duplex jet assembly,' [ Page 4, clause 6.4.1(c) ] -- Substitute the following for the existing matter 'c) Assembly of discbarge line ( delivery of centrifugal pump ).' (Page 4, clause 6.4.2, para 1, line 4) -- Substitute 'inner'/or 'delivery'. ( Page 5, clause 6.4.3, heading ) -- Substitute 'Inner' for 'Delivery', (Page 5, clause 6.4.3, line 2) -- Delete '( delivery )'. ( Page 5, clause 6.4.3 ) -- Insert the following Note at the end:
'NOTE -- The inner pipe becomes the suction line of the centrifugal pump and the annular space between the inner and outer pipes functions as pressure pipe line.'

( Page 5, clause 6.4.4 ) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: '6.4.4 Assembly of Delivery Pipeline to the Monopump see 6.2.3 for details.' ( Page 6, clause 8.1, first line ) -- Substitute 'maintenance requirements' for 'installations'. ( Page 6, Annex A ) -- Substitute 'IS 210 : 1993 Grey iron castings ( fourth revision )' for 'IS 210 : 1978 Grey iron castings ( third revision )'. ( Page 6, Annex A ) -- Insert the following after IS 996 : 1979: 'IS 7S38 : 1975 Three phase squirrel cage induction motor for centrifugal pumps for agricultural application'

(HMD 20)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

9

IS 12699 : 1989

Indian Standard
SELECTION, INSTALLATIOlN, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF JET CENTRIFUGAL POMP COMBINATTON -- CODE OF PRACTICE
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down general guidelines for selection, installation, operation and maintenance duplex and packer type jet centrifugal pump combinations. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards; listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 SELECTION CRITERIA 3.0 The selection criteria are listed below: a) Water well size, capacity, and depth; b) Performance requirements, namely, quantity, jet setting depth and discharge head; c) Type of prime mover; d) Types of insallation; and e) Quality of water. 3.1 Water Well Size, Capacity tod Deptt 3.1.1 Open Well In open wells, there is no restriction on selection of pipe size for the jet centrifugal pump combination. 3.1.2 Bore Well In bore wells the size of pipe lines depends on the diameter of the bore. For the same bore well if more quantity of water is to be pumped, in order to accommodate bigger flow area for the pressure pipe and delivery pipe of the jet pump, packer/duplex type of jet pumps are preferred to twin type jet pumps. In all bore wells for ease of erection maximum jet pump outer dimension shall be always minimum 6 mm less than the clear bore well size. The maximum quantity of water that can be pumped by using these jet pumps with optimum percentage loss of friction in combined' pipe line of pressure and delivery of pump shall be as given in Tables 1 and 2. Table 1 Dimensions and Maximum Output for Twin Type Jet Pump ( Clause 3.1.2 )
'Maximum Recommended Output
l/m 12 20 35 50 65 80 120 180 225 320

Clear Bore Diameter mm 80 100 110 125 150 150 200 200 200 250

Discharge Maximum Pipe Dimension

Jet Pump
mm
76 92 102 114 126 135 164 172 185 230.

Pressure Pipe mm 20 25 32 40 40 50 50 65 65 80

25 32 40 40 50 50 65 65 80 100

mm

NOTE -- The discharges indicated are for an optimum combined pipe friction of about 10 percent. By alllowing higher frictional losses, more output can be obtained. Table 2 Dimensions and Maximam Output for Packer/Daplex Type Jet Pumps ( Clause 3.1.2 )
Clear Bore O u t e r Pipe Discharge Diameter Socket Pipe DiaDiameter meter

mm
80
100 100

mm

125 150 150 200

125

110

70 89 96 (TC)* 102 102 122 ( T C ) * 127 147 ( TC )* 159

mm 25 40 50 50 50 65 65 80 80

Outer Pipe Diameter

mm
50: 65 80 80

Maximum Recom mended Output l/m -

100

80

100

125 125

15 35 75 75 75 170 170 250
250

*(TC ) means turned coupling. 3.2 Quallty of Water The quality of water shall be taken into consideration for selection of jet pump and centrifugal pump components construction. When pumped

1

IS 12699 : 1989 water is neutral, the jet pump shall be made of cast iron (Minimum Grade FG 200 of IS 210 : 1978). When the water is acidic, jet pump and impeller of centrifugal pump shall be bronze as per Grade LTB2 of IS 318 : 1981. 33 Performance Requirements 3.3.1 Quality The quality of water required shall be decided by two factors: a) Actual consumer requirement, and b) Availability of yield of well or bore well. The maximum quantity that may be tapped shall be 80 percent of the tested yield of the well. 3.3.2 Jet Setting Depth To take care of frictional losses, the jet setting depth shall be taken 1.2 times the optimum spring depth of the bore well and jet pump shall be placed 3 to 5 m above the bottom of the bore well for silt not to enter the jet pump and it shall be placed 2 m below the maximum drawn down level or to have adequate submergence as specified by manufacturer. 3 3 3 Discharge Head The discharge head of the jet centrifugal pump combination shall be almost near the minimum operating head of the system which generally is taken as operating head of the centrifugal pump minus 6 m. This shall allow the system to operate at the optimum efficiency. 4 TYPE OF PRIME MOVER Jet centrifugal pump combination shall be selected according to the availability of the power source. a) Diesel Engine, shall be according to IS 11170 : 1985. b) Electric Motor, shall be according to IS 996 : 1979.
NOTE -- If jet centrifugal pump combination is to be driven by both, belt driven type centrifugal pump shall be preferred. If the pump is to be driven by only electric source, monobloc or direct coupled pump shall be preferred.

b) Horizontal When centrifugal pump is mounted horizontally, the length of the horizontal pipe line shall not be more than 1.5 to 2 m. In case the lengths are to be increased, one size higher diameter of pipe shall be used to keep the frictional losses minimum. 6 INSTALLATION 6.1 Installation of Centrifugal Pomp All requirement laid down in IS 9694 ( Part 2 ): 1980 shall apply to the centrifugal pump. ( For simplicity, the centrifugal pump of the system has been taken as a motorized monobloc horizontal type centrifugal pump ). The entire installation is given for pumps with flange ends; for screwed ends, the procedure is the same except that the pipes are screwed in and jointed with union joints slip coupling. Further, the pipe tapping to the jet pump shall be provided in the centrifugal pump casing itself in the example considered. 6.1.1 Plumbing the Well Before erecting the jet inside the borewell, lower a guide of outer diameter 6 mm bigger than the outer pipe coupling/jet diameter with a minimum length of 2 m into the borewell. It shall be noted that it goes into the borewell freely. At every 3 m interval, a knot shall be tied in the inserting rope to find out the water depth. A yield test conducted in the bore with test pump will also help to assess the maximum length of pipe to be lowered. 6.2 Installation of Twin Type Jet Centrifugal Pomp Combination 6.2.1 Inspection All components before erection, shall be inspected for possible damage in transit. No dirt or foreign particles entrapped inside shall be seen by blowing air through jet assembly combination. Pour water inside the jet assembly up to pressure pipe housing level and find out whether there is any leakage in the jet body or the foot valve. If there is any leakage in the foot-valve where it is threaded with the jet assembly, tighten them with suitable pipe compound and thread packing. Over tightening will result in breakage.

5 TYPES OF INSTALLATIONS

6.2.2 Pipe Assembly a) Vertical Clean all pipes from foreign particles before tight* Whenever the centrifugal pump is to be ening with jet pump. Tighten the delivery and placed in a separate room away from well, pressure pipe, applying suitable pipe compound horizontal installation is preferred and to the proper threads with the ejector body. whenever space availability is limited and While tightening the delivery pipe, care shall be where pump has to be placed above the taken to see that it does not on any account strike well, vertical mounting of the centrifugal the protruding portion of the venturi tube. Do pump shall be preferred. not over-tighten the pipe in the jet body and

2

IS 12699 : 1989 b) Packer housing contained in a sealing pipe white tightening the pressure pipe, do not move away the two pipes too much as both the above with stopper coupling; will lead to breakage of jet assembly. After tighc) Packer head/well adopter; tening each length, pour water and see that there d) Flanges to connect pump and packer head; is no leakage in the joints. A chain block of minimum two tonne capacity with tripoid each of 6 m e) Clamps for outer and inner pipe, well; and length of SO mm pipe can be used for deepwell f) Delivery assembly components: erection. Each pipe shall be used clamped with proper size clamp securely, and while one clamp 1) Pressure regulating valve, is used for lifting or lowering, the other nuts be 2) Priming unit, loosened and positioned in the proper place 3) Pressure gauge, and secured to fit the chain block for the subsequent operation. Tighten each end of pipe length 4) Air releasing cock, and by a binding wire to avoid damage to the jet 5) Delivery flanges. assembly due to pipe chattering during subsequent pipe tightening. When the pipes have been fitted up to full length, fit two elbows with the delivery 6.3.1 Outer Pipe Assembly and pressure pipes with the proper centre distance The packer housing which forms the bottom most between the pipes and fit them to the delivery and part of the outer pipe is always supplied with a pressure pipe lines in the flanges. The slip coup- screwed in stopper coupling. Clean the packer ling in the pressure pipe line facilitates easy erec- housing and see that the stopper coupling contion. Make a central cut in the horizontal length tains within it, a shock absorbing disc pasted to it. of the pressure pipe line, then insert the slip coupl- Then screw down the packer housing to the first ing in the pressure line such that the cut is in length of outer pipe through a coupling firmly the centre of the slip coupling. Then tighten the applying suitable pipe compounds. During the slip coupling nuts to seal the pressure line from tightening operation, care must be taken to see leakage. Tighten pump common flange without that either the packer housing or the outer pipe any leakage with a rubber washer to the pump does not collapse due to the excessive or improper body. In vertical mounting, fit directly the deli- tightening pressure. Lower first length inside very pipe to the common flanges and assemble the bore gently without striking the walls of the the slip coupling to the pressure pipe vertically. bore. Connect through couplings up to the required length, successive bits of outer pipe to the 6.2.3 Assembly of Discharge Pipe to the first length. On the top of the last bit of the outer Monopunp pipe, tighten the outer pipe flange and place above the bore well or open well, using a clamp Fit the discharge flange to the pump body using on a bed, which may be bore casing pipe in the rubber washer and wire gauge to avoid entry borewells, or a platform of rails in open wells. of foreign particles. To the discharge flange using For lowering the outer pipe within the bore well, a nipple, tighten a T-coupling. To the top of the a chain block mounted on a tripoid post must be T-coupling, tighten the priming unit. To the other used. Each length of outer pipe must be checked side, tighten the pressure regulating valve. Con- for correct bore sizes and for bends, by passing nect the discharge line to the overhead tank on the through it a guide of the specified outer pipe other side of the pressure regulator valve. The bore size. Any burrs or welding lines inside the arrow mark on the valve body shall point towards outer pipe protruding above the specified bore the direction of the flow of water in the discharge size diall be removed and then only the pipe shall line. Tighten the delivery and pressure pipe lines be used for erection. in the horizontal portion by a twin clamp before starting. Give a proper support to the ejector pipe- 6.3.2 Assembly of Inner ( Delivery ) Pipe to the line so that they do not give any pressure on the Jet Assembly and Locating it Within the Outer pump body. Pipe 6.3 Installation of Packer Type Jet Centrifugal Pump Combination All the jet assemblies fitted with foot-valve, packer assembly and a strainer are to be tested for proper operation before leaving the works. The main components of packer type jet centri- The complete assembly of jet, foot-valve, packer fugal pump combination are centrifugal mono- assembly and strainer are to be supplied as a bloc pump/coupled pump/belt driven pump. single unit. They contain two bucket washers at the bottom fitted to the packer assembly. Screw down the packer jet assembly to the first Jet Assembly Components length of delivery pipe by using proper pipe coma) Packer type jet assembly with foot-valve, pound so that there shall not be any leakage. packer and strainer assembly; During the operation, care shall be taken to see 3

IS 12699 : 1989 that tbe pipe is clean. During tightening operation, the bucket washer shall not, be allowed to touch any surface which will lead their damage. Lower the delivery pipe with jet assembly into the outer pipe so that the rubber packer do not strike the walls of the outer pipe during lowering operation. A good suggestion is to use small lengths after cleaning them thoroughlv. Care shall be taken to see that the joints are leakproof. During the tightening operation of successive bits of delivery pipe, the bottom portion of the pipe lowered inside the casing pipe shall not be allowed to turn. As soon as the bottom portion of the jet assembly has touched the stopper coupling, see that the delivery pipe protrudes above the outer pipe flange by 0.2 m. At the top, delivery pipe shall. not be threaded. Do not allow the delivery pipe or jet assembley to strike the stopper couplings suddenly. This may lead to damage of the complete unit itself. Use chain block with tripoid to lower the delivery pipe. 6.3.3 Assembly of Outer and Delivery pipe to the Monopump Through Packer Head and Flanges portion by twin clamp before starting. Give a proper support to the erector pipeline so that they do not give any pressure on the pump body. screw down the pressure gauge to its thread in the pump casing/pressure regulator valve body.

The concentric flow areas between outer and inner 3) Duplex head/well adoptor; (delivery) pipes are made twin flow areas by 4) Flanges to connect pump and duplex; fitting a packer head above the outer pipe flange. and Place its gasket above the outer pipe flange and 5) Outer and inner pipe clamps. then mount the packer head above it, passing it above the inner pipe outside diameter. In this c) Delivery assembly components: condition, the inner pipe shall be protruding above 1) Pressure regulating valve, tbe packer headtop level by at least 40 to 50 mm. 2) Prlniing unit, Cut the inner pipe using hacksaw to the top sutrface level of. packer head. Clean out all the 3) Pressure gauge, burrs around the inner pipe and insert the sealing 4) Air releasing cock, and ring rubber gland above the outside diameter of the inner pipe which will sit in its seating in the 5) Delivery flanges. packer head. Place its gasket above the packer head, now it is ready for connecting with the 6.4.1 The installation of duplex type jet assembly monopump. Two sets of flanges one for the with pipes and monopump is done in three phases. packer head and other for monopump shall be a) Assembly pf outer pipe and delivery pipe supplied. Connect these flange using two elbows ( inner pipe ) to the duplex jet assembly, and required length of pipes. A slip coupling may be used for the ease of erection in the pressure b) Assembly of outer and inner pipe to the line. Using the gasket, tighten this assembly to monopump through duplex head/well the packer head and monopump. adopter through flanges, and c) Assembly of discharge line. 6.3.4 Assembly of Discharge Pipeline to the Monopump 6.4.2 Assembly of Outer Pipe and Delivery Pipe Fit the discharge flangie to the pump body using to the Duplex Jet Assembly the rubber washer and wire gauge to avoid entry For ease of erection, the length of individual bits of foreign particles. To the discharge flange using of pipes are generally kept less than three metres nipple, tighten a T-coupling. To the top of the since pipes are assembled together. Keep the T-coupling, tighten the priming unit. To the lengthboth pf the pipe at least 3 m longer outer side, tighten the pressure regulating valve than outer pipedelivery for easy so that the arrow on it points towards the, flow of and outer pipe separately. tightening of the inner water in discharge pipeline. Connect the discharge line to the overhead tank, on the other side of the Check the duplex jet assembly for any damage in pressure regulator valve. In horizontal sets, tighten transit and blow air through the jet assembly so the suction and pressure pipelines in the horizontal that no foreign particles have clogged the venturi

It shall be born in mind that in duplex jet pump, both outer and delivery pipe are screwed to jet assembly together and then lowered in the wall. The foot-valve of the duplex jet pump may be either external to the duplex assembly or internal within duplex assembley. The main components of a duplex type jet centrifugal pump combination are: a) Centrifugal monopump/coupled/belt driven pump, b) The jet pump assembly components: 1) Duplex type jet pump assembly with foot-valve, strainer and duplex unit; 2) Outer pipe flange;

6.4 Installation of Duplex Type Jet Pump

4

IS 12699 : 1989 or nozzle. If the footvalve forms an internal part of the jet assembly, fit a small column of inner pipe and pour water to check water tightness of seating of the footvalve. If the footvalve is external, it should be only fitted after the assembly of first length of inner and outer pipe to jet assembly before lowering. Tighten the jet assembly with first bit of inner pipe with proper sealing compound. Above the duplex nut seating, place the gasket and place the first bit of the outer pipe and tighten both through outer pipe coupling using proper sealing compound. Connect the delivery line to the overhead tank on the other side of the pressure regulating gate valve. Tighten the suction and pressure pipelines in the horizontal portion by a twin clamp before starting. Give proper support to the ejector pipeline so that they do not give any pressure on the pump body. Screw down the pressure gauge to its thread in the pump casing. 6.4.4.1 Electrical connections

Use proper capacity switch and starter with overload and under voltage protections. While giving connection, take care to avoid loose contacts. Do not use oversize fuse. Before starting, see Using one clamp on the outer pipe and one on that the motor runs in the correct direction as the inner pipe, lower the pipes within the bore. indicated by the arrow mark on the casing. In Pour water within these pipes and check for any single phase jet pumps, test with a voltmeter to leakage. If both the inner and the outer pipes ensure that the line voltage does not go below 180 are lowered to the required length, fix a clamp on volts while starting the pump, the outer pipe and house it on the well casing. Tighten the outer pipe flange using proper sealing 7 OPERATION compound to the outer pipe. It shall be seen that in this position, the inner pipe shall be pro- 7.1 All the instructions laid down for centrifugal truding above the outer pipe flange by a length of pump in IS 9694 ( Part 3 ): 1980 shall apply to the operation of jet centrifugal pump combination. at least duplex head height plus 50 mm. Further, the following recommendations shall be 6.4.3 Assembly of Outer and Delivery Pipe to followed. Monopump Through Duplex Head and Flanges 7.1.1 After starting the pump, the pressure reguThe concentric flow areas between outer and inner lating valve/throttle valve shall be adjusted to a (delivery) pipes are made twin flow areas by pressure which is 20 percent higher than the fitting a duplex head otherwise known as well minimum operating pressure specified on the adopter above the outer pipe flange. Place its name plate. Pump shall be allowed to run at gasket above the outer pipe flange and then mount least for 3 to 4 hours and fall in operating the duplex head above it passing it above the inner pressure shall be recorded. Pressure regulating pipe. In this condition, the inner pipe will be valve shall now be readjusted to the protruding above the duplex head top level by at minimum operating pressure. Failure of the least 40 to 50 mm. Cut the inner pipe using pump to operate at minimum operating pressure hacksaw to the top surface level of the duplex shall mean that the yield of well is lesser than the head. Clean out all the burrs around the inner capacity of the pump. In such cases, readjust the pipe and insert the sealing ring rubber gland above pressure to a higher value so that the continuous the outside diameter of the inner pipe which will flow of water is established. The failure of jet sit in its seating in this duplex head. Place its centrifugal pump combination to deliver water gasket above the duplex head. Now it is ready for after starting may be due to the following connecting it with the monopump. Two sets of additional factors: flanges, one for the duplex head and the other for a) Clogging of foreign particles in jet nozzle the monopump shall be supplied. Connect these or venturi. flanges using two elbows and the required length of pipes. A slip coupling shall be used for ease b) Foot valve strainer clogging due to mud in of erection in the pressure line. Using the gasket, the well -- It is recommended that footvalve tighten this assembly to the duplex head and to shall be at least 2 m above the bottom most the monopump. point of well in bore wells and at least 0.3 m above the bottom in open wells. 6.4.4 Assembly of Discharge Pipeline to the c) Inner changing pressure and delivery pipe. Monopump d) Leaky joints of duplex nut. Fit the discharge flange to the pump body using the rubber washer and wire gauge to avoid entry e) Leaky joints of coupling in pressure and of foreign particles. To the delivery flange, using delivery pipes. a nipple, tighten a T-coupling. To the top of f) Damage of packer washers during erection the T-coupling, tighten the priming unit. To the in packer type jet pump. other side, tighten the pressure regulating valve. 5

IS 12699 : 1989

8 MAINTENANCE
8.1 All the installations laid down for centrifugal pump in IS 9694 ( Part 4 ) : 1980 shall Apply for the maintenance of jet centrifugal pump combination. 9 SHIPMENT 9.1 IS 9694 ( Part 2 ) : 1980 shall apply to the centrifugal pump part.

9.2 Jet Pump Assembly

a) All tho important components, such as, venturi, nozzle, footvalve, etc, shall be clearly protected and covered from foreign particles entry. b) The venturi and footvalve stem portion shall be thoroughly protected from damage due to accidental throwing of the packing. c) Pressure gauge supplied with the pump shall be thoroughly protected from damages to the dial and the glass cover from shock.

ANNEX A (Clause 2.1)
LIST OF PEFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS

IS NO.

Title
Grey iron castings (third revision ) Leaded tin bronze ingots and castings ( second Single phase small and universal electric motors ( second revision )

IS No.

Totle
nanee 6f horizontal centrifugal pumps for agriculture applications : Part 3 Operation

IS 210 : 1978
IS 318 : 1981 IS 996 : 1979

IS 9694 ( Part 2 ): 1980 Code of practice for the Selection, installation, operation and mainte- IS 11170 : 1985 nance of horizontal centrifugal pumps for agriculture applications: Part 2 Installation

IS 9694 (Part 4) : 1980 Code of practice for the selection, installation, operation and maintenance of horizontal centrifugal pumps for agriculture applications: Part 4 Maintenance Performance requirement constant speed compression ignition (diesel) engines for agritultural purposes Technical requirement for jet centrifugal pump combination

IS 9694 (Part 3) : 1980 Code of practice for the IS 12225 : 1987 selection, installation, operation and mainte-

6

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, II any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Doc : No. HMD 20 ( 4740 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telenhones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SCO 445-446. Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Southern : C. I. T. Campus. IV Cross Road. MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. G U W A H A T I . HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. Printed at Printwell Printers, Delhi, India Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 36 24 99 2 18 43 3 16 41 41 24 42 41 25 19 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

