( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

PLANNINGANDDESIGNOF REVETMENTGUIDELINES
UDC 627,417 ( 026 )

Q BIS 1995

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002 April

1995

Price Group 4

River Training and Control Works Sectional Committee,

RVD 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the River Training and Control Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. It is a common practice to use revetment for protecting the river bank, flood embankments, guide bunds, spurs, etc, from the fury of floods. The protection work of this type is known by different names such as stone pitchmg, rip-rap, revetment, etc. However, the most common technical term is revetment. The size and mass of stone to be used for revetment is required to withstand flow velocity, tractive force, etc, taking into consideration specific gravity of material in revetment, porosity, bank slope, angle of repose of bank and protecting material, etc. A filter is also required below the protection layer to prevent possible soil loss. This standard covers the planning and design of revetment for bank protection works. The construction and maintenance aspects of revetments are being covered in a separate Indian Standard.

IS 14262 : 1995

Indian Standard

PLANNINGANDDESIGNOFREVETMENTGUIDELINES
1 SCOPE

This siandard lays down the guidelines for planning and design of revetment used for embankments and bank protection works in case of alluvial rivers and canals. 2 REFERENCE The Indian Standard `IS 8237 : 1985 Code of practice for protection of slope for reservoir embankments ($rsl revision )' is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 GENERAL DESIGN FEATURES 3.1 Dry Revetment Stone used in revetment for river bank protection is subjected to hydrodynamic drag and lift forces. These destabilizing forces are expressed in terms of velocity, tractive force, etc. The stabilizing forces acting against these are component of submerged weight of stone and downward component of the force caused by contact of the stones. Weight of the stone on horizontal expressed as: bed may be

weight has to be increased. The limiting value for the slope is the angle of repose of material of sub-base. Correction factor K for computing weight of stone on sloping face may be obtained from the following equation: ( sin' B/sin%I#J ) K=Jl where ti = angle of bank slope with horizontal, and 4 = an;i;;\"f repose of material of protection _. Thus the weight of stone would be

W = 0.023 23 (X, s, _ 1 1QV6 where w= weight of stone in kg, St? - specific gravity of stone, and V=== mean velocity of water in m/s over the vertical under reference. The weight of stone worked out is the minimum required. Use of higher weight stones will be based on the material available at site, ease of construction, factor of safety, etc. 3.2 Effect of Specific Gravity In practice, density of stone could vary from 2 000 to 3 300 kg/ma. The actual density of stone should be determined for calculating the weight of stone given in 3.1. 3.3 Effect of Bank Slope and Angle of Repose The weight of stone estimated for horizontal bed would not be sufficient for same velocity on the sloping bank because only component of self-weight normal to the slope acts as a stabilizing force. Therefore, for sloping banks, the 1

Weight of stone may also be calculated using the nomograph given in Fig. 1 ( see page 3 ). For river training works, sub-base is to be graded to a stable slope depending upon the angle of repose and cohesion of bsnk material under saturated condition, and the height of the bank. For high bank a berm may be necessary. For important works stability of bank with designed slope and berm should be checked by slip circle method or by soil dynamic testing procedures. Mere large size stones/crates would not be adequate for protection if the same is not laid on a stable base. For normal bank protection a slope of 2H : 1 V or flatter is recommended. 3.4 Size of Stone Size of the stone D, may be determined the following relationship: from

where W = weight of stone in kg, and SS = specific gravity of stones. Minimum dimension of the stones should not be less than Ds as obtained above. From the worked out weight and known specific gravity, the volume of stone should be calculated. Generally, the size of stone should be such that its length, width and thickness should be more or less the same, that is stone should be approximately cubical. Round stones or very flat stones having small thickness should be avoided.

IS 14262: 1995 3.5 Thickness of Protectioo Layer Typical dry stone on page 5. 3.7 Filter A graded filter of 150 to 300 mm thickness conforming to IS 8237 : 1985 should normally be provided below the revetment to prevent failure by sucking action of high velocity flow. Syntheticigeotextile filter may be used from the point of view of quality control and convenience of laying. The criteria for synthetic filter is given in Annex A. A 150-mm thick sand layer should be provided over the filter fabric to prevent the mechanical rupture of the fabric by revetment stones. 4 REVETMENTS IN MORTAR revetment is shown in Fig. 2

Minimum thickness of protection layer is required to withstand the negative head created by velocity. This may be determined by the following relationship:
TZ

V$

2g(Ss-where T = V 5 g = thickness velocity rtcdeleration gravity

1)

of protection in m/s, due to

layer in m, gravity in m/s',

& = specific

of stones.

For safety purposes, two layers of stones according to the size obtained in 3.4 above should be provided. 3.6 Stones io Crates

4.1 Sizes of the Stooes Stones, bricks or concrete blocks may be used for revetment in mortar. Size of stone, concrete block, etc, in this type of pitching, is not a critical aspect of design as every individual piece is bonded by mortar. Average size of the available stone may be used for the purpose. Thickness should, however, be decided using equation given in 3.5 to achieve stability against lifting. Typical revetment in mortar is shown in Fig. 3 ( see page 5 ). 4.2 Paoelling Mortar revetment should not be constructed in a continuous or monolithic form. To avoid cracks, joints at suitable interval are required to be provided. Generally, revetment is divided inpanels ofsize3m x 3mor3m x 5morso ( see Fig. 4 on page 5 ). The size of the panel may be varied depending upon the river reach to be protected and the length of bank s1ope'. Standard granular filter or synthetic fabric filter should be provided below the joint. 4.3 Drain Holes

At high velocities, weight of stone determined from relationship given in 3.3 works out very high which makes handling and placing of Under such circumstances, stones difficult. small stones in crates are generally used. However;the specific gravity of the crate is different from that of the individual stone due to presence of voids. Porosity in crates may be worked out by the formula:

where DE0 = mean crate diameter in cm. of stones used in be

Mass specific gravity S, of crates determined from the equation: S, = ( 1 -- e ) S, Volume of the using S,,. crate should

may then

be

determined

Crates should be laid with longer dimension along the slope of the bank. The size of the mesh of crate should be smaller than the smallest stone in the crate. The mesh should be double knotted. GI wire of minimum diameter 4 mm should be used for crates. Crate units may be tied to each other by 5 mm GT wire as additional precaution. If crates are provided in layers, each layer should be tied to lower and upper layer at suitable intervals with 4 mm GI wire. Launching apron should not be tied to crate on slope. A nomograph to determine the size and weight of stone or crates for revetment is given in Fig. 1.

Drain holes or weep holes are required to be provided in each panel for free drainage of pnre water from the saturated bank soil beneath it,. Depending upon the size of the panel, one or more drain holes need to be provided. The pipe provided in the drain hole should be up to the natural bank. Inverted filter or synthetic filter fabric should be provided at the end in contact with soil to prevent escape of soil particles. Other end of the drain pipe should be flush with the revetment face ( see Fig. 3 on page 5 ). 5 TOE PROTECTION To prevent the s!iding and failure of the revetment on slope, toe is required to be protected. This may be in the form of simple key, a toe wall, a sheet pile or a launching apron. Different types of toe protections are also shown in Fig. 2 to 6 ( see pages 5 and 6 ).

IS 14262:lYYS

.
--3 2 16 16 14 -1 5. 10 9 6 1r ROO k( 6 6OU : .* 0;. a's 2 12 -1 25 -2

1 -1

~0 35 -030

f
z 5 t,

d -30 265 *c-, .,.. ., -24

4

:' :.
:'

: 300 200

.06 -06

L. *, *. -... -. .\ _. .
3

. ..' . . ( `.
--.._ -..

04 -03 0 25

-07 "35 -.
`. -.

cl

K.FACTOA

P`
0 25 2 " 01 T=THICKNESS I P; PIVOT LINE 0 20 D. DIAMETER

J-115
s.SPEClFlC GRAVITY Velocity : 3 m/s

V:VELOCITY

VJ=WEIGHl

Bank alopc Angle

:2 : 1 : 30 degree% : 2.65

of repose

SpcciRc gravity

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 14262 : 1995

HFC FREE BOARD

`(I

---

-..

.:. .;.

-

. *.*s

. -.

FIG. 2 DRY PITCHING WITH APRON

. : .\
.

r

FREE

BOAR0

.'

. .

b &k-t
.
.

---

-

-=%b
WEEP PIPE WITH FILTER

JOINT INVERTED FILTER

OF PANEL

WITH

FlLTER

i.RODIHLE

STRATA

i

I!NFRC,I~IRLF

SIRAT,

FIG. 3 PITCHING IN MORTARWITH TOEWALL

PANEL

JOINT

w I *_ FIG. 4 FRONT VIEW OF PANEL

IS 14262: 195 5.1 Simple key may be provided at the toe when

rock or unerodible strata is available at the river bed and the overlying banks are under attack and subjected to erosion. The key is in the form of stones, bricks or concrete blocks filled in trench at the toe below the hard river bed for depth equal to the thickness of pitching for proper anchorage ( see Fig. 5 ). Sole purpose of this key is to provide lateral support. The stones, bricks or blocks may be laid in mortar if pitching on slope is in mortar. 5.2 When hard strata is available below the river bed at a reasonable depth, toe wall is recommended. The thickness of toe wall depends upon the height of the wall and height of the overlying protection works. This wall may be constructed in masonry ( see Fig. 3 ) and designed as a retaining wall with weep holes, etc. 5.3 When firm strata is not available at a reasonable depth below the river bed, toe protection in the form of sheet piles is recommend-

ed. The sheet pile may be made up of RCC or steel or bamboos depending upon the availability of material. Sheet piles should be driver! below the anticipated maximum scour plus grip length ( see Fig. 6 ). Depth of scour may be worked equation:
DL = 0.473 ( Q/f)l/s or DL = 1.33 ( q'/f )],a, 2nd

out from

the

f = 1.76 42 where
Dr, = scour depth below HFL in m,

Q = discharge in ma/s, q = discharge per unit width in ms/s;lm, f = silt factor, and d = mean particle diameter of river bed material in mm. Maximum anticipated scour for launching apron may be taken as = 1.5 DL.

rJ FREE BOARU 5s

HFL

ERODIBLE

STRATA

--

,- LlNEROOlBLE

STRATA

Tr

THICKNESS PROTECTION

OF LAYER

FIG. 5 TOE

KBY

BED BEFORE

PROFILE SCOUR

BED PROFILE Af7ER SCOUR

FIG.

6 TOE PROTECTION WITH PILEAND TOP KEY

IS 14262 : 1995 5.4 Sheet piles are difficult to drive.

Launching apron is, therefore, preferred and generally provided for dry rubble revetments ( see Fig. 2 ).

the laid apron may be kept 0.8 T near the toe of the revetment and l-2 Tat the river end. 5.7 Filter as mentioned in 3.7 should be provided below launching apron. 6 ANCHORING 6.1 Proper anchor is required for keeping the revetment in place and serving the desired function. Upstream edge from where the revetment starts, should be secured well to the adjoining bank. Similarly, downstream edge where the pitching ends also need to be secured well to the adjoining bank. For this purpose, the revetment should be properly anchored to the ground at its two ends by sultably extending it as may be required at site ( see Fig. 7 ). Anchorage is also required to be provided on the top for submerged bank ( see Fig. 6 ). If the top of bank is above HFL, the revetment should be raised above HFL with adequate free board. Under such situation, anchorage at the top is not required ( see Fig. 2 ).

5.5 Launching apron should be laid at normal water level or at as low a level as techno*economically viable. The stones in the apron should be designed to launch along the slope of the scour and provide a strong layer that may prevent further scooping out of the river bed material. The size and shap: of the apron depends on the size of the stone, thickness of the launched apron, depth of scour and slope .of launched apron. Weight and size of the stone for launching apron should be determined as in 3.3 and 3.4. Thickness of launching apron should be determined as in 3.5. 5.6 The slope of launching apron may be taken as 2 H : 1 V. Adequate quantity of stones for the apron has to be provided to ensure complete protection of the whole of the scoured face according to levels and slopes. The quantity of stones so calculated may be provided in a wedge shape having width of 1.5 DL ( see Fig. 2 ) and average thickness T. Thickness of

FIG. 7 UPSTREAMAND DOWNSTREAMKEY FOR RBVBTMENT

7

IS 14262 : 1995

ANNEX

A

( Clause 3.7 )
CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF FILTER FABRIC

Geotextile filters may be recommended because of ease in installation and their proven effectiveness as an integral part of protection works. The following criteria, depending on the gradation of bed material, may be used to select the correct filter fabric: a) For granular material containing 50 percent or less fines by weight, the following ratio should be satisfied: 8.5% passing size of bed material (mm) --.) 1.0 Eqmvalent opening size of bed of fabric (mm) In order to reduce the chances of clogging, no fabric should be specified with an size smaller than equivalent opening

0.149 mm. Thus the equivalent opening size of fabric should not be smaller than 0.149 mm and should be equal to or less than 85 percent passing size of the bed material. b) For bed material containing at least 50 percent but not more than 85 percent fines by weight, the equivalent opening size of filter should not be smaller than O-149 mm and should not be larger than O-211 mm.

c) For bed material containg 85 percent

or more of particles finer than O-074 mm, it is suggested that use of non-woven geofabric filter having opening size and permeability compatible to the equivalent values given in (a) above may be used.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, typr or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No, RVD 22 (140)

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

-

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDLGARH 160022

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 85 61 37 86 26, 37 86 62 t 60 38 20 25 43

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
I 235 02 15 16, 19, 235 04 23 42 15

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

I 632 92 78 95, 91, 632 78 92 58

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed st New India Printing Press. Khurjs. Indls

