IS : 7306

- 1974

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR DETERMINING SYNCHRONOUS MACHIN-E QUANTITIES FROM TESTS
( Semnd Reprint NOVEMBER 1997 )

UDC

621.313.32

: 621.317.3

: 620.1

0 Copyrighf 1975

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 10

May 1975

IS : 7306 - 1974

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR DETERMINING SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE QUANTITIES FROM TESTS
Rotating
Chairman SHRIJ. S.
ZhVERl

Machinery

Sectional
Bharat

dommittee,
Representing

ETDC

15

Bijlee Ltd, Bombay

SIIRI

C. E. RHASKAR Sbri J. S. Zaveri) XPPUKUTTAN

RAD

(Altmnte ro
FACT Engineering Udyogamandai. and Design Organization,

SARI R.

SHRI G. HARINDRAN (A/tern&) ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, ELECTRICAL Naval Headquarters ENGINEERING (MATERIAL) STAFF OFFICER, LEANDER PROJECT ,I... ~ (ELECTRICAL) (Afternate SHRI T. V. B.~LAKRISHNAN Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar SHRI B. J. VOHRA (.4lternatr) SHRI P. R. BAPAT Gurst, Keen. Williams Ltd, Bombay SHRi K. R. R. IYENGAR (.hmatc) Directorate General of Supplies & SHRI G. R. BHATIA (Inspection MYng), New Delhi SHRI J. S. PASS1 (&tema#e)

Disposals

SIIRI C. S. BIJLANI SFIRI B.`G. DESAI SHRI P. L. PRADHAN (Alternafe) DIRECTOR (HED- 1)

Walchandnagar Jyoti Limited,

Industries Baroda

Ltd, Walchandnagar
Commission (Power

Central Water 8r Power Wing), New Delhi

DEPUTY DIRECTOR (HED-I) (Alternate) SIIRI \`. D. ERAI\`I>E Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. S. BENDRE (Alternate) DR S. K. &PTA Research and Development Organization Electrical Industry, Bhopal JOINTDIRECTOR STANDARDS Railway Board (Mi,&try of Railways) (ELECTRICAL)-I DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANI>ARDS (ELECTRICAL)-11 ($/teWlnte) SHRI T. R. hlo1-1.4~ Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. L. NARAYANAN (Alternate) SARI H. Ii. RIIXIIERJEE National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. ~IL~KHOPADHYYA (Alternote)

for

(Continued on page 2) 0 Copvright 1975

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 7306-1974
(Continued from page 1) Representing

Members

SHRI A.K. NACARKATTII LT-COL S. P.-NARULA SHRI S. K. SARKAR (A&mate) SHRI K. G. PARIKH SHRI S. SARUP (A&mate) SHRI D. P. PATEL SHRI R. K. TASKAR (Alternate) DR G. M. PHADKE SHRI J. R. MAIIAJAN (&fern&) SHRI K. N. RAMA~WAMY

Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore Army Headquarters Millowners' Association, Bombay Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay Manufacturers' of Technical Association, Development,

Indian Electrical Bombay Directorate General New Delhi

DR VAKIL AHMED (A&mate) SHRI RAMESHCHANDRA Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi SHRI P. DUTTA (Alternate) SHRI K. M. SINCLAIR Heavy Electricals (India) Ltd, Bhopal DR A. K. GOSWAMI(Alternate I) SHR: S. GOVINDARAJ (Alternate II) SHRIMZAHED ALI Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI P. KONDALARAO (Alternate) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director General, IS1 (Ex-o#ccio Member) Director (Elec tech)
Secretary

SHRI R. C. JAIN Deputy Director (Elec tech), IS1 Panel for Finalization of Draft Standards on Machines, ETDC 15 : P13 Synchronous

Conuener

SHRI M. ZAHED ALI
Members

Bharat Heavy Electricah Ltd, Hyderabad

SHRI T. V. BALAKRISHNAN SHRI B. J. VOWRA (Alternate) DEPUTY DIRECTOR(TED) SHRXS. GOVINDARAJ

Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Ranipur Central Water 82 Power Commission (Power Wing), New Delhi Heavy Electricals India Ltd, Bhopal

IS : 7306- 1974

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR DETERMINING SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE QUANTITIES FROM TESTS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 2 February 1974, after the draft finalized by the Rotating hlachinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard shall be read in conjunction with IS : 7132 - 1973* to which reference has been made for some tests in this standard. 0.3 It is not intended that this standard should be interpreted as requiring the carrying out of any or all of the tests described therein on any given machine. The particular tests to _be carried out shall be subject to a special agreement. 0.4 While the tests also apply in general to brushless machines, variations do exist and special precautions shall be taken. certain

0.5 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications : IEC Publication 34-4 (1967) Rotating electrical machines, Part 4 : Methods for determining synchronous machine quantities from tests. ,International Electrotechnical Commission, IEEE 115 Test procedures for synchronous machines. Institution of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, USA. CSN 350201 Testing synchronous machines, OEad pro normalizaci a m&eni (Czechoslovakia).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down methods for determining characteristics quantities from tests of three-phase synchronous machines having ratings of 1 kVA and above and frequency from 15 to 400 Hz. 1.1.1 The test methods are not intended to apply to special synchronous machines, such as permanent-magnet field machines, inductor type machines, etc.
*Guide for testing synchronous machines.

3

IS : 7306- 1974
NOTE - For single-phase machines or polyphase machines other than three-phase, modifications will be needed in some cases, but they can usually be readily determined.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, (Part XXXV) - 1973" shall apply. 3. GENERAL 3.1 Tests for determining synchronous machine quantities shall be' conducted on a completely sound machine, all the devices for automatic regulation being switched off. Unless otherwise stated, the tests are conducted at the rated speed. 3.2 Indicating measuring instruments and their accessories, such as measuring transformers, shunts and bridges used during tests, unless otherwise stated, shall have an accuracy class not inferior to 1-O (see IS : 1248 - 1968~). The instruments used for determining dc resistances shall have an accuracy class not inferior to 0.5. The oscillographic measuring equipment shall be chosen with due regard to the rated frequency of the machine to be tested, so that the readings are taken in a linear portion of the vibrator ~amplitude against frequency characteristic. The measurement of the speed of rotation of synchronous machine may be conducted by means of a stroboscopic method or by using tachometers (mechanical or electrical). Instead of measuring the speed of rotation, it is permissible to measure frequency by means of a frequency meter when the machine is running: synchronous with any other machine or running on its own. 3.3 The temperature of the windings is measured in those tests when the quantities to be determined depend on it or when knowledge of it is. required by the safety considerations of the machine during tests. In cases where transient temperatures may exceed the safe values, the tests shall be started only after the machine has been run at no-load with. normal cooling or has been at rest for a period to assure low starting temperature, and the temperatures shall be careful!y monitored or predetermined so that the test may be discontinued before the temperature becomes. excessive. 3.4 During the test, the winding connections of the machine shall be the same as for normal working. All quantities are determined with star connection of the `armature winding as the basis (unless special connections, such as open delta, are
*Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part XXXV Rotating machines. TSpecification for direct acting electrical indicating instruments (first r;Jion).

the definitions given in IS : 1885

4

IS : 7306 - 1974 If the armature winding is actually delta connected, the values specified). of the quantities obtained in accordance with this standard shall correspond to an equivalent star-connected winding. 3.5 Unless otherwise specified, all the quantities and characteristics shall be ~designated in per unit values considering rated values of the voltage lJn, and the apparent power S, as base ones. In this case base current will be: -I, = 1/3u, and base impedance ohms Similarly the base frequency is regularly selected as equal to rated frequency and from this value base electrical angular velocity wn and base time tn, if needed, are obtained from the equations given below : w,, = 2 v fn radians per second tn ,,L fn = 2q W, seconds

S,

amperes

A time constant given in seconds may be converted to per unit by dividing it by tn. 3.5.1 The intermediate calculations, if it is convenient, may be performed in physical values with subsequent conversion to the quantity in per unit value. 3.5.2 The time shall be expressed in seconds. 3.5.3 For calculations of characteristics, and when drawing diagrams, the excitation current corresponding to the rated voltage on the no-load saturation curve shall be taken as its base value. 3.5.4 If a machine has several rated values, those taken for the base values shall be stated. 3.5.5 Small letters designate the quantities in per unit values, and capital letters designate them in physical values. 3.6 Unless otherwise stated, the positive sequence armature resistance is considered to be negligible in the formulae specified for determining synchronous machine reactances. When the positive sequence armature resistance constitutes more than 20 percent of the measured reactance, the formulae shall be considered as approximate. 5

IS : 7306 F 1974 3.7 The definitions of the majority of quantities and their experimental methods of determination correspond to the widely accepted two-axis theory of synchronous machines with approximate representation of all circuits, additional to the field winding and stationary circuits relative to it, by two equivalent circuits, one along the direct axis and the other along the quadrature axis, neglecting armature resistance or taking it into consideration only approximately. As a consequence of this approximate machine representation, three reactances (synchronous, transient and sub-transient) and two time constants (transient and sub-transient) along the direct axis, two reactances (synchronous and sub-transient) and one time constant (sub-transient) along the quadrature axis and the armature short-circuit time constant are considered for transient phenomena studies. Those time constants are based on the assumption of an exponential decrease of the particular components of quantities involved (currents, voltages, etc) . If the plot of the measured component under consideration does not decrease as a pure exponential, for example, in case of a solid rotor -machine, the time constant shall normally be interpreted as the time required for component to decrease to 1/~~0.368 of its initial values. Exponential decay curves corresponding to these time constants shall be considered as equivalent curves replacing the actual measured ones. 3.8 Synchronous machine quantities vary with saturation of the magnetic circuits. In practical calculations both saturated and unsaturated values are used. Unless otherwise stated, the saturated value of a reactance shall be taken as the rated (armature) voltage value of the quantity, and their unsaturated value shall be taken as the rated (armature) current value, except synchronous reactance which is not defined as saturated. The rated (armature) voltage value of a quantity corresponds to the magnetic condition of the machine during sudden short-circuit of the armature winding at no-load rated voltage, the machine running at rated speed. The rated (armature) current value of a quantity corresponds to the condition in which the fundamental ac component of armature current which determines this particular quantity is equal to the rated current. 4. METHODS OF DETERMINATION

4.1 Methods for determining synchronous machine quantities are given in Table 1.

6

IS : 7306-1974
TABLE

1 METHODS

OF DETERMINATION MACHINE QUANTITIES

OF SYNCHRONOUS

QUANTITY

METIIOD OF DETERMINATION

CLAUSE -No.

SATURATED OR UNSATURATED
VALUE

REMARK s

(1)
xd

(2) a) No-load saturation and three-phase sustained short-circuit tests b) Low slip test No-load saturation and sustained three-phase short-circuit tests a) Negative excitation test b) Low slip test c) On-load test by measuring the load angle

(3) 5.1.2 5.5, 5.6 5.1.3

(4) Unsaturated Unsaturated

(5) Preferred Preferred

-

-

5.4, 5.4.1 5.5, 5.6 5.7, 5.8

Saturated Unsaturated 3 Unsaturated Saturated

Preferred Preferred -

x'd

a) Sudden three-phase short-circuit test b) Voltage recovery test c) Calculation from the test values of &, 7 ' and 7'6 a) Sudden three-phase short-circuit test b) Voltage recovery test cl Applied voltage test with the rotor in direct and quadrature-a x i s positions with respect to the armature winding field axis 4 Applied voltage test with the rotor in any arbitrary position e) Test conducted by disconnecting the machine running close to synchronous speed from a three-phase reduced voltage supply

5.9, 5.10 5.1~1, 5.12 5.40.1

Unsaturated Saturated 1 Unsaturated -

Preferred -

X" d

5.9, 5.10.2 5.11, 5.12.2 5.13, 5.14

Unsaturated Saturated 1 Unsaturated Unsaturated Saturated

Preferred

These may be used for the unsaturated value ofX"d, but are usually not practicable for the saturated value because of the large current required and possible overheating of solid parts

'

5.15, 5.16

Unsaturated Saturated Unsaturated Saturated

5.17

7

IS : 730611974
TABLE 1 M~~THODS OF DETERMINATION MACHINE QUANTITIES OF sYNC*B0~0us Co~z~d

QUANTITY

METHOD OF DETERMINATION

CLAUSE No.

SATCRAT~D OR LJXSATUR.~TED VI\I.UE

hYARXS

(1) Pq a) Applied voltage test with

(3) the rotor in dirrct and quadrature-a x i s positions with respect to the armature winding field axis Applied voltage test with the rotor in any arbitrary position 5.13, 5.1-F

(4) Unsaturatrtl

(5) 7 Both these methods are practically equivalent and may be used to determine unsaturated value. These methods are usually not practicable for the determination of the saturated value bethe cause of large current reand quired, overpossible heating of solid parts Preferred

a) Line-to-line short-circuit

sustained test sequence

5.18, 5.19 5.20, 5.2 5.40

Unsaturated Unsaturated

b) Negative-phase test

1

Preferred

c) Calculation from the test values of fld and x"~ a) Line-to-line short-circuit sustained test sequence

Unsaturated Unsaturated

5.18, 5.19 5.20, 5.21

b) Negative-phase test

a) Single-phase voltage application test to the three-phase connected in series (an open delta) or parallel b) Line-to-line and to neutral sustained shortcircuit test

5.22, 5.23

Unsaturated

Preferred

5.24, -5.25.1

Unsaturated

-

(Continued)

8

Is : 7306- 1974
TABLE 1 METHODS OF DETERMINATION MACHINE QUANTITIES OF SYNCHRONOUS Contd

QUANTITY

METHOD 0~ DETERMINATION

CL.4uSE No.

SATURATEDOR UNSATURATED \'ALUE

REMARKS

(1)
RO

(2)
Single-phase voltage application test to the three-phase connected in series (an open delta) or parallel and to Line-to-line neutral sustained shortcircuit test No-load saturation sustained three-phase shortcircuit and over-excitation test at zero powerfactor Calculation from the test value of X, measured Ammeter-voltmeter method and bridge method

(3) 5.22, 5.23

(4) -

(5) Preferred

5.24, 5.25.2

-

-

-u,

5.2.3

-

-

5.2.4

-

-4rmature winding direct current resistance (%) Excitation winding direct current resistance !Rr)

8.2, 8.3 of IS: 71321973*

-

-

.-\mmeter-voltmeter method or bridge method

8.2, 8.3 of IS: 71321973*

-

-

RI

Calculation of positive sequence armature winding resistance *Guide for testing synchronous

5.40.3

-

-

machines. (Continued)

9

IS : 7306-1974
TABLF, 1 METHODS OF DETERMINATION MACHINE QUANTITIES CLAUSE NO. (Sj 5.26, 5.27 .?.ll, 1.12.3 3.40.1 OF SYNCHRONOUS Contd RE~IAKHS

QUANTITY

METHOD OF DETERMINATION

S~TTURATED OR UNSATURATED \WA1.lJE (4;

(2)
Field current decay test with armature winding open circuited b) Voltage recovery test Cl Calculation from the test values of Xd, x'd and T`d

(5) Preferred

4

4
b)

4

Sudden three-phase short-circuit test Field current decay test with armature winding short-circuited Calculation from the test values of.x~~, x',j and 7'dO

3.9 5.29 5.40.1

-

If a sudden shortcircuit test is performed for determining xfd then T'~ shall be determined from the same test. In all other cases prefercncc . given~to the fielll current decav method with thk armature winding shortcircuited

Voltage recover)- Lest Sudden three-phase circuit trst short-

5.11 ) 5.12.3 5.9, 5.10.4

-

-

+a

a) Sudden three-phase short-circuit test : ij By decrease of the periodic (ac) component in the excitation winding current ii) By decrease of the aperiodic (dc) components ofthecurrent in the armature winding phases b) Calculation from the test values of xz and ra

5.9 5.10.5 -

510.6

-

-

5.40.4

-

-

(Continued)

10

IS : 7306 - 1974
TABLE METHODS OF DETERMINATION MACHINE QUANTITIES OF SYNCHBO~NOUS Contd SATUXATEDOR UNSATVRATED VALUE (4) REMARKS

1

QUANTlTY

METHOD 0~ DETERMINATION

CLAUSE No.

(1)
7J

(2)
a) Suspended rotor oscillation test b) Auxiliary pendulum swing test c) No-load retardation test d) On-load retardation test with synchronous machine operating as a motor Acceleration after a load drop test with machine operating as a generator

(3) 5.30, 5.31 5.32, 5.33 5.34, 5.35 5.36, 5.37

1
t J

5.38, 5.39

-

The application of one or another method depends on the design and the apparent power of machine the under test

H

4 b)

dc]
4

Suspended rotor oscillation test Auxiliary pendulum swing test No-load retardation test On-loadretardation test with synchronous machine operating as a motor Acceleration after a load drop test with machine operating as a generator measurement during operation under rated conditions Phasor diagrams : Potier ASA Swedish

5.30, 5.31 5.32, 5.33 5.34, 5.35 5.36, 5.37

-

1
I I J

5.38, 5.39

-

The application of one or another method depends on the design and the apparent power of machine the under test

4 Direct

6.2

-

Preferred

b)

6.3 6.4 6.5

-

-

Direct measurement By diagram from the noload saturation charactcristic and known it,,

77::

-

NOTE The details for calculating per unit values from the physical values of some of the synchronous machine quantities are also given in the relevant clauses of the standard mentioned in this table.

11

IS : 7306 - 1974 5. DESCRIPTION QUANTITIES QF THE TESTS AND DETERMINATION OE

5.1 Determination of Quantities from the No-Load Saturation and Sustained Three-Phase Short-Circuit Characteristics 5.1.1 The no-loadsaturation
circuit charade&tic characteristic and sustained three-phase shortare determined in accordance \\-ith IS : 7 132-1973*.

synchronous. 5.1.2 Direct-Axis Synchronous Reactance (X, j - Direct-axis reactance is determined from the no-load saturation and three-phase sustained short-circuit characteristics as a quotient of the no-load voltage taken from the air-gap line at some excitation and the sustained shortcircuit current value taken from the short-circuit characteristic at the samt excitation current (see Fig. 1) :

x#j

ZzT

FI
1

un Ohms
$ = $3
zcs
per

Xd =

2 =

unit to an unsaturated state

The value of X, determined of the machine.

as above corresponds

5.1.3 Short-Circuit Ratio (K,) - Short-circuit ratio is determined from the no-load saturation and three-phase sustained short-circuit characteristics as quotient of the excitation current correspotiding to the rated voltage on the no-load saturation curve and the excitation current corresponding to the rated current on the short-circuit curve (see Fig. 1) :
f,, = g -_il, ?Cl<

5.2 Deternzination of Potier Reactance (X,)

5.2.1 The Potier reactance is determined graphically from the no-load, and overexcited zero power-factor three-phase sustained short-circuit In case the complete overexcited zero power-factor characcharacteristics. teristic is not available, the excitation current corresponding to the rated at zero power-factor (overexcited; voltage and rated armature current, is sufficient.
5.2.2 Zero power-factor 21 of IS : 7132-1973*. 5.2.3 voltage,
*Guide

characteristic

is determined

in accordance

wit11

The point A of Fig. 2 corresponds to the excitation current rated armature current and zero power-factor overexcited.
for testing synchronous machines.

at rated

12

IS : 7386- 1974
AIR- GAP CHARACTER!STIC NOLOAD SATURATION CHARACTERISTIC

'

CIRCUIT

CHARACTERI-

I

if

FIG. 1

NO-LOAD SATURATIONAND SUSTAINED THREE-PHASESHORTCIRCUIT CHARACTERISTICS
EE-PHASE SHORTCHARACTERISTIC NO -LOAD SATURATION CHARACTERISTIC

if

FIG. 2 DETERMINATION OF POTIER REACTANCE 13

IS : 7306 - 1974
To the left from the point A and parallel to the abscissa, length AF equal to the excitation current (irk) for the rated armature sustained short-circuit current is laid off. The line parallel to the initial lower portion of the noload characteristic is drawn through the point F up to the intersection with The length of perpenupper part of the no-load characteristic (point H). dicular from the point H to point G (intersection with AF line) represents the Potier reactance drop at the rated armature current. In per unit value X, is equal to HG. 5.2.4 Potierreactance given below : where is equal to 0.6 (0.65) for cylindrical rotor machines, and X, = total armature reactance without the rotor. can also be calculated from an empirical formula

Xp=aX, a = a factor which is equal to I ,O for salient pole machines and

NOTE - In case more precise values of factor n are available from previous experience of~machines of similar construction, the same shall be used in the equation of X,.

5.2.4.1 Total armature reactance (X,) is determined by applying three-phase voltage at rated frequency to the terminals of the armature winding without the rotor in position. The applied voltage is so chosen that the armature current is within the rated value. Measurements are made of terminal voltage in volts (U), line current in amperes (I) and supplied active power in watts (P) during the test. X, is calculated from the equations given below : X, = X, = where 5 L = & ohms, 45s .t/r2 Rs ohms r2 per unit

= y per unit,

P R = 312 ohms, and
r

' = P 3 per unit.
can also be determined partly by test and partly where it is not possible to determine experimencurrent corresponding to rated armature current rated voltage. 14

5.2.5 Potier reactance by calculation in cases tally even the excitation at zero power-factor and

IS : 7306- 1974 The excitation current i,, corresponding to rated armature current, is determined according to sustained three-phase short-circuit characteristic. The excitation current component i 8, compensating the armature reaction only at rated current, is calculated from machine parameters. The difference of current (& -&) is plotted on the x-axis as OE (see Fig. 3). From the point E perpendicular is drawn to intersect the no-load characteristic at F. The calculated Potier reactance is given by: X;, =EF
SHORT-CIRCUIT CHARACTERISTIC OPEN-CIRCUIT CHARACTERISTIC

0

E

G

-

if EXCITAT-ION

FIG. 3 ALTERNATIVE METHOD FOR DETERMINATIONOF POTIER -REACTANCE

5.3 Measurement of Armature Without de Rotor in Position

Bore

Leakage

Reactance

(xb)

5.3.1 The armature is supplied with a three-phase voltage at its rated The voltage is so chosen that the armature current is near the frequency. Under these test conditions, the emf (UC) induced in a search rated value. coil placed in the armature bore, as detailed below, is measured. The search coil is placed on the active surface of stator .(in stator bore), length of coil shall be equal to full length of stator core and its width equal Active sides of this coil are fastened above the slot wedges to.pole pitch. and over-hangs are stretched out by braces along the radii towards the machine axis in planes, limiting the stator core packets for protecting them from the influence of leakage fluxes around the over-hang parts of the winding. The current in all the three phases is also measured and a mean value is The armature bore leakage reactance (Xt-,) is then calculated determined. from the following equation : * b_ xa, TPh UC IT C 15

IS : 7306 - 1974
where
xb

= armature bore leakage reactance in ohms, Zi-W = armature winding factor which is a product ofspread factor and pitch factor and is computed in the usual manner, E mean armature phase current in amperes, Z UC = voltage across the terminals of the search coil in volts at the current Z, TP, = number of series turns per phase of the armature winding, TC = number of turns in the search coil, RC = resistance of the search coil in ohms, and R, = resistance in ohms of the voltmeter used.

if the stator (armature) has fractional number of slots per pole per phase, then the width of the search coil ismade equal to largest whole number of slots included in a pole pitch and X,, is calculated as per the formula :
x b

where JV = largest whole number of slots included in a pole pitch, and = fractional number ~ofslots per pole per phase=3.14. 4 5.3.2 Armature leakage reactance (X) is determined from the following equation : x=x,-x, where X8 m= total armature reactance determined according to 5.2.4.1, and Xb = armature bore leakage reactance determined in accordance with 5.3.1. 5.4 Negative Excitation Test - The test is conducted with the machine operating under no-load in parallel with the network. The excitation current is steadily reduced to zero, its polarity reversed, and it is then increased up to the moment when the machine begins to slip. The values of the voltage, armature current and excitation current are measured during the test up to the moment when the machine begins to slip. 5.4.1 Determination of X, from the Neqative Excitation Test - The determination of Xq from the negative excitation test is made using the formula (in per unit or physical values) :

16

IS : 7306-1974
where xd = direct-axis synchronous reactance determined from same straightened no-load saturation characteristic, the

ur = voltage at the moment of slipping, and e = -no-load emf for the excitation current ii, at which the machine slips. It is determined from the straightened no-load saturation characteristic drawn through the point corresponding to the voltage at the moment of slipping (Fig. 4).

FIG. 4

QUADRATURE-AXIS SYNCHRONOUSREACTANCE FROM NEGATIVE EXCITATION TEST the machine slips (II) is

If during the test the armature current at which measured, X, is determined using the __ formulae :

xq =
XU =

s* P

ohms per unit

The value of X4 obtained from-this test may, depending upon the value of Ur, include saturation. If it is possible to reduce the applied voltage to 60 percent of the rated value or lower, then the test may be carried out for obtaining unsaturated value of X,. 17

IS : 7306 - 1974 5.5 Low Slip Test (See Fig. 5) - During the low slip test. subnorma symmetrical three-phase voltage (2 to 15 percent of o;l) is applied to the The voltage shall be such armature terminals of the machine under test. that the machine does not pull in. The excitation winding shall be opencircuited, the rotor shall be driven by a prime mover at a slip less than 0.01 and for solid rotor machines much less than that value so that the currents induced in the damper circuits during asynchronous operation shall have During switching on and off of negligible influence on the measurements. the supply, the excitation winding shall be closed (short-circuited or closed through a discharge resistance) to avoid possible damage. Armature current and voltage and the slipring voltage and slip are measured by indicating If the residual voltage measured instruments or recorded by oscillograph. before the test is larger than 30 percent of the supply test voltage, the rotor shall be demagnetized. Demagnetizing may be done, for example, by connecting the field winding to a low-frequency source with current about 50 percent of the no-load rated voltage excitation current of the tested machine and graduaily decreasing its amplitude and frequency (the latter, if possible). The slip may be determined as the ratio of the frequency of voltage induced in the field to the frequency of the applied voltage.
,-ARMATURE TERMtNAL ACROSS VOLTAGE OPEN FIELD

I

r-VOLTAGE

I

OPEN FIELD

-zizcARMATURE

a
A

V

I MAX

1

-I

1MIN

1

J

MAX 2

L1 MIN

2

FIG. 5 Low

SLIP METHOD or; OBTAINING QUADRAT~JRE-_bxsSYNCHRONOUS REACTANCE 18

IS : 7306 -1974

The slip may ais0 lx determined, by the use of a stroboscope energized from the same frequeney as the applied voltage illuminating equally spaced marks on the rotor, the number of marks being equal to the number of poles. The slip frequency is the apparent rate of progression of the marks in revolutions per second multiplied by the number of pairs of poles, and the slip is the ratio of slip frequency to the frequency of the applied voltage. 5.6 Determination
of X, from the Low Slip Test 5.6.1 To determine X, from the low slip test, armature current and voltage are measured at maximum excitation winding voltage ( UfO), and XQ is calculated using the following formulae :
s, = 2/3 ,yrl = 2 u IlllIl Ohms

per unit

NOTE If Z,,x does not coincide with Urnin, use in calculationsZ,,x as a base and its corresponding voltage. If, during the test, the residual voltage of the machine (VW) is in the limits of 10 to 30 percent of the supply test voltage, the value of the current is determined using the formulae:

amperes

imar = J where Z," =

iz, _

(2)'

per unit

half sum of the two consecutive (see Fig. 5).

maximum of the current

envelope curve

5.6.2 A check of the measured value may be made by calculating X, from the same test, using the results of the voltage and current measurements at the time when the voltage of the open-circuit excitation winding is equal to zero and comparing it with its value determined from no-load saturation and sustained three-phase short-circuit tests. Then, xd =
x"d =

2 $4
E

u Im,n

ohms

per unit Ill With a residual voltage less than 30 percent of the supply test voltage, the half sum of the two consecutive minima of the envelope curve represents Imln (see Fig. 5). 5.6.3 The results of X, measurements from the low slip test may be considered correct only if the value of Xd obtained from this test practically Otherwise, the test agrees with its value obtained in accordance with 5.1. 19

IS : 7306 - 1974 is repeated at several low values of the slip, followed by extrapolation of XQ values to zero slip. The value of quadrature-axis synchronous reactance obtained from this test practically~corresponds to the unsaturated value. 5.7 On-Load
5.7.1 Test and Measurement of the Load Angle (6)

The test is conducted with the machine operating in parallel with the network. The loading of the machine shall not be less than 50 percent of the rated active load at rated power factor. When conducting the test, armature current (;) and voltage (u), angle + between the voltage and the current (using the two-wattmeter method) and load angle 6 (the internal angle between the terminal voltage and emf) are measured. The load angle may be measured by using the stroboscopic method or any other accurate method. 5.7.2 Measurement of Load Angle (S) -by Stroboscofie - This test is made by noting the shift in rotor position (load angle) when the load is changed from a specified power, power factor, and voltage to no-load with the same The shift in rotor specified voltage. The test is made at rated frequency. position is observed using a stroboscope connected to the armature terminals. The change x, in the position of a point on the rotor, between the two load conditions, is measured as an arc length using a scale. The load angle (6) in electrical radians, is calculated as follows: XP 6 = 2R where = change in position of a point on the rotor measured `as arc length, P ' = number -of poles, and R = radius to the point on rotor where x is measured. NOTE -x and R shall be in consistent units. Alternatively, a scale which reads .X electrical radians

directly in electrical radians may be used.

5.8 Determination

of X, from the On-Load Test and Measurement of the Load Angle -- X, is determined by the following formulae :

xq 5.9 Sudden
59.1

=

u tan 6 i (Cos $ - Sin #J tan S) per tutrt Short-Circuit Test

Three-Phase

This test is conducted at rated speed. The test is made by applying a short-circuit to the armature winding when operating at the desired volExcitation of the machine is, as a rule, accomplished from tage on no-load. its own exciter which shall be separately excited. If its own exciter cannot.
20

IS : 7306-1974
be used, then a separate exciter may be used, but its rated current value shall be at least twice the no-load field current of the tested machine and its armature resistance not greater than that of the main machine exciter. This exciter shall be separately excited. 5.9.2 Before making these tests the machine shall be carefully inspected to see that the bracing of the stator coil ends is satisfactory, the foundation is in good condition, and the holding down bolts are tight. The rotor shall be inspected to see that all keys and bolts are in place and properly tightened. Certain precautions are required in preparing the electric connections because of the abnormal conditions which attend a sudden short-circuit test. Very heavy currents flow, particularly in large machines and results in-great forces on the test conductors. To prevent damaging movement, test conductors shall be securely braced. The armature circuit shall be solidly grounded at a single point using a conductor of size comparable to the leads from the machine terminals. There are two choices for the location of this ground connection : the neutral of a Y-connected armature winding or the point common to the three If shunts are used in measuring contacts of the shorting-circuit breaker. the currents, their common point shall be where the ground connection is made, to avoid hazardous voltages at the oscillograph in case of a mishap. If current transformers are used in measuring armature current, the point common to their primaries shall be where the ground connection is made, unless they are insulated to withstand full line-to-line armature voltage. The automatic voltage regulator should be made inoperative. Also all protective relays which may cause the field circuit breaker to trip shall be made inoperative. A discharge resistor of sufficiently low value shall be used so that if the field circuit breaker were to trip, the voltage across the field winding would not be excessively high. 5.9.3 The three phases are to be short-circuited practically simultaneously. The phase contacts shall close within,.15 electrical degrees of each other. This value may be exceeded on test when the armature dc component is not of importance. 5.9.4 To measure short-circuit current, use is made of non-inductive shunts, air-cored transformers or suitable current transformers. The latter shall be used in dealing with ac current components only and shall be chosen so that the initial value of the sub-transient component of the short-circuit current is on the straight line portion of the transformer characteristic. The air-cored transformer is connected to, the oscillograph through an integrating amplifier. When it is necessary to determine the maximum aperiodic and periodic values of short-circuit current components only, an integrating oscillographic galvanometer may be used. 21

IS : 7306- 1974 The total resistance of the measuring instruments and their leads connected into the secondary circuit of current transformers shall not exceed the rated values accepted for the given type of transformers. 5.9.5 The terminal voltage of the machine, the excitation current and the excitation winding temperature are measured immediately before shortcircuiting. 5.9.6 To obtain quantities corresponding to the unsaturated state of the machine, the test is performed at several armature voltage of 10 to 40 percent rated value. The quantities are obtained for each test and plotted against the initial values of ac transient or sub-transient armature currents. From this relationship, the required quantities are obtained at the rated armature current value. 5.9.7 To obtain quantities corresponding to the saturated state of the machine, the test is performed with rated voltage at the terminals of the machine before short-circuiting the armature winding. If the sudden short-circuit test cannot be performed at rated armature voltage, the tests shall be conducted at several armature voltages (for example, 30 percent, 50 percent and 70 percent of rated armature voltage), and the quantities determined for each test. ~They are then plotted against open-circuit voltage before short-circuiting and the approximate rated armature voltage quantity is found by the extrapolation method. In the case of large synchronous machines, it is generally found that the synchronous machine quantities determined from sudden short-circuit tests even at 30 percent of rated armature voltage, correspond very nearly to the saturated state of the machine in all such cases the armature voltage at which the sudden short-circuit is carried out for the purpose of determining synchronous machine quantities corresponding to the saturated state of the. machine shall be a matter of agreement between the manufacturer and the customer. 5.9.8 To determine the machine quantities, oscillograms of the armature current in each phase and of the current in the excitation circuit are taken (see Fig. 6). Oscillograph recording shall continue for a time interval not less than ($d+0.2) seconds after the short-circuit. The steady state values shall also be recorded by restarting the oscillogram following the establishment of steady state conditions. For a check the final values shall be measured by instruments. Shorter oscillographic records may be taken if it is known from tests on similar machines that the current value decays as an exponential. 5.9.9 The change with time of aperiodic and periodic armature current components in each phase is determined from the three-phase short-circuit oscillograms as an algebraic half-sum and algebraic half-difference of the ordinates of the upper and lower envelopes of the short-circuit current in separate phases respectively. 22

IS : 7306 - 1974

if
TIME

\\
I(

FIG. 6 SUDDENSHORT-CIRCUIT CURRENTS OF SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR :

ARMATURE~~URRENTS, i,, i,, i, AND FIELDCURRENT,ii

,

5.9.10 The periodic components of the armature current during sudden short-circuit is determined as a mean arithmetic of the periodic components of the armature current in all the three phases. 5.9.11 To determine the transient ( n?b) and subtransient (Ark) cornponents, the value of the sustained short-circuit current i (cc) is subtracted from the curve of the periodic component of the armature current. The remainder, which is the sum of A;`~ and nink, is plotted on paper with a semilog scale. This plot may be a straight line or a curve. 5.9.11.1 When the latter part of this plot is a straight line (corresponding to an exponential), this line extrapolated to zero time gives the initial value Aik (0) of the transient component of short-circuit current (seeFig. 7). 5.9.11.2 When the latter part of this plot is a curve, the amplitude of the current iA is measured (see Fig. 8) at a time OA', where OA' is taken as 23

IS

: 7306-

1974

0.2 seconds or the time at which subtransient effects become negligible. The time The time OB' is measured at which the current is is = (1 /e) Ai_,. constant ~`6 is taken as (OB' - OA') seconds. The straight line through the values of current iB and iA is assumed to represent the equivalent value of to zero time, it gives the initial vallle A& and, when it is extrapolated A&(O) of the transient component of short-circuit current. The subtransient short-circuit current component is defined as the difference between the Ai',+ ATk curve and the straight line representing The variation of the subtransient current component the value of A&. with time is also plotted on the semilog scale (see Fig. 7).

Fro. 7 REACTANCESAND TIME CONSTANTSFROM SUDDEN SHORT-CIRCUIT TEST 5.9.121The aperiodic current components of all the phases are plotted Extrapolation of these curves to the zero a_gainst time on semilog scale. time gives the initial values of the corresponding current (see Fig. 9). 59.13 To find the greatest possible value of the aperiodic component, the initial values of the aperiodic components of separate phases obtained by extrapolation are laid off as vectors along three radial lines $0" apart, radiating from one origin, the largest of the three vectors bein.g laid off on 24

IS : 7306-1974

FIG. 8 ALTERNATIVE TO FIG. 7 IF TRANSIENT COMPONENT
DECREMENT IS NOTEXPONENTIAL
the middle line. Perpendiculars are The vector drawn from the origin to intersections of these perpendiculars component equal to the initial value ponent (see Fig. 10). drawn through the end of each vector. the centre of the triangle formed by the represents the largest possible aperiodic of the amplitude of the periodic com-

The largest possible value of the aperiodic component of the current may be determined analytically by the formulae (in per unit or physical values) : 2/3 J where i,, is the highest initial absolute value of the aperiodic components of the currents and iaz is the absolute initial value of aperiodic current components in either of the other phases.
hmax = 5

2

i$

+

&

-

ia, i,,

5.9.14 The function of the periodic component of the excitation current against time is determined from the excitation current oscillogram and is Extrapolation of the curve to zero time gives plotted on a semilog scale. the initial value of the periodic current component.
25

IS : 7306- 1974 5000

2000

1000

5oo/ky++4f 0
TIME

10
(CYCLES):

FIG. 9 SEMILOGPLOT OF APERIODIC COMPONENTSOF ARMATURE CURRENTS,i,,, ia2, i, /- ia MAX

IOA

FIG. 10 MAXIWM

APERIODICCOMPONENT OF THREE-PHASE SHORT-CIRCUIT CURRENT 26

IS : 7306 - 1974 5.10 Determination Short-Circuit Test of Quantities from the Sudden Three-Phase

5.10.1 The direct-axis transient reactance is determined as the ratio of the no-load voltage, measured immediately before the short-circuit [u(O)] to the initial value of the periodic component of the short-circuit current neglecting the subtransient component (see Fig. 7).

x'd

=

[; (cc)

u(0) + Ai'k(O)]

per unit

5.10.2 The direct-axis subtransient reactance is determined as the ratio of the no-load voltage, measured immediately before the short-circuit U(0) to the initial value of the periodic component of the short-circuit current, obtained from the analysis of the oscillogram (see Fig. 7).

xl; =
"

U(O)

`d
[i(K)

[I(w)
+

;i;os`": (0) +
& (0) +

nruk

(@I

Ohms

x,

=

ni; (O)] per

unit

5.10.3 The direct-axis transient short-circuit time constant T'd is determined as the time required for the transient armature current component to decrease to 1 /C M 0.368 of its initial value (see Fig. 7 and 8) (see also 5.9.1-l .2). 5.10.4 The direct-axis subtransient short-circuit time constant ( T"* ) is determined as the time required for the subtransient armature current component to decrease to 1/~=0.368 of its initial value (see Fig. 7).

5.10.5 The

armature

short-circuit

time

constant

(TV) is determined

as

the time required for the periodic component of the excitation (field) current (it) to decrease to 1/~=0.368 of its initial current (see Fig. 11). 5.10.6 The armature short-circuit time constant (c,) from the decrease of the aperiodic armature current components in each phase is determined as the average time required for these components to decrease to 1 /C M 0.368 of their initial value. Any phase whose initial aperiodic component is less than 40 percent of the initial resolved value shall be disregarded in determining the armature short-circuit time constant (see Fig. 9). Determination of the armature decrease of the aperiodic armature vided the armature current during The initial non-inductive shunts. components is determined from the short-circuit time constant from the current component is permissible, prosudden short-circuit test is measured by resolved value of the aperiodic current equation given below :

I,,

=

&

(a2+b"--ab)

+

fig
27

(aa+c2-uC)

+

&

(b2+8+bC)

IS

: 7306 where

- 1974

a =

largest value of direct-current currents at the selected time,

component per unit;

in the three-phase

b = second largest value of direct-current component per unit; and c ZIz smallest value of direct-current component per unit.

0

5 TIME

10
(CYCLES)

15

20

5

FIG. 11

SEMILOGPLOT OF ac COMPONENTS(CRESTVALUE) OFFIELD CURRENTS! FORDETERMINATIONOFARMATURETIME CONSTANT -r8
is at

5.10.7 The largest possible instantaneous initial short-circuit current determined as the sum of the values of periodic and aperiodic components a half-cycle after the instant of the short-circuit. The value of the periodic component at this instant the sustained, transient and subtransient components circuit current. The two latter components are taken directly for the corresponding instant.

is equal to the sum of of the sudden short(see Fig. 7) (in

from the diagram

The value of the aperiodic components is determined per unit or physical values) given below : ?a = -0.5 2%rnax E 28

by the formula

f 711

IS

:I 7306 - 1974

where
28, mitx
=

the largest possible value of the aperiodic current component of the sudden short-circuit determined in ~accordance with 5.9.13, base of natural logarithm, constant determined in the armature short-circuit time accordance with 5.1d6, and frequency in hertz 0.5 f

E=

5-8

=

f=
5.11 Voltage

corresponds

to a half-period

>

Recovery

Test

5.11.1 The voltage recovery test after disconnection of a sustained threephase short-circuit is conducted on a machine running at rated speed with the armature winding short-circuited by a circuit-breaker at the beginning of the test. The machine is operated with the armature winding short-circuited and with excitation current set at a value corresponding to the linear portion of the no-load saturation curve, which as a rule is not higher than 70 percent of rated open-circuit armature voltage, conditions being steady at the instant of operation of the circuit-breaker. 5.11.2 Quantities obtained from this test correspond to the unsaturated state of the machine. The requirements for the excitation system are the same as those given in 5.9.1. 5.11.3 The sustained short-circuit shall be switched off practically simultaneously in all three phases with the currents being interrupted within 180 Oscillographic records (initial part at electrical degrees, or half a cycle. high speed) of one line voltage recovery and one armature current are required (see Fig. 12).

FIG. 12 OSCILLOGRAMSOF THREE-PHASE SHORT-CIRCUIT CURRENT BEFORE SWITCHING OFF AND RECOVERY VOLTAGE AFTER S~IT'CHING OFF

5.11.4 The
determined

difference between the by the envelope of recovery 29

sustained voltage and the voltage voltage is plotted on a semilog scale

IS : 7306 - 1974 against time, and extrapolated to the instant of the switching off circuit (see curve Au', Fig. 13).

ofthe

short-

l---t-

t't---I--k---H

Tdo-H \:I
t=o

I

I

I

I -% I
IIS)

FIG. 13 REACTANCES ANDTIME CONSTANTS FROMVOLTAGE RECOVERY TEST The extrapolation of the straight portion of curve AU' to the ordinate gives the initial value of the transient voltage component n u'(0). The difference between the voltage determined by curve AU' and the transient voltage component (Au') gives the subtransient voltage (AU") for the corresponding instants. 5.12 Determination of Quantities from the Voltage Recovery Test 5.12.1 Direct-axis transient reactance is determined from the voltage recovery test as the ratio of the difference between the sustained voltage U(N) and the initial value of the transient voltage component Au'(O) to the armature current (&) measured immediately before the disconnection of the short-circuit (see Fig. 13).

x'(j

=

u (=)

7 A "(O) per unit Zk 30

IS : 7306- 1974

5.12.2 The direct-axis subtransient reactance is determined as the ratio of the difference between the sustained voltage U(X) and the sum of the initial values of transient AU'(O) and subtransient nu"(0) voltage components of the armature current (ik) measured immediately before the disconnection of the short-circuit (see Fig. 13).
XUd =

u (=I

- [(AU (0) + AU" (O)]

ohms

d3
ik

Ill
unit

x*(f

zzz

u (=I - [Au'(O) + AU" (O)l per

5.12.3 The direct-axis transient open-circuit time constant (T'dO) is determined as the time required for the transient voltage component Au' to decrease to l/~mO.368 of its initial value (see Fig. 13).
The direct axis subtransient open-circuit time constant ( 7'do ) is determined as the time required for the subtransient voltage component Au" to decrease to l/~wO.368 of its initial value (see Fig. 13). 5.13 Applied Voltage Test with the Rotor in Direct and QuadratureAxis Positions with Respect to the Armature Winding Field Axis (see Fig. 14) 5.13.1 To conduct the test, ac voltage at rated frequency is applied to any two-line terminals of the armature winding. The excitation winding shall be short-circuited. The duration of the voltage application shall be limited to avoid serious overheating of solid parts. The rotor is slowly rotated to find the angular positions corresponding to the maximum and practically zero values of the excitation winding current. The first position corresponds to the direct-axis, the second to the quadrature-axis. Supply voltage, armature winding current and the power input are measured with the rotor stationary in these positions. Excitation winding current is determined for the purposes of evaluation of the rotor position (direct-axis or quadrature-axis), therefore, to measure it, the instrument need not necessarily be of high precision. 5.13.2 If it is not possible to perform the tests at the rated armature current or voltage, the determination of quantities referred to the unsaturated or saturated state ~of the machine shall be done from several tests with different supply voltages (20 to 70 percent Un), 5.13.3 The quantities are plotted against applied voltage or armature current and the required values are found by extrapolation. 5.13.4 For machines with closed or semiclosed armature slots and closed damper winding slots, the supply voltage shall not be lower than 20 percent of the rated value. 31

IS : 7306- 1974

I PHASE 3

0

FIG. 14 DIAGRAMFOR DETERMINATION OF SUBTRANSIENT REACTANCES (BY APPLIEDVOLTAGETEST) 5.14 Determination of Quantities from the Test Described in 5.13

5.14.1 Direct-axis subtransient reactance from the applied voltage tests is determined using the formulae given below : , .yd = z,_Rr ohms

J

where

5"a =

u
21

ohms

u ,eWd =- 1/3 2 ;c per unit

P Rid = 212 ohms
y"e = 3k 2@ er unit

The values of the voltage ( U), current (I) and power input (P) are measured for the rotor position which gives the maximum excitation winding current. 5.14.2 -Quadrature-axis subtransient reactance from the applied voltage test is determined using the formulae given in 5.14.1 where subscript d is replaced by subscript q. The voltage, current and power input are measured for the rotor position which gives practically zero excitation winding c trrent. 32

l[S : 7306 - 1974 5.15 Applied Voltage Test with the Rotor in Any Arbitrary Position - To conduct the test, ac voltage is applied in turn to each pair of the armature winding line terminals of the stationary machine under test. The excitation the rotor position windirig shall be short-circuited. It is necessary that remains the same for all three applications of test voltage.

If necessary the rotor shall 1~ braked. The duration of the voltage application shall be limited so as 10 avoid serious overheating of solid parts. The applied voltage, current and power input to the armature, and the excitation winding current are measured ~by applying ac supply voltage to each pair of the terminals. Requirements for obtaining saturated state of the machine quantities are similar referred to 5.13. the to the Applied unsaturated Voltage or Test

5.16, Determination of Quantities with the Rotor in Any Arbitrary

from Position

5.16.1 Direct-axis subtransient reactance from the applied voltage test with the rotor in any arbitrary position is determined as given in 5.16.1.1 to 5.16.1.3. 5.16.1.1 The reactances between each pair of the line terminals of the armature winding x,?, xS3 and xX1 are calculated from the formulae given in 5.14.1 (replacing subscript d by subscripts 12, 23 and 31, according to the terminals between which voltage is applied). 5.16.1.2 The direct-axis subtransient reactance from the formula (in per unit or physical valuti) : is then calculated

i'd
where
q2 Xmed = + x23 +

= $&a h &

x31

3 2 3
x12(%2 x23) + x23(x23 x3l) + x3l(x31 %2)

@,.-C =
5.16.1.3

J before &c is determined from the following

The

sign

relations

:
Plus (+), if the maximum of the three measured values of the excitation circuit current corresponds to the largest measured armature reactance between a pair of the armature winding line terminals. Minus (-), if the maximum of the three measured current values of the excitation circuit corresponds to the smallest measured reactance between a pair of the armature winding line terminals. 33

IS : 7306 - 1974 5.16.2 Quadrature-axis subtransient reactance from the stationary impedance test with the, rotor in any arbitrary position is determined similarly to the method described in 5.16.1. The sign before Ax is determined from the following relations :

a) b)

Plus (+), if the minimum of the three measured current the excitation circuit corresponds to the largest measured between a pair of armature winding line terminals. Minus (-), if the minimum of the three measured current the excitation circuit corresponds to the smallest measured reactance.

values of reactance values of armature

5.17 Test Conducted by Disconnecting the Machine Running Close to synchronous Speed from a Three-Phase Reduced Voltage Supply

The D and &axes subtransient reactances are determined by disconnecting the machine, connected to the source of three-phase reduced (the rated voltage is also allowed) voltage rotating with a speed close to synchronous. The excitation winding should be short-circuited. The voltage U,, the armature current L, and the current in the excitation winding'!s oscillographed during test. The machine is disconnected from the source at the moment of maximum deviation of the ammeter connected In this case the voltage instantly changes by to thetexcitation circuit. value `A U,' (see Fig. 15) and thereafter uniformly alternates.

FIG. 15 OSCILLOGRAPH

OF U,

Subtransient reactance lated by formula :

along the direct asis (Xnd) in per unit is calcu-

where AV',

= instant change in U, in per unit, and IO = armature current at the moment of of the machine in per unit.
34

disconnection

IS :*7306 - 1974 If the machine is disconnected at a moment when the current in excitation winding is equal to zero, then the q axis subtransient reactance will be obtained similarly. 5.18 Line-to-Line Sustained Short-Circuit Test

5.18.1 To conduct the line-to-line sustained short-circuit test, any two line terminals are short-circuited (see Fig. 16) and the machine is driven at rated speed by some prime mover. 5.18.2 The short-circuit current (I&, excitation current and the voltage between the open line terminal and one of the short-circuited terminals are measured ( U,,) . To increase the accuracy or current harmonics, the measured. The measurements of the measurements in the presence active (P) and reactive (Q) power of voltage should be current.

are taken at several values of the short-circuit

5.18.3 To avoid serious overheating of solid parts, the duration of the line-to-line sustained short-circuit test at currents above 30 percent In should be limited to the time required for taking the readings of the instruments. For salient pole machines the current may be increased up to the rated value, if the vibration of the machine does not exceed permissible values. For non-salient pole machines the armature current is usually limited to 50 percent of the rated value.

FIG. 16 CIRCUIT FOR LINE-TO-LINE SUSTAINED SHORT-CIRCUIT TEST 5.19 Determination Short-Circuit Test of Quantities from the Line-to-Line Sustained

5.19.1 Negative sequence reactance from the line-to-line sustained shortcircuit test is determined using the formulae given below :

These formulae

apply when voltage

or current ohms

harmonics

may be ignored.

u2
x2 = -

P These formulae considered.

L 1
-L "-t$ apply

--L d3

per unit the voltage or current harmonics shall be

when

Negative sequence circuit current valve. current.

reactance is determined for each measured shortOn the basis of the test data X;, is plotted against
equals 113 tinlrs the rated phase current

NOTE The value of X2 when the current ~vill be taken as the rated current value.

5.19.2 Negative sequence resistance from the line-to-line 1 circuit test is determined using the formulae:

sustained

short-

R, =
12 =

F[p2 :,3-$
f [-$$---I -&

ohms per unit

Ncgativc sequence resistance is determined for each measured shortcircuit armature current. On the basis of the test data R, is plotted against armature current.
XOTE - The value of R, when the current quals will be taken as the rated current value.

1'3 times the rated phase current

c

5.20 Negative-Phase Sequence Test - The test is conducted when the reduced symmetrical voltage (2 to 20 percent l n) is applied to a machine driven at rated speed comlected to an external source of supply with negative-phase sequence, that is operating as an clectro-magnetic brake with the slip equal to 2. The excitation winding shall be short-circuited. If the residual voltage of the machine under test exceeds 30 percent of the supply voltage, the rotor shall be demagnetized before testing the machine (see 5.5). The voltage and current in all three phases and. the supply power are measured during the test. 36

IS : 7306- 1974

5.21 Determination
Test - Negative the negative-phase

of Quantities frpm the Negative-Phase Sequence sequence reactance and resista.nce are determined from sequence test by the formulae :

X2 :=.z v"z;

-

R; ohms

x.2
t`j

7

u
ET

43
=

I

ohms

F per unit

R,
r-, where U = average

=

37-A

'

OhIllS

= P `;i per unit ?.voltage current, applied, and

measured

I = average measured P = input power.

Negative sequence reactance and resistance are determined for each On the basis of the test data X, and R, are plotted measured supply voltage. against current. 5.22 Single-Phase voltage application series or in parallel (see Fig. 17). Voltage Application Test - The test of single-phase across the terminals of the three-phase connected in is conducted with the machine driven at rated speed

The connections should be arranged so that the current in the three phases at any instant should flow in the same sense, that is from neutral The excitation to line terminal or vice versa as defined by zero-sequence. winding is short-circuited. Measurements are taken of the applied voltage, current and power input The values of the supplied voltage at several values of supply voltage. are chosen so that the armature winding current is of the order of the rated value. 5.23 Determination of Quantities from the Single-Phase Voltage Application Test-The zero sequence reactance and resistance are determined from the test of single-phase voltage application across the terminals using the formula given below : X,,
x0

= =

4x2 &`,

-

I?: ohms per unit

37

I7A

Series

Connection

W 0

19 ac SUPPLY

I

FIELD

ARMATURE 176 Parallel Connection

FIG. 17 SINGLE-PHASE VOLTAGEAPPLICATION TEST When the three phases of the winding are connected in series : & = u Fl ohms

P R. = 312 ohms
per unit 38

IS : 7306-1974

When the three phases of the winding are connected in parallel :

R, = 7
20

ohms per unit
Short-Circuit Test

=

3$;

lo = T

5.24 Line-to-Line

and to Neutral Smmined

5.24.1)Tdconduct the line-to-line and to neutral sustained short-circuit test the armature winding is star-connected, two line terminals are shortcircuited to neutral, the machine is driven at rated speed and is excited (se& Fig. 18).

FIG. 18 CIRCUIT FOR LINE-TO-LINEAND TO NEUTRAL SUSTAINED SHORT-CIRCUIT TEST 5.24.2)Measurements are taken of the voltage from the open terminal to neutral (U,) and the current in the connection from the short-circuited terminals to neutral (lo). 5.24.3 To take into account the influence of harmonics, measurements are taken of active and reactive power. 5.24.4 The measurements are taken at several values of the neutral current. The current values and the duration of the test are limited by rotor over heating or vibration. 5.25 Determina tion of Qwtities from Neutral Sustained Short-Circuit Test
the Line-to-Line and to

5.25.1 The zero sequence reactance from the line-to-line and to neutral short-circuit test is determined by the formulae $vn below :
39

X0

=

13 l&J
z

per unit

These formulae apply when voltage or current harmonics may~be ignored. b) X0 = g[PZ uz y q2 QZ] ohms

x,=2

9 [ P2 + q2

-

Where U, P and Qare measured values of the voltage, active and reactive power respectively. These formulae considered. apply when the voltage or current harmonics shall be

1

per unit

The zero-sequence reactance is calculated for several neutral current values. On the basis of the test data, X0 is plotted against neutral current.
NOTE - The value of X0, when the neutral current equals three times the rated phase current, will be taken as the rated current value.

5.25.2 The zero-sequence resistance from the line-to-line and to neutral short-circuit test is determined by the following formulae for several neutral current values : R, = $rp2 y e2] ohms

5,

=

P
On the basis of the test data,

u2 _a

R. is plotted against neutral current.

L 1
p2
2

per unit

NOTE- The value of R,, when the neutral current equals three times the rated phase current, will be taken as the rated current value.

5.26 Field Current
Circuited

Decay

Test with the Armature

Winding

Open-

5.26.1 The field current decay test with the armature winding open is conducted with the machine driven by some prime mover at rated speed, excited to rated voltage, and suddenly short-circuiting the excitation winding. When necessary, the excitation winding supply source should be disconnected within O-02 second. 40

IS : 7306 - 1974 5.26.1.1 When testing machines, a current limiting resistor may be connected in series with its excitation winding to limit the dc supply shortcircuit current. 5.26.2 An oscillogram is taken of the armature winding voltage, the current in the excitation winding and the slip-ring voltage. The latter serves for precise determination of the instant of the starting of field current decay (zero time) and the determination of the initial voltage value at this moment. The residual voltage is determined with the field winding open and with the machine operated at rated speed. 526.3 The difF'ence between the transient voltage obtained from the oscillogram and the residual voltage of the machine is plotted against time on a semilog scale (see Fig. 19).

o-251 ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' '
D 1-O 2.0 30 1.0 5-O 6-O

7-O

6-o

TIME FIG. 19 DETERMINATION OFDIRECT-AXIS OPEN-CIRCUIT TIME CONSTANT 5.27 Detcrmina tion of 7'dg from the Field Current Decay Test with the Armatnre Winding Open-Circuited - Direct-axis transient open-circuit time constant (T'do) is determined from the field current decay test as the time required for the voltage difference mentioned in 5.26.3 to decrease to I/EM 0.368 of its initial value (see Fig. 19). 5.28 Field Current Decay Test with the Armature Winding ShortCircuited 5.28.1 The field current decay test with the armature winding shortcircuited is conducted with the machine driven by a prime mover at rated speed and with rated armature current flowing, and suddenly 41

short-circuiting the excitation winding. The limitation of the duration and the value of the supply source short-circuit current is made in accordance with 5.26. 5.28.2 As oscillogram is taken of any line current and of the excitation current or slip-ring voltage. 5.28.3 The difference between the transient current obtained from the oscillogram and' the sustained short-circuit armature current' due to the residual voltage is plotted against time on a semilog scale. 5.23
Determin ation of 7'd from the Field Current Decay Test with the Armature Winding Short-Circuited - Direct-axis transient short-

circuit time constant (T'd) from the field decay test is determined as the time required for the current difference mentioned in 5.28.3 to decrease to I/E% 0.368 of its initial value. 5.30 Suspended
Rotor Oscillation Test 5.30.1 To perform this test, the rotor is suspended on one filament or two parallel filaments in such a way as to have its shaft in a vertical position. Turning the rotor produces oscillations about the shaft axis. The time required to make several oscillations is recorded and an average time of one cycle of oscillation is calculated.

5.36.2 With one filament suspension, the test is performed twice with the rotor itself and the rotor together with a flywheel or a pulley acting as a known flywheel. 5.36.3 The unidirectional displacement angle for one filament suspension should be not more than 45" and for two filament suspension not more than 10". 5.31 Determina tion of 7~ and H from Suspended Rotor Oscillation Test - The acceleration time and stored energy constant from the string test are calculated using the formulae :

suspended rotor oscillation
7,

Pll Jw" *IO-' kWs/kVA H = 2s,
where

=

.PJa.l O-"
-

seconds

3 = moment of inertia in kgms,
a=$ angular speed in radjsec, n = rated speed of rotation in revlmin, PlI = rated active power in kW, and sll = rated apparent power in kVA. 42

IS : 7306-1974
The moment of inertia, when the rotor is suspended by one filament, is cakxlated using the formula :

and when it is suspended by two filaments, it is calculated using the formula :

where JP = known moment of inertia of pulley in kgm2, T= time of one cycle of rotor swing in seconds, Tp = time of one cycle of rotor swing together with pulley of flywheel in seconds, a= distance between the points of suspension in metres, L = length of suspension in metres, m= rotor mass in kilograms, and g= acceleration of free fall in m/s2. 5.32 AuxiEary Pendulum Swing Test 5.32.1 This test is recommended roller bearings. for machines provided with ball or

5.32.2 To perform this test, an auxiliary pendulum (a lever and a mass at the end) is attached in a plane at right angles to the shaft of machine, placed horizontally. The'mass of the pendulum, which is known, shall be as small as possible. Instead of an auxiliary pendulum a known mass may be <attached at the circumference of the rotor or pulley. The auxiliary pendulum is displaced at an angle about 5" from its steady position. The time of one swing is measured. 5.33 Determina tin of q and H from the Auxiliary Pendulum Swing Test - The acceleration time and stored energy constant from the auxiliary pendulum swing test are calculated by the formula as shown in 5.31. The moment of inertia is calculated using the formula:

J
where mp =

=mpL

[%$! - L]kgm2

mass of the auxiliary pendulum in kilograms, distance from the centre of the shaft to the centre of gravity of the pendulum or to the centre of gravity of the mass attached at circumference of rotor or pulley in metres, z-p = time of one cycle of swing in seconds, and acceleration of free fall in m/s2. s=

L=

43

I!3 : 7306-1974
5.34 Ne-Load Retardation Test

5.34.1 The no-load retardation test is conducted when there is no additional flywheel mass on the shaft of the machine under test. The machine is excited from -a separate source and the excitation is unchanged during the test.

5.34.2 The machine under test is brought up to overspeed by increasing the supply frequency or by means of a prime mover provided with a clutch; then the supply is disconnected. 5.34.3 This test consists of measuring the retardation time At when the machine is slowing down between two predetermined speeds with difference n w, say, from 110 to 90 percent of rated speed or from 105 to 95 percent of rated speed. In cases where overspeed is not permissible the retardation test is carried out at a speed close to the synchronous speed but below it. 5.35 Determination
of 71 and H from the No-Load Retardation Test 5.35.1 Acceleration time of the machine and stored energy constant from the no-load retardation test are determined using the formulae given below :

where P mech = PI;e = P, = 11 = S, = 5.36 On-Load mechanical losses at rated speed in kW determined according to IS : 4889-1968*, core losses at rated speed and corresponding value of test voltage in kW determined according to IS : 4889-1968*, rated active power in kW, rated angular speed in rad/s, rated apparent power in kVA, and At and A w are as defined in 5.34.3.
Machines

Retardation Test of Mechanically Coupled with the Synchronous Machine Operating as a Motor

5.36.1 The test is conducted with the machine operating as a motor and supplying a load. The speed of rotation of the unit before disconnecting from the network shall be equal to the rated speed. The power input before disconnecting shall be not less than 60 percent of the rated power; the power factor shall be close to unity. The excit&on of the machine during the test is unchanged.
*Methods of determination of efficiency of rotating electrical machines.

44

IS : 7306 - 1974 After disconnecting the supply source, the change of speed of the unit during the first few seconds is determined. ,. ~5.36.2 The speed-time curve is plotted and a tangent to the initial point of curve is drawn. This tangent is used to determine the change in speed n w for the time interval n t. 5.39 Deiermina tion of Tj and H of Mechanically Coupled Machines from the On-Load Retardation Test with Synchronous Machine Operating as a Motor - The acceleration time and stored energy constant of the machine together with the load from the on-load retardation test with the machine operating as a motor are determined by the formulae given below :
71 =

"*

g Dw

PI `1 -

(Par +

pll

Pea) seconds

H _ where

"," & L ow

(`8t* + `0U) kws,kVA Sll

P, = power supplied to the motor immediately before disconnection from the network in kW, Pstr-l-Pcu = stray load losses+ohmic losses in armature winding immediately before disconnection in kW, P, = rated active power in kW, s, = rated apparent power in kVA, and wn = rated angular speed in rad/s.
NOTE-This method of determination is not very precise.

5.38 Acceleration After a Load Operating as a Generator

Drop

Test

with

the

Machine

5.38.1 The test is conducted with the machine operating as a generator driven by a prime mover. 5.38.2 Before the test, the generator load is fixed at 10 to 20 percent of the rated Joad (the power-factor is fixed close to unity), the speed regulator of the prime mover is taken out of service. 5.38.3 The excitation of the generator during the test shall be unchanged. After a sudden `disconnection of the generator from the network the change of speed with time curve is determined. At a speed of about 107 to 110 percent of rated value, the regulation of prime mover is put in service or steam is cut off. The acceleration curve is plotted. 5.38.4 A tangent is drawn to the acceleration curve at the point corresponding to the rated speed of the machine, and the speed change for the time interval is determined. 45

IS : 7306 - 1974 5.39 -tietermination of Tj and H of Mechanically Coupled Machines from tbe Acceleration After a Load Drop Test with the Ma&ine Operating as a Generator - The acceleration time of the machine and its prime mover and stored energy constant from the acceleration after the load drop test with the machine operating as a generator are determined using the formulae given below : 75 = FI = where w,, y

nt PI `; w ; n

seconds kWs/kVA

P, = power supplied by the generator

immediately before disconnection from the network in kW and other symbols denote the same as defined before,

Pn = rated active power in kW, and s, = rated apparent power in kVA.
NOTE This method of determination is not very precise.

5.40 Determination Test Quantities

of

Quantities

by

Calculations

Using

Known

5.40.1 The quantities x'd, xd, r'aO and 7'd are connected by the following relations :

with each other

%,j 7'd = x'd T'&-,
This relation is used for the determination the known values of xd and two -other quantities. of %`,j or T'~ or T'& from

5.40.2 The negative sequence reactance from the known values of x'd and x"~ is calculated by the formulae given below :

5.40.3 The positive sequence resistance of the armature winding is determined from the known 312n Ra losses (PC") and stray losses in the armature winding (P,t,) measured on three-phase steady short-circuit, at rated current in accordance with IS : 4889-1968" using the formulae given below :
RI =

Pen+
3 I,'

Pstr

ohms

r1 = (Pcu + Pstr) per unit This value of R, corresponds to the winding temperature measurements were conducted.
*Methods of determination of efficiency of rotating electrical

at which the loss

machines.

46

IS : 7306 - 1974 5.40.4 Armature short-circuit time constant at rated frequency fn from the known test values of saturated negative sequence reactance (xs) and armature resistance per phase at 75�C (T*) is calculated using the formula given below :
7a = -

2

nfn rl&

X.2

seconds
CURRENT

6. DETERMINATION

OF RATED

EXCITATION

6.1 The rated excitation current of synchronous machine may be determined

by any of the methods described in 6.2 to 6.5.

6.2 Determination of Rated Excitation Current by Loading at Rated Conditions -The rated excitation current for rated armature current, power-factor and voltage may be obtained directly by loading the machine at the rated conditions and measuring the excitation current. This method is not generally~applicable to the factory test, particularly in the case of large machines., 6.3 Determination
Diagram of the Rated Excitation Current by Potier

6.3.1 To determine the rated excitation current by Potier diagram, use is made of the no-load saturation characteristic (see 5.1), sustained shortcircuit characteristic (see 5.1) and Potier reactance X, (see 5.2).

6.3.2 The vector of the rated armature current (in) of the tested machine is laid off along the abscissa (see Fig. 20). The rated voltage vector ( Un) is drawn at the power-factor angle & (which is considered to be positive for an overexcited generator) to it. 6.3.3 The vector of the voltage drop (i, xp) in the Potier reactance at the rated current is drawn from the end of the voltage vector as a perpendicular to the armature current vector. The voltage drop in the armature winding resistance is usually neglected. If necessary, it ma'y be taken into account by drawing the vector of positive phase sequence voltage drop in the positive phase sequence armature winding resistance from the end of the voltage vector parallel to the current vector. The vector should be laid off on the diagram (Fig. 20) in the direction of the armature current vector for generators and in the opposite direction for motors. 6.3.4 The vector sum of the rated voltage and the voltage drop in the reactance x, gives emf vector e,; the excitation current if, corresponding to this emf is determined from the no-load saturation curve and is laid off from the origin at 90" to the emf vector. 6.3.5 The excitation current component compensating armature reaction at rated armature current (ira) is determined as the difference between the 47

&R-GAP

CHARACTERISTIC

USTAINED THREE-PHASE HORT-CIRCUIT CHARACTERISTIC NO- LOAD SATURATION CHARACTERISTIC

FIG. 20 RATED LOAD EXCITATION FROM POTIERDIAGRAM excitation current corresponding to the rated armature current on the sustained short-circuit characteristic, and the excitation current corresponding to the voltage drop in X, due to armature rated current on the no-load saturation characteristic. Vector i ia is laid off from the end of the vector i,, parallel to the armature current vector. The rated excitation current if, is the vector sum ofin, and ii,. 6.4 Determination Diagram of the Rated Excitation Current by the ASA the rated excitation current of the machine by the (see Fig. 21), use is made of the no-load saturation the sustained three-phase short-circuit characteristic reactance (see 5.2).

6.4.1 To determine ASA vector diagram characteristic (see 5.1)) (see 5.1) and the Potier

6.4.2 The determination of emf ep is made in accordance with 6.3. The excitation current for the air-gap line at the rated armature voltage (ifs) The vector curis determined from the no-load saturation characteristic. rent iis is laid off from the origin along the abscissa axis. From its end, at the rated power-factor angle 4, (which is considered to be positive for an overexcited generator) to the right of the vertical, ths vector of excitation current ifk corresponding to rated armature current on the sustained threephase short-circuit characteristic (see 5.2) is laid off. 6.4.3 The vector current. corresponding to the difference (nil) between the excitation currents of the no-load saturation characteristic (in,) and 48

IS : 7306- 1974 on the air-gap line (Z,,,), both for the voltage eB (see Fig. 21) is laid off along The sum of the three the geometrical vector sum of the excitation currents. vectors corresponds to the rated excitation current.
r-SUSTAINED THREE-PHASE SHORT-CIRCUIT CHARACTERIAIR- ,GAP CHARACTERISTIC NO-LOAD SATURATION

"1

ifky

ifP

ifn

if

FIG. 21 RATED LOAD EXCITATION FROM ASA DIAGIZAM 6.4.4 The rated excitation current. by ASA method may also be determined using the following equation (in per unit or physical values) : if, = A4 + Z/h + ilk Sin +n>2 + (4k COS+IP

6.5 Determina tion of the Rated Excitation Current by the Swedish Diagram 6.5.1 To determine rated excitation current of the Swedish diagram, use is made of the no-load saturation 5.1), the sustained three-phase short-circuit characteristic excitation current corresponding to the rated voltage and at zero power-factor (overexcited) (see 5.2.2). machine by the characteristic (see (see 5.1) and the armature current

6.5.2 Three values of the excitation current are laid off on the abscissa axis (see Fig. 22A) : a) OD corresponding to the rated voltage on the no-load saturation curve, 49

IS : 7306 - 1974 b) c) OB corresponding to the rated voltage and armature zero power-factor, and OC corresponding to the rated armature short-circuit characteristic. current at

current on the sustained

6.5.3 If the excitation current at rated voltage, rated current and at zero power-factor overexcited is not available from the test, the sjme may be determined as given below while using the Swedish diagram. Potier reactance X, is computed according to 5.2.4 and thePotier reactance drop in X, at rated armature current is added to the rated armature voltage (see point H' of Fig. 22B). A line parallel to the abscissa axis is drawn from point H' to intersect with the open circuit characteristic in point H. From that point a perpendicular is drawn to intersect the abscissa axis at point J (see Fig. 22). OC corresponds to the excitation current at rated armature current on the sustained short-circuit characteristic. PC (ifa) corresponds to armature reaction effect, at rated current. Now to the right of the point J, the length PC is added along the axis to get the point B. The excitation current equal to the length of DB is the required current to be used in the Swedish diagram (see Fig. 22). 7. DETERMINATION OF THE VOLTAGE REGULATION PERCENTAGE INHERENT

7.1 Direct Method - The synchronous generator under test is loaded to its rated values of voltage, current, speed and power-factor. The excitation current under these conditions and the speed are kept constant and the load is gradually reduced to no-load condition. The terminal voltage E,, -of the armature is noted. The percentage inherent voltage regulation is calculated according to 7.3. 7.2 Indirect Method -The rated excitation current is first determined according to 6.3, 6.4 or 6.5 and the respective terminal voltage of the armature on open-circuit (E,) is read from no-load saturation characteristic (Jee 5.1). The percentage inherent voltage regulation is then calculated according to 7.3. 7.3 The below : percentage Pvcentage where inherent voltage regulation is determined = Eo - G Gl as given

inherent voltage regulation

Eo = armature terminal voltage on open-circuit corresponding to the rated excitation current, and i_T, = rated armature terminal voltage of the machine. 50

IS : 7306 - I974
AIR-GAP CHARACTERISTIC SHORTCIRCUIT CHARACTERlSTlC

CHARACTERISTIC

22A

FIG.

22 RATED EXCITATION CURRENT FROM SWEDISH DIAGRAM
51

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 Fax : 91 113234062, 91 11 3239399,91 11 3239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 8-77 00 32

Central Laboratory:

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 Regional Central Offices:

: Manak Bhavan, 9 BahadurShah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : l/l4 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054
Northern : SC0 335336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern

323 76 17 337 86 62 60 38 43 23523 15 832 92 95

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 TWestern : Manakalaya, E9, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East),
MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 38OOOl $Peenya Industrial Area, ist Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 56OC58 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD t21001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003

550 13 48 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 0-28 08 01 8-71 19 96 54 11 37 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 68 76 23 89 23 52 51 71 26 23 05 32 36 35 621 17 271085 309 65 28 222 39 71

5-8-56C, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 5OOdOl E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 117/418,B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Seth Bhawan, 2nd Flocr, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 T.C. No. 14/1421, University PO. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM `Safes Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 tSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 $Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, BANGALORE 560002
Printed at Simco Printing

695034

Press, Delhi

