зет AAF IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


за З чтатага Ft mara 
з' wa — fifa аге 
STET 1 тога зятет 
( FAT утдатт) 


Planning and Design of Ports and 
Harbours — Code of Practice 
Part 1 Site Investigation 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.140 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM 5210 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR чая, 9 serere TH AMT, 45 ее — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR МАКС 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 9 


Ports, Harbours and Offshore Installations Sectional Committee, СЕО 47 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Ports, Harbours and Offshore Installations Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 


Based on the serious desire felt towards formulating Indian Standard recommendations relating to various aspects 
of waterfront structures, the IS 4651 series of standards were established. This standard is one of this series 
formulated on this subject and deals with site investigation. 


The other parts in the series are given below: 
Part2 Geotechnical engineering 
Part 3 Loading 
Part 4 General design considerations 
Part 5 Layout and functional requirements 


This standard (Part 1) was first published in 1967 mainly to cover provisions regarding soil investigations and 
other allied data useful for the design of port and harbour structures. The standard was revised in 1974 to include 
all aspects related to collection of data needed for the planning, design and construction of marine structures for 
ports and harbours. 


The following significant changes have been made in this revision: 
a) The details regarding primary data collection in site have been included. 
b) Hydrographic survey has been elaborated. 


c) Numerical simulation techniques to collect information on oceanographic processes have been illustrated 
in detail. 


d) The method of tidal observations using Radar Level Sensor (RLS) has been elaborated. 


e) The method of wave observations and statistics of wave parameters have been covered in detail along 
with sample presentation. 


f) The provisions related to tidal current meters, and their observations have been elaborated. 


g) Two new types of geophysical survey namely, side scan sonar survey and magnetic survey have been 
introduced. 


h) Subsurface exploration during soil investigation has been updated. 


j) A new annex has been added to illustrate single co-ordinate system, geodetic datum, control surveys, 
positioning techniques and also contains a glossary which consists of definitions of technical terms. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex D. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance 


with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


PLANNING AND DESIGN OF PORTS AND 
HARBOURS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 1 SITE INVESTIGATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) deals with site investigation 
and collection of data necessary for the planning, design 
and construction of marine structures of ports and 
harbours after selection of a suitable site for the port. 


1.2 The information required is grouped under the 
following headings: 

a) Survey (see 5), 

b) Meteorological data (see 6), 

c) Oceanographic data (see 7), 

d) Geological data (see 8), 

e) Soil investigation (see 9), 

f) Seismic data (see 10), and 

g) Local resources (see 11). 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provision which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subjected 
to revision, and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
1892 : 1979 


Title 


Code of practice for 
subsurface investigation for 
foundations (first revision) 


1893 (Part 1) : 2016 Criteria for earthquake 
resistant design of structures: 
Part 1 General provision and 


buildings (sixth revision) 


7314 : 1974 Glossary of terms relating to 


port and harbour engineering 


15883 (Part 1) : 2009 Construction project 
management — Guidelines: 


Part 1 General 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms given in 
IS 7314 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 World Geodetic System - 1984 (WGS-84) — A 
system to define the global survey datum. It defines the 
size and shape of a spheroid on which the satellite based 
survey systems produce the survey coordinates, latitude 
and longitude. 
NOTE — Old survey coordinates from local datum (like 
Everest Spheroid) must be transformed in order to project on 
new survey charts. 


3.2 Spheroid — A mathematical entity represented 
by an imaginary solid produced by rotating an ellipse 
about its minor axis. It is used to represent the shape 
of earth for mathematical computations like coordinate 
transformations. 


NOTE — WQGS-84 is a spheroid that fits the globe closely. 


3.3 Bathymetric Survey — Measurement of depth 
under water. The depths are represented with respect to a 
horizontal datum (normally chart datum). Depths can be 
measured using an echo sounder that sends a sound pulse 
and observes its echo from seabed. The time elapsed for 
two-way flight of sound pulse is a measure of depth. 
NOTE — A multi-beam echo sounder can simultaneously 
measure multiple returns of such echoes (or depth at different 
locations) there by increasing the productivity of survey. 


3.4 Single (or Multiple) Parameter Distribution 
(of Wave Parameters) — А representation of the 
variability ofa wave parameter like wave height or period 
with respect to its direction. The percentage occurrence 
over a period in class intervals are presented in tabular 
form, which may be extended to multiple parameters 
also, wave height and period versus direction. 


NOTE — Such parameters are used for determination of 
favourable orientation of structural elements at sea. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 A brief description of the site including its latitude, 
longitude, geographical location, accessibility, etc, 
along with map should be given. Historical background 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


of the area, purpose of the project, type of hinterland and 
communications may also be briefly described. 


4.2 Available Information 


Wherever possible, advantage should be taken of existing 
local data on tides, storms, waves, littoral drifts, mud 
banks, etc and records of previous investigations in the 
vicinity and information compiled. The behaviour 
of existing structures which may be of similar nature 
to the ones proposed, and the influence of the soil 
and water on the materials of construction should be 
studied and recorded. At such places, site exploration, 
soil investigation and examination of the materials of 
construction may be limited to confirm the site data 
that may be expected in the neighborhood of proposed 
work. 


4.3 Planning for Field Data 


The primary data collection may be grouped into 
following two categories: 


a) Survey and investigations — Topography, 
bathymetry, geological, geophysical, 
geomorphological, surveys and geotechnical 


investigations. Normally these operations cover 
a certain aerial extent around project site and are 
carried out only once. 


The topographic survey shall cover the entire 
project site property indicated in the cadastral 
map. 

Bathymetric survey coverage shall be defined in 
two directions as, along shore and offshore. 


1) Along-shore limit — This shall depend on the 
purpose of the project - port, marine structures 
like outfall/ intake, pipelines, etc and generally 
be bound by the property limits of project 
site. If it is a greenfield project, the influence 
of the project on the geomorphology of the 
vicinity shall be considered for determining 
the along-shore extent. For example, if the 
site is set in a sandy stretch of coast, littoral 
drift cause erosion/deposition on the adjacent 
area. The survey coverage shall exceed the 
estimated erosional/depositional stretches. 
In the absence of any specific information to 
ascertain such influence, at least two expands 
on the either side of project site shall be 
covered for bathymetric survey. 


Offshore limit — If" it is intended to 
characterize a construction site, the survey 
shall cover from beach/breaker zone up to 
1.0 km seaward of the proposed-most seaward 
activity. Activity in this context would include 
any installation like breakwater, intake/outfall, 
trenching, dredging, temporary anchoring, 
dumping, pipe laying, etc. 


2 


wa 


If the survey is intended to generate data for 
numerical model, then the bathymetric survey 
shall cover seaward distance up to 30 m depth 
contour or 5 km whichever is shorter. Beyond 30 
m contour, secondary sources of bathymetry [like 
National Hydrographic Office (NHO) chart] shall 
be adopted. 


b) Met-ocean observations — Tide, current, wind, 
wave, sediment characterization and water 
quality, are observed over representative seasons 
or preferably over one-year cycle to record the 
overall variability. 


Since the duration of data collection for met-ocean 
parameters plays a significant role in numerical 
model  calibration/validation for predicting 
extreme events, it is strongly advised to go in 
for continuous observations wherever possible. 
Once a project site has been identified, in the first 
opportunity, a program of met-ocean observation 
shall be initiated by project authorities. This 
observation may include wind, tide, barometric 
pressure, temperature as basic parameters and 
wave, water current, water quality, sediment as 
secondary parameters. Depending upon the nature 
of project, some or all the parameters may be 
observed for period, which represents seasonal 
as well as inter annual variations. It may be noted 
that from the time of project site identification to 
actual construction phase, generally a long period 
elapses with number of seasonal cycles. This 
intervening period may be gainfully utilized for 
collecting such site specific met-ocean data that 
would go a long way to refine and optimize the 
design parameters, by the time the project reaches 
implementation phase. 


5 SURVEY 


5.1 Coordinate System 


A uniform coordinate system shall be used for whole 
project that would allow all survey charts and engineering 
layout drawings to be seamlessly connected. The details 
of coordinate systems along with control surveys are 
presented in Annex A. 


5.2 Topographical survey of adequate area covered by the 
project is the first requirement and should be obtained at 
the earliest. Survey maps of scale 1 : 50 000 and contour 
interval of 20 m are required for general planning. The 
recommended scales for survey maps for detailed 
planning are 1 : 5 000, 1 : 2 500 and 1 : 1 250 with 
contour interval of 1 m. In no case, shall the survey maps 
for detailed planning be of scale less than 1 : 5 000. 


5.3 Hydrographic survey charts for the coastal region 
extending to continental shelf (up to the ше at which the 
depth of water is 200 m) and of scale 1 : 50 000 or 1 : 25 000 
(whichever is available) are required for general planning. 


Hydrographic charts required for detailed planning shall 
be drawn to a scale as large as possible but in no case shall 
be less than 1 : 5 000. Recommended scales аге 1 : 2 500 
and 1 : 1 250. 


5.3.1 Hydrographic survey shall meet the accuracy 
standards indicated in latest version of International 
Hydrographic Bureau (IHB) publication namely IHB- 
SP 45. For single beam sounding surveys, the survey 
tracks shall be planned in such a way to cross the depth 
contours perpendicularly in general. The line spacing 
as recommended in Table 1 shall be considered while 
planning the single beam echo sounding survey tracks. 


NOTE — For other numerical models, the line spacing can be 
decided between the parties on a case to case basis. 


In all cases, tie-lines in transverse direction are to be 
planned at a spacing of not more than 5 times those for 
main survey lines. 

Table 1 Survey Line Spacing 


( Clauses 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 ) 


SI No. Purpose of Survey Recommended 
Maximum Line Spacing 
m 

(1) (2) (3) 

1) Structural ^ installations, 10 
dredge quantity estimation, 
trenching 

ii) Pipeline route selection, 50 
sea outfalls and cables 

iii) Numerical model input 100 
purposes 


5.3.2 The choice between selection of multi-beam 
echo sounding (MBES) or single beam echo sounding 
(SBES) is determined by economic considerations. 
Where the highest possible coverage is needed, such as 
in dredging, rocky bottom, pipe routes, etc, multibeam 
survey is preferable. In such cases, the line spacing 
would depend on the individual system's swath 
coverage capabilities. Since this capability varies from 
system to system, the general guideline for line spacing 
in MBES 15 to have 100 overlap between swaths 
of adjacent tracks. For example, the usable swath 
coverage of a system is 60 m at 10 m water depth, then 
the recommended line spacing would be 30 m between 
survey tracks. This may result in a variable line spacing 
in case of steep slopes. If the site configuration permits, 
the multi beam survey main lines shall be run parallel 
to contours. In shallow waters («10 m) the MBES is not 
preferred due to restricted swath coverage. In such area, 
SBES shall be substituted with line spacing mentioned 
in Table 1. 


For different purposes of survey, the accuracy orders 
specified in Table 2 as also in IHB-SP 45 shall be 
followed. 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


Table 2 Accuracy Requirement for 
Different Surveys 


( Clause 5.3.2 ) 


SI No. Purpose of Survey IHB-SP 45 Order 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Structural installations, dredge Special order 
quantity estimation 
ii) General planning, pipeline route Order 2 
selection 
iii) Numerical model input purposes Order 2 


6 METEOROLOGICAL DATA 


6.1 Meteorological data to be collected should cover 
the following, most of which are available from 
existing observations made by organizations like India 
Meteorological Department: 


a) Winds, 

b) Cyclones, 

c) Rainfall, 

d) Relative humidity, 

e) Temperature, and 

f) Barometric pressures. 


6.2 Winds 


For preliminary studies, information may be obtained 
from the available meteorological records of the area. 
Recording of velocity and direction of wind at the proposed 
site shall be obtained by installing continuous and self- 
recording anemometers. The data shall be collected for at 
least a period of one year and shall also be correlated with 
the data available at places nearest to the site. 


6.3 Cyclones 


Information should be compiled regarding track of 

cyclones. The velocity of maximum winds, radius of 

maximum wind velocity, duration, pressure drop at the 

cyclone centre and speed of movement of cyclone centre is 

required (see Note). From this, a design cyclone is adopted 

and waves that could be incident at a place computed. 
NOTE — Information given in the ‘Handbook of cyclonic 
storms’, "Tracks of storms and depression in Bay of Bengal and 
Arabian Sea 1964’, and ‘Synoptic charts’ issued by the India 
Meteorological Department shall be referred. 


6.4 Rainfall 


Data on rainfall as available should be collected from 
India Meteorological Department (IMD) for a minimum 
period of 3 years as follows: 


a) Annual average rainfall, 
b) Months in which the maximum rainfall occurs, 
c) Maximum intensity of rainfall and duration, and 


d) Average number of wet days in a year. 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


6.5 Relative Humidity 


Data on the maximum, mean and minimum relative 
humidity for every month shall be obtained for a minimum 
period of 5 years. 


6.6 Temperature 


The normal ambient air temperatures with emphasis on 
daily and seasonal variation shall be collected from India 
Meteorological Department. 


6.7 Barometric Pressures 


Data on monthly average barometric pressures should be 
collected for the nearest site from the IMD. 


7 OCEANOGRAPHIC DATA 


7.1 Numerical Simulation of Coastal Processes 


Considering the time requirements and logistical 
constraints for oceanographic data for large projects, 
the preliminary assessment, feasibility reports may be 
prepared with secondary data. Reports for statutory 
clearance purposes for example, [Detailed Project 
Report (DPR), Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA), etc] shall make use of validated numerical 
model results, while a comprehensive observation 
program shall be set in motion at the start of these 
activities. This will help in refining the site-specific 


environmental loading parameters (design water levels, 
currents, sediment transport rate, etc) required for final 
design process. 


NOTE — See IS 15883 (Part 1) for reference. 


With the advent of numerical model techniques 
and computing facilities, site specific simulations 
can provide first cut information on oceanographic 
processes (involving tidal elevation, currents, waves, 
etc). A numerical model to study the hydrodynamics 
(HD) and wave propagation shall be setup using the 
surveyed bathymetry. The boundary forcing shall be 
defined with elevation variation due to tide using open 
source global models (Le-provost, etc). The HD model 
shall be validated using field observations of tide and 
current as described in the following sections. The 
calibrated HD model serves as basis for modelling 
other coastal processes like wave transformations, 
sediment transport and deriving extreme value 
statistics. However, it must be noted that no numerical 
model results shall be relied upon unless it is validated 
with season specific site observed primary data. 


The numerical model after due calibration with field 
observation shall be used to derive various design 
parameters and evaluate different scenarios of outcome 
caused by the project elements on the environment. The 
components of model and its details are presented in 
Table 3. 


Table 3 Numerical Simulation Model Components 
( Clause 7.1 ) 


SI No. Component Input Output Purpose 
(0) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Hydrodynamics model Bathymetry, tide, currents at Elevation and current a) Basic component to enable other 
boundaries field for entire domain components 


ii) Wave model Wave (random/regular) at 
boundaries 

ili) Sediment transport model Sediment characteristics 
grain size, critical shear 


stress, suspended and bed 


load 


iv) Water quality model 
pollutants 


Water quality parameters and 


b) Define elevation and current 
variation at any location within 
domain 

c) Inundation on coast 


Wave parameters like a) To derive design wave height, 


Hs, Tp, mean direction direction and period at any 
location 

b) To derive sediment transport 
model 


c) To derive design water levels 
d) Wave setup, run up. 


e) Hind casting wave parameters to 
derive return period statistics 


Sediment transport rate 
in the domain 


Morphological evaluation of seabed 
and coast with and without the project 
elements 


Dispersion characteris- Evaluate the environmental changes due 
tics to project elements 


NOTE — Information as given in ‘Handbook of cyclonic storms’, ‘Tracks of storms and depressions in the Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea — 1964’ 
and ‘Synoptic charts’, issued by the India Meteorological Department may also be referred. 


7.1.1 Oceanographic data to be collected should cover 
the following: 

a) Tides, 

b) Waves (wind waves and swells), 

c) Storm surges, 

d) Currents, 

e) Salinity, 

f) Sea water temperature, and 

g) Suspended load. 


7.2 Tides 


7.2.1 Record of the tidal information, over as long a period 
as possible from Port Authorities or Geodetic and Research 
Branch, Survey of India or Hydrographic Department of 
the Indian Navy, including any local information specific 
to the site of the works should be obtained. Based on 
this, the data as given in Fig. 1 should be compiled and 
presented. 

NOTES 

1 Data over a full metonic cycle of 19 years will be useful. 


2 Information on tidal bores, if any, in the area should also be 
collected and included in the above data. 


7.2.2 For most of the ports, the information on tides is 
available (see Note) and may be adopted. For a new place, 
tide tables could be predicted and furnished by the Survey 
of India on request. To compile information as indicated in 
7.2.1, at least two years observed records should be studied. 


NOTE — Data from the Indian Tide Tables is published yearly by 
the Survey of India, Dehradun. 


7.2.3 For new port structures, tide levels expected at a 
particular place may be required. For this purpose, tides 


HIGHEST HIGH WATER (HHW) 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


for at least 12 months shall be observed as described in 
and correlation established between the observed tides 
and the predicted tides for the harbour in general. 


7.2.4 For greenfield projects with navigational 
requirements tidal observations shall be conducted 
at least for one year cycle. The tide gauge shall be 
established on a rigid mount (structures that would not 
yield to environmental forces or sink) and connected to 
Survey of India datum (MSL) in the vicinity. A minimum 
of three bench marks shall be established within the 
project premises and connected to the gauge for periodic 
verification. The tidal observation shall be carried out 
using a radar level sensor (RLS) or pressure gauge with 
atmospheric correction. The RLS based sensors are more 
robust and have lesser maintenance issues. 


The recommended sampling regime shall be: 


Recording interval :6 min 
Observation burst length : 1 min 
Observation frequency :2 Hz 


Observation duration : One year (minimum) 
One observation spell of 1 min duration will result 
in 120 samples that will be averaged and standard 
deviation (SD) derived. The outliers beyond 3 times 
SD shall be eliminated and a fresh averaging shall be 
carried out. This mean value shall be time tagged at the 
centre of observation period. 


Care must be taken to synchronize the tide gauge time 
with standard time marks (GMT or IST) using a GPS 
receiver precisely within 5 s. This must be checked 
periodically for possible clock drift at least once in a 


MEAN HIGH WATER SPRINGS (MHWS) 


MEAN HIGH WATER (MHW) 


MEAN HIGH WATER NEAPS (MHWN) 


MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL) 


MEAN LOW WATER NEAPS (MLWN) 


MAXIMUM RISE + 


MEAN LOW WATER (MLW) 


SPRING RANGE 


I-—— MEAN RANGE 
MAXIMUM RANGE 


MEAN LOW WATER SPRINGS (MLWS) 


CHART DATUM (CD) 


2 — — — MEAN RISE — — ——» 
28— — — — — — — SPRING RISE — — — — | 


LOWEST LOW WATER (LLW) 


Fic. 1 Еовм FoR PRESENTING TIDAL INFORMATION 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


month. The recording must be aligned with starting of 
the hour mark (for example, 00:00, 00 : 06, ......, etc). 


The observations can also be analyzed using standard 
software packages (like T-tide, SLPR, etc) for harmonic 
constituents. Generally, the longer tide records yield a 
better estimation of harmonic constituent list that can 
be used for tidal prediction. 


7.3 Waves 


7.3.1 For planning and preliminary design purposes, 
secondary sources like wave atlas published by 
agencies like CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography 
(CSIR-NIO), National Institute of Ocean Technology 
(NIOT) may be used. 


7.3.2 Wave heights can also be computed by hind 
casting studies using the storm data and synoptic 
charts from the India Meteorological Department. 
Alternatively, hind casting may be carried out by 
numerical modelling using global  re-analyzed 
wind field data that may be obtained from research 
organizations like European Centre for Medium-Range 
Weather Forecasts (ECMRWF), National Centres for 
Environmental Prediction (NCEP), etc. These data 
products are also available commercially for a location 
of interest and duration. Wave statistics shall be derived 
from models that are validated with field observed 
wave information for short time (typically one month 
each in monsoon and non-monsoon periods). 


7.3.3 Separate wave observations shall be carried 
out for long period and short period waves. Wave 
gauges shall be used while keeping in mind their 
limitations — for example pressure type gauges cannot 
be used to resolve high frequency (<4 s period) 
wave components due to depth induced attenuation 
problems. Similarly, accelerometer type gauges are 
not recommended to observe long period waves 


(730 s). The recommended sampling regime for wave 
observation shall be as follows: 


Recording interval e 

Observation burst : 20 min 

length 

Observation : 2Hz 

frequency 

Observation : minimum two spells 
duration of one month each 


in monsoon and non- 
monsoon periods. 


7.3.4 Using above field data, the wave model shall be 
validated and year-long simulation shall be carried out. 
The cyclone tracks with barometric pressure and wind 
variation can be superimposed on the high definition 
(HD) model to derive the extreme water levels due 
to surge and wave setup at project site. The design 
cyclone track may be modelled to cross at the project 
site to simulate expected extreme conditions. Statistics 
of wave parameters shall be derived using hind-cast 
data as follows: 


a) Single parameter distribution (percentage 
occurrence of wave height, period and direction). 


b) Multi-parameter distribution (wave height versus 
direction, height versus period). 


c) Extreme value with return periods of 100 years or 
more for wave height. 


7.3.5 Sample of single parameter and joint distribution 
of wave statistics are given in Tables 4 and 5. Sample 
graphic representation of annual variation of wave 
parameters as rose diagrams are given in Fig. 2. The 
combination of parameters like wave height and period 
or height and direction may be prepared using these 
formats. 


Table 4 Single Parameter Distribution 
( Clause 7.3.5 ) 


Hs (m) 

Jan Feb Mar Apr May 
0.0 — 0.5 61.5 51.43 21.40 2.31 
0.5 – 1.0 38.46 47.00 65.69 56.67 37.41 
1.0-1.5 1.57 12.28 33.72 51.05 
1.5 – 2.0 0.62 6.92 10.61 
2.0-2.5 0.38 0.93 
2.5-3.0 
3.0-3.5 
3.54.0 
4.0 — 4.5 
4.5 —5.0 

25.0 


Significant Wave Height (Percent) 


Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
1.92 15.88 47.82 58.25 

23.85 32.26 44.29 60.90 70.84 48.08 38.77 
57.24 49.69 43.98 31.09 10.05 2.95 2.30 
15.32 15.63 9.06 4.49 2.48 0.90 0.68 
2.82 1.99 2.23 1.28 0.68 0.26 

0.45 0.43 0.25 0.32 0.06 

0.32 0.19 


SI No. 


i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
viii) 


ix) 


Tz 
(s) 


«02 
02 — 03 
03—04 
04 — 05 
05 — 06 
06 — 07 
07 — 08 
08 — 09 
> 09 


Регсешаге 


Table 5 Multi – Parameter Distribution (Hs and Tz) 


Significant Wave Height versus Wave Period (Percent) 


( Clause 7.3.5 ) 


Significant Wave Height, Hs (m) 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


ee НОД 


<0.5 0.5 — 1.0 
0.03 

4.60 4.42 
10.11 25.09 
5.54 10.90 
1.10 5.15 
0.17 1.26 
0.02 0.19 
0.01 
21.58 47.02 


Фа: 
Sy, 
Ne 


<> 
е: 
e 
Kx] 
NON 


> 
9 
55 
exo 
9 
M 
Se 4 


225252 


Š 
5 
SOS 
200502 
ex 
0655 
9250525 
ша 
9905660 
XR 
KOK 
[^ 


Ха 


i. 
< 
ос 
5 
XX 


COM, 
COM, 
< 0606 0605262 


5 
5 
а: 
(оо 
oS 


4 


Ху 
К 
ones 
% 
0506 
ie 


ex 
а 
SS 
~ 
SS 
52505 


ФФ, 
<> 
5000 
ФФ. 
<> 
en 


КА 

N? 
% 

Ма 


Š 


4 


22 
2 


x 
x? 


5 
2020002929 
KKKK 
0509000 
Aue 
OOS 
о 
— 
МАРА, 
SKKKK 
SRK 

ооо 


LS 


eS 
(90$ 
ORS 
06% 
(9090 

Ко 

0909006; 


% 
Y 


eS 
€ 
ХХ 
S 
eS 
ма 
e: 


A 
02 
° 
eS 


1.0- 1.5 


7.59 
13.57 
2.33 

1.08 

0.19 


24.76 


60006 


SOF, 
nef 
< 


15-20 2.0-2.5 


2.5-3.0 3035 3.5-4.0 > 4.0 Percent 
0.03 
9.02 
0.03 42.82 
4.31 0.23 34.55 
1.01 0.61 0.12 10.31 
0.14 0.04 0.01 0.04 2.74 
0.09 0.01 0.49 
0.01 0.02 
5.59 0.89 0.13 0.04 100.00 


; 
Го 


+. 
KLI 


У, 


RRR 


PERCENTAGE OCCURENCE 
OF WAVE HEIGHT, Hs IN т 


ABOVE 3.00 


2.50 - 3.00 


2.00 - 2.50 


1.50 - 2.00 


1.00 - 1.50 


0.50 - 1.00 


0.25 - 0.50 


BELOW 0.25 


LOCATION: 2G2H + 2H HARISPURGARH ODISHA, 


IN THE BAY OF BANGAL 
LAT: 86.529° E 
LONG: 20.000° N 


2 A SIGNIFICANT WAVE HEIGHT AND MEAN WAVE DIRECTION 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


JAN 


<<< 
050000905 
са 
ооо оо 
5 


KX 
AAA A 
ОХ 
een Mig 
PIE e 
SSS 
SKK J 
FERRE 
У 
Oo 


4% 


MAR 


MAY N 


АД 
Д 
К 


6% 


ҒЕВ 


KR 
KRII 
KRA 
ПУК 
RSS 
ERSS 
RSS 
RSS 
NM 
WERKE 
— — КО 
Y00000 2400 ARA, 
RA 
оо 
IB ss. PRR REELS 
TEDE o. a 


APR 


х 
ооф 
Оро 


< 


И 


ФФ, 
ок 


b 
09506060060 


6% 


ЈОМЕ 


< 
од 
< A 
1 KLEE RK RRR ERE 
ER SRR ERE RE RK A, 
SRK RK KKK вео K 
Q 0010000000 0000000000 KKK OY 
IIRO OOR A 
1 RRR ОК ОК 


Q2 


III e R 
0000 Оооо E 
SKK K 


52 


00:90:03 


% 
<> 
9099 
Ко 


7% 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


JULY AUG 


< 


за 

79766 

КХК 

SSA ККУ] 
ооо RR SIS 
ЕЕ М ооо 
< Calm Касае 
са В Eu 

2204 Е NONI 
m ° dg o o 
J хах ERS] 

АКО СКОК Ооо OA 
OOK 
LRA 


2 


$ 


зи 


ха 


6% 


SEP OCT 
N 


A 


0500 


<> Ma «Л 
аи 
<> 


<> 
17 


0599050005 
RSRSRS SRS 
RR KR HK 
0506050500050 
RSIR 
ORRIN 
SARSI 5609 
De (5 0090099 о 
Коо ed 


e 


LOK 
SRK 
Z^ 


NOV DEC 


690 


2 В ANNUAL VARIATION OF WAVE PARAMETER 


Fic. 2 SAMPLE OF PRESENTATION OF WAVE PARAMETER IN DETAIL 


9 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


7.3.6 Long Period Waves 


Long period waves affect the harbour seiches/resonance, 
long period drift and mooring loads, wave setup near 
shore, etc. For the measurement, the wave gauges 
(pressure based or GPS based) have to be configured to 
record for longer period unlike normal wave observations 
in open sea. To resolve 100 s waves, a minimum 
observation duration of 30 min is required. Similarly, to 
resolve 300 s waves, the duration shall be at least | h. 


If the harbour oscillations are to be observed, the radar 
level sensor based (RLS) water level recorders may be 
used with appropriate sampling regime. 


7.4 Storm Surges 


Storm surges may be inferred from tidal gauges, if the 
gauges had functioned through the period of storm. 
Alternatively, a numerical simulation of storm surge shall 
be carried out for a nearby cyclone event and calibrated 
with known/observed tide gauge data. After calibration, 
the model may be forced with design cyclone with 
modified track and intensity to cross the project site. Such 
‘synthetic’ cyclones can be used to generate hypothetical 
scenarios to workout possible extreme conditions like 
extreme water level, maximum inundation, wave run up 
and surge, etc. 


7.5 Currents 


7.5.1 The direction, magnitude and duration of current 
during complete tidal cycles at maximum spring and 
neap tide over a year should be recorded. In riverine 
ports where there is fresh water discharge, current 
pattern at highest expected flood should be assessed 
and recorded. Current pattern at the specific location 
of structures, should also be assessed for a period of at 
least one year for purposes of alignment of berth, dock 
entrances, moorings, etc. 


BEAM SIZE 
0.5m 


ADCP 


WATER DEPTH (D) INm 


SS FRAME 


5 kg WEIGHT 


7.5.2 Current readings should be taken at a minimum 
of three points preferably at depths of 0.1 а, 
0.5 d and 0.9 d where ‘d’ is the depth of water, and 
recorded. Alternatively, profiling-type current meters 
[Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (ADCP)] shall be 
used to get the variation of current along the depth of 
water column. 


The current meter observations shall be carried out at 
minimum of three locations within the project site at 
different depths. All current meters shall be of self- 
recording type and shall be moored with ‘U’ type 
deployment as shown in the Fig. 3. 


The sampling regime of current observation shall be as 
follows: 


Observation burst length : 1 min 
Sampling rate : 2 Hz 
Interval between : 10 min 


observations 


: Three spells of 
14 days each 


Field campaign duration 


four month 
apart. Each 
spell shall 


cover a spring 
to neap cycle. 


The observed currents shall be listed in speed/direction 
or velocity components (и, v) with time. This data set 
shall be used for validating the hydrodynamic model 
derived current field. 


7.6 Sea Bed 


Classification of sea bed material in the vicinity of 
structures and approaches and up to an area in the sea 
where depth of water is 6 m more than the maximum 
depth for which the harbour is being designed, should 


MARKER FLOAT 


- 


SINKER 
WEIGHT 


PP ROPE LENGTH (2D) INm 


pp ROPE (2.5 D INT 


Fic. 3 SCHEMATIC FOR CURRENT METER MOORING 


10 


be ascertained and recorded. Sea bed slope which is 
also a design parameter may be ascertained from 
hydrographic survey charts. 


7.7 Suspended Load, Salinity and Temperature 


7.7.1 These observations shall be carried out both during 
the dry and wet seasons at different locations in the 
harbour and channels over the full tidal cycle during neap 
and spring tides. The suspended load and salinity shall 
be measured at depths of 0.1 d, 0.5 d and 0.9 d below the 
water level (where d is the depth of water) at every hour 
during the tide cycle. Salinity and suspended load should 
be assessed from the water samples collected at these 
depths. Salinity may also be measured at the site by using 
direct meters which are available for this purpose. Sea 
water temperature shall also be measured during these 
observations. 


7.7.2 The rate of littoral drift may be estimated from 
observations at nearby harbour sites over a period of 
at least one year. The direction of drifts at the site may 
be ascertained from validated numerical wave model 
and observations of the coast line in the vicinity of the 
structure, such as dredging records, shore line changes, 
accretion erosion, wave data and the orientation of river 
mouths. These studies may be conducted up to a location 
where the depth of water is 12 m more than the design 
depth. 


Estimates of littoral drift and morphological changes 
in the project vicinity shall be assessed using relevant 
numerical modelling techniques. The yearly variation 
of wave climate shall be used to simulate sediment 
transport process and assess the morphological changes 
like erosion/accretion over the modelling period. These 
results shall be validated with available information like 
differential bathymetry from NHO chart or shorelines 
from satellite imageries. Using such validated model, 
the bathymetry of model shall be incorporated with 
structural modifications on the shoreline. The sediment 
transport model shall be re-run with new bathymetry 
to assess the variation brought into the system by the 
project elements like breakwater, dredged channel. 


8 GEOLOGICAL DATA 


8.1 Any detailed published information on the geological 
condition of the area of the project, if available, should 
be carefully studied. A combination of shallow seismic 
surveys and borehole investigations shall be conducted to 
ascertain the nature of sub-sea strata. 


The coordinate system mentioned in 5 shall be followed 
uniformly for geophysical surveys. The offshore 
positioning shall be carried out with differential GPS 
or equivalent with at least 2 m accuracy. If the survey 
involves towing sensors, the relative position of tow body 
shall be determined by applying offsets or preferably with 
an acoustic positioning system integrated with surveys 


1 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


vessel’s navigational sensor. Similarly, the positioning 
of boreholes and sampling stations shall be carried out 
with accuracies commensurate with geophysical surveys. 
Any vertical height information (like borehole depth, 
cone penetration test - CPT, etc) shall be referred to chart 
datum (CD) while reporting. All charts shall report the 
position data consistently using identical coordinate and 
projection as referred in 5. 


8.2 Geophysical Survey 


The geophysical survey method of locating base rock 
aims at giving a continuous record of strata. Shallow 
seismic surveys may involve reflection surveys (sparker, 
boomer, etc) and in exceptional cases using refraction 
techniques. For general purposes (for example, port 
elements, breakwaters, dredge channel), information on 
the nature of material for at least 30 m below seabed shall 
be acquired. Depending on site condition and specific 
structural requirement (for example, pile foundation), 
greater depths may have to be probed. 


8.2.1 Stratification Survey by Sub-bottom Profiler 


This may be suitably used to determine the thickness 
of the various sediment layers and disposition of 
underlying bedrock. It may also be used to map the top of 
the first compacted layer and to check the water depths. 


8.2.1.1 A first interpretation can be made on the spot 
from the onboard cross-sections. Consequently, the 
survey programme can be modified, while operating. 
Finally, a geophysical interpretation is made by 
preparing a location map and a cross-section showing 
the stratification of various layers and pointing out the 
main geological features. During or after the survey it 
is common practice to select some locations for shallow 
and deep corings. A correlation is obtained between 
the findings of the seismic survey and the actual soils 
encountered during coring. An isopach map of the 
site shall be prepared using sub-bottom profiler data 
including profiles along the lines of interest. 


8.2.2 Side Scan Sonar Survey 


Seabed features like sand ripples, rock outcrops, 
wrecks, exposed pipelines, cables shall be mapped 
before finalizing the suitability of site for engineering 
purposes. These may be detected by side scan sonars 
that generate sonogram of the seafloor along with 
position information. Generally, these are done by 
towing a side scan sonar sensor behind a survey boat 
in a systematic manner. The survey tracks shall be 
spaced 50-100 m in shallow waters (< 20 m water 
depth). Closer tracks shall be considered to ensure 100 
percent coverage of swaths and no blind area between 
swath coverage. The interpretation of sonograms shall 
be assisted by collecting seabed surface samples to 
identify the nature of soil. These surface samples shall 
be collected by implements like grabs and corers. 
The interpreted sonograms of each survey track when 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


combined together (mosaic) provides an overall view 
of the project site. Such investigations are valuable to 
avoid hazards on the sea bed for construction and route 
planning. 


8.2.3 Magnetic Surveys 


To get information on buried hazards (for example, 
shipwrecks, chains, metal debris, etc), itis recommended 
to conduct magnetic surveys. Ferro-magnetic objects 
within the site shall be mapped in a systematic manner 
using a magnetometer towed survey. The line spacing 
in shallow waters shall be in the order of 200 m. A 
combination of individual magnetic sensors forming 
a ‘Gradiometer’ may be utilized to get more precise 
information on the position of buried objects if the site 
condition warrants. 


8.2.4 After processing the individual geophysical data, 
they shall be organized on a chart with common coordinate 
system, scale and boundaries for easy comprehension. 
These may be in the form of tiled panels for each data set 
stacked on a single chart sheet (for example, bathymetric 
contours on top panel, followed with isopachs, sonograms, 
interpreted profiles on stratigraphy, bore hole logs, etc). 
A sample format of map is presented in Fig. 4 where the 
shape of project site is not amenable for such presentation, 
suitable modification may be considered for multiple charts. 

NOTE — A geophysical survey data should be correlated with 


borehole/drill hole data for correctly assessing the variations 
within the strata. 


8.3 Compilation of Geological Data 


The following data about the geology of the area should 
be compiled: 


a) Type of strata/bedrock including information on its 
origin and method of formation; 


b) Any faults, fissures, folds and other unconformities in 
the area of the project; and 


c) Crushing strength and other properties of the rock in 
the project area and its suitability for use in marine 
works. 


9 SOIL INVESTIGATION 


9.1 Earlier Uses of the Site 


In a site which has been partially developed, enquiries 
should be made regarding the past structure’s layout 
of pipes and obstructions likely to be met in the area for 
new works. Enquiries should also be made regarding old 
creeklets, excavated pits, etc, which might have either 
silted up or reclaimed. This information will be particularly 
useful in deciding the number and location of trial pits and 
borings, and assessing in general, the likely soil strata that 
may be met with. 


9.2 Subsurface Exploration 


9.2.1 It is not practicable to standardize the disposition and 
spacing of borings required for subsurface investigation as 
these depend upon the type of structure and the nature of 
the site. Broadly speaking, the number of bore holes should 
be sufficient to give a picture of the probable variation in 
the subsurface strata over the site and their depth should be, 
such as to include all strata likely to affect the stability of 
the structure. Any soft strata encountered below foundation 
level should receive special study. 


For smaller project sites (< 2 km?) at least 5 boreholes 
shall be drilled that are distributed in such a manner 
to assess the overall variability of substrata. For port 
development, the boreholes may be decided after 
completing the shallow geophysical surveys to confirm 
the features detected in sub-bottom profiles. While 
variation of seabed shall be the guiding factor for 
locating the boreholes in general, few of them must be 
located at the position of proposed structural elements 
like breakwater, jetty, etc. Recommended maximum 


ROCK OUTCROPS, ETC. 


y2 — 
х1 PANEL - 1 : (PLAN VIEW) BATHYMETRIC МАР WITH CONTOURS x2 LOCATION MAP 
ar AND ANNOTATED SOUNDINGS E 
v2 — 
- PANEL - 2 : C | ЕШ) soon МАР FROM SUB - BOTTOM v EMO нв NOTES 
REGARDING SURVEY 
ди OPERATIONS, 
COORDINATE SYSTEM, 
CONTROL SURVEY, ETC. 
PANEL - 3 : (PLAN VIEW) GEOCODED SONOGRAMS IN THE FORM 2 
OF MOSAIC INDICATING INTERPRETED SEABED SOIL x2 


x1 CLASSIFICATION, GEOTECHNICAL SAMPLE LOCATIONS, 
SEABED FEATURES LIKE SAND RIPPLES, WRECKS, DBRIS, 


PROJECT DETAILS 


x1 PROFILE WITH BOREHOLE DATA 


w.r.t. CD 


PANEL - 4 : (PLAN VIEW) REPRESENTATIVE SEABED 


SUPRIMPOSED, Z COORDINATE INDICATES LEVELS 


zit 
x2 


DOCUMENT CONTROL 
DETAILS, REVISIONS 
ETC. 


Fic. 4 TEMPLATE FOR COMBINED CHART OF SEABED INVESTIGATIONS 


separation between boreholes for different purposes аге 
as follows: 


:3 rows, one at 
centre of channel 
and one on either 
edge of channel and 
every 500 m along 
channel 


: 500 m (subject to a 
minimum of 3) 


Navigation channels 


Break water 


: 500 m (or 4 no. per 
sq.km) 


Harbour basin 


9.2.2 A few subsurface soundings like the standard 
penetration test and the cone penetration test may 
be conducted. The cone penetration test should be 
conducted in conjunction with at least one bore hole 
with sampling for correlation of soil type with the 
penetration resistance obtained from soundings. 


Investigations meant for submarine pipeline route 
or cable laying can take advantage of in-situ soil 
testing methods like  vibro-coring and electric 
cone penetrometer to characterize the seabed. The 
penetration depth may be in the order of 5 m for such 
investigations. However, the location of such testing 
shall be decided using the information obtained from 
shallow geophysical surveys. 


9.2.3 The subsoil investigation should be carried out in 
accordance with IS 1892. 


9.2.4 Initially the main borings may be along the top 
edge of the shore. These borings may be spaced 50 m 
apart and taken to a depth of 3 m into hard strata or 
a depth equal to twice the difference in the elevation 
of the ground surface on either side of the structure 
(see Fig. 5). In a few cases, the borings may be taken 
deeper to investigate the nature of the underlying 
strata. It is desirable to use large diameter bores in 
reclaimed areas and where embedded boulder layers 
are encountered, depending on the size of the project. 


9.2.5 The intermediate borings of the first order may be 
further drilled after the findings of the principal borings 
are known, to a depth at which the known uniform soil 
layer, identified by the principal borings, is encountered, 
here also the spacing of the borings may be 50 m. 


9.2.6 The intermediate borings of the second order may 
be drilled only when there 15 a considerable change 
in the upper layers. Normally, they are also located at 
50 m spacing but off the areas as shown in Fig. 5. 
The spacing could be reduced if the subsoil conditions 
so require it. The boring depth depends on the result 
of the preceding borings and should extend at least to 
twice the design depth. 


13 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


9.2.7 Depth of Exploration for Channels and Dredging 


For this purpose, the bore holes should be extended to 
a known geological formation below the dredged depth 
or to a minimum of 5 m beyond the design dredged 
depth, whichever is less. 


9.2.8 Bore hole data should be presented in the form of 
bore hole logs along with important longitudinal and 
cross-sectional soil profiles and bore holes location 
plan. A recommended proforma for bore hole logs is 
given in Annex B. 


9.3 Mean Ground Water Level in Tidal Areas 


This should be ascertained over a yearly cycle on the 
entire site under reference or may be assumed to lie at 
about 0.30 m above the mean tides water level. With a 
stronger ground water influx from the shore, the mean 
water level may lie higher as in rainy season and in 
areas with poor drainage characteristics. 


9.4 The results of field tests and those obtained from 
laboratory investigations should be compiled and 
properties of identified strata tabulated for use in design 
work. 


10 SEISMIC DATA 


Past data regarding seismic activity in the particular 
site may be collected for use in design [see IS 1893 
(Part 1)]. 


11 LOCAL RESOURCES 


11.1 The following provisions deal with construction 
resources only. Local resources may be men, materials 
and machine. 


11.2 Materials 


A comprehensive assessment of the availability of the 
local construction materials and their costs should be 
made as regards the following: 


a) Types of material like bricks, stones, timber, etc; 
b) Existing and proposed quarries; and 
с) Facilities for transport of materials by rail, road or 
other modes of transport. 
11.3 Manpower Resources 


The availability of the following should be judged and 
prevailing rates of daily wages recorded: 


a) Skilled labour, trade-wise; 
b) Unskilled labour; and 
c) Availability of local construction agencies with 
their resources. 
11.4 Plant and Equipment 


Availability of earth-moving and other machinery and 
workshop facilities with the local bodies like Public 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


INTERMEDIATE 
BORINGS 


BORING 
DEPTH 2H 


D mum 


s 


Fidi 0.75 H 


MAIN BORINGS IN 
€ OFWALL 


INTERMEDIATE 
BORINGS 


-se 


50 m 


MAIN 
BORINGS 


50 m 


INTERMEDIATE 
BORINGS 
FIRST ORDER 


T t 


50m 


INTERMEDIATE! 
BORING SECOND 
ORDER 1 


om | ee 


50m 


50m 


H = DIFFERENCE IN ELEVATION OF GROUND SURFACE 


Fic. 5 Layout oF Вовімсѕ FOR WATER FRONT STRUCTURES IN DOCKS AND HARBOURS 


Works Department, ек, should be assessed 50 Ша! 
advantage could be taken of these facilities in the initial 
stages of the project till the project machinery arrives 
and workshop facilities are set up. 


11.5 Water and Power 


The availability of water and power for the proposed 
facility and construction purpose should be ascertained 
and recorded. 


11.6 Local Rates 


For costing purposes, local schedule of rates of material, 
labour, transportation, hiring of plant, etc, should also 
be collected. 


12 OTHER INFORMATION 


Before deciding the preliminary design of the proposed 
work, information on the following aspects should also 
be collected: 


a) Availability and ownership of land for acquisition 
in the entire area of the port. 


15 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


b) Map indicating areas of inundation during highest 
high tide. 


c) Pollution and environmental effects: 
1) Measurement of existing pollution level, and 


2) Pollution limit standards laid down by local 
bodies and other authorities. 
d) Any existing/proposed master plan for the 
development of the area including hinterland 
development. 


е 


МУ 


Other information useful in the general planning 
of the port area, such as investigations of any 
river/stream which has outlet in the harbour, 
investigations regarding the river requiring 
diversion, etc. 


13 REPORTING OF SITE DATA 


A summary of site data may be reported on a form as 
suggested and given at Annex C for easy assimilation. 
NOTE — The form given in Annex C is designed to serve 


as a check list only. Many items may be inapplicable for a 
particular project. 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 5.1 ) 
DETAILS OF COORDINATE SYSTEMS AND CONTROL SURVEYS 


A-1 A single coordinate system and a common geodetic 
datum shall be used for all surveys (topographic, 
hydrographic, geophysical and geotechnical). The 
default coordinate system (map projection) shall be 
Universal Transversal Mercator (UTM) and the datum 
shall be World Geodetic System (WGS-1984). All maps 
and charts shall display the coordinate system adopted 
along with zone number and central meridian. Important 
coordinates (for example, structural alignments, well 
heads, etc) shall be indicated both in geodetic (latitude 
and longitude) as well as projection (X, Y — Easting and 
Northing) coordinates for cross verification. 


A-1.1 Geodetic datum mentioned above shall not 
be misunderstood for vertical references used in the 
project site for heights and depths. For engineering 
construction purposes, mean sea level (MSL) shall be 
used as datum for heights and chart datum (CD) shall 
be used for depths. For water front structures, however 
CD shall be referred when heights, levels and depths 
are to be indicated together in drawings. 


A-1.2 Navigation charts in India and topo-sheets of 
survey of India are generally based on Everest Spheroid 
and special attention shall be paid while integrating the 
newly surveyed data with information from old charts. 
The datum and projection details shall be indicated in 
maps of survey. 


A-2 CONTROL SURVEYS 


А common horizontal and vertical control survey shall 
be adopted for the entire project. Horizontal control 
may be extended from existing survey marks (such as 
GTS stations) or locally established reference mark 
after due verification for their correctness. The geodetic 
position of at least one reference mark shall be verified 
by GPS in static relative positioning mode with respect 
to an International GNSS Service (IGS) tracking station 
using at least 24 h observation. A network of survey 


16 


markers shall be established based on this reference 
mark. Wherever possible, this result shall be cross 
checked with existing survey markers and differences 
shall be documented. If some of new markers are to be 
used for local survey (such as staking out, differential 
GPS base station, etc) they shall be appropriately sited 
for accessibility and visibility. 


Vertical control for topographic survey shall be 
referenced to mean sea level (MSL) that can be traced 
to nearest Survey of India bench mark. If the site is 
located close to open sea, the tidal characteristics may 
be adopted from relevant NHO charts and interpolated. 
Otherwise, the tidal characteristics shall be derived 
from site observations with suitable tide gauge. Further 
details on tidal observation may be found in 7.2. 
Bathymetric surveys shall be reduced to Chart Datum 
(CD). The chart datum shall be adopted from relevant 
NHO charts for the project site. In the NHO chart, 
the CD and MSL differences are indicated for select 
locations falling within the chart limits. For project 
sites that are falling in between such locations, linear 
interpolation shall be used to determine the CD. In all 
cases, the difference between CD and MSL shall be 
indicated along with the source of information in all 
project maps and charts of water front. 


A-3 Positioning shall be carried out preferably by 
satellite navigation systems (like GPS) in relevant 
mode (static or rapid static, kinematic, real-time 
kinematic, etc) that can meet the accuracy requirements. 
Horizontal control surveys shall use static relative 
positioning techniques which can provide millimetre 
level accuracy over 10 s of km of baseline length. 
Orthometric levelling (such as bubble-tube assisted 
levelling instruments) shall be used for all vertical 
control surveys. For large area coverage (> 5 km?), 
satellite-based level transfers (geometric levelling) may 
be permitted only when differences between Geoid and 
Spheroid is considered. 


2020 


IS 4651 (Part 1) 


'e[dures poqunisip оде] — Т0 


pue о шев 1oyey, — M 
‘ordures радва — (7 
3591 јојошодооод — d 
19107) — 2 
гоја шев pequmisrpu(] — N 


:so[dures Jo за А) јполојур 10] spuoSo'T 


(81) (21) (91) ($1) (D | (61) | ED 1010) |000) (2) 09) (s) (p) (9) (0) (1) 
ш 
SMO[g JO o[dureg ‘ON ш зовјлпб 
попеллова) | ‘ON — ISIL | Jo ssouxory L | 219шев | ода], | здод |001 | 08 07 | шпуев | punory 
лозем попелзопо4 pue Jo Á19A029M Jo шолј uoneogisse[) | взело |'ON 
зулешом | риполо) рлерџеје dəq дш шев |wu)dəq одъзпозло4 ssəuyər | yjydaq | joquids [108 uondrosoq | IS 
грајојашоз Iq 
PHIS A глопеицощ 
:рәѕп то дшев 1106 ‘SULIOQ JO оше 
DON Suuog :випод Jo ода], 
:uoneoo Ләлә eoggns puno 


шоце8цѕәлш Зшор Хоподе оф JO ошем (0 
:qof oq jo ошем (9 


ООП ЯЛОН ЯЧОЯ МОЈ УИМОНОНа 


(8'С6 25101) 


Я XINNV 


гошви suom) (е 


17 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 13 ) 


PRECISE DATA FORM FOR PREPARATION OF A DOCK AND 
HARBOUR ENGINEERING PROJECT 


C-1 TERMS OF REFERENCE 


The following lists the various reference terms: 
a) Administrative authority/client. 
b) Purpose of the scheme/project. 


c) Design ships required to be catered for with all 
relevant parameters. 


d) Number of ships likely to use dock/harbour facility 
at one time. 


e) Duration of use during calendar year, whether all 
weather or fair weather only. 


f) Permanent/estimated life of structures required. 
g) Summary of requirements: 


1) Proposed approach channel/entrance channel 
bearings, widths and dredged depths and 
turning circles; 

2 


— 


Wharfage/berthage in linear metres and special 
requirements, if any; 
3) Dock harbour facilities like cranes, capstans 
and services, such as water (fresh/salt), 
electricity (a.c./d.c.), compressed air, fuel oil, 
bunkering and so on; 


4 


w 


Shore facilities like workshops, administrative 
blocks, passenger transit lounges, warehouses, 
transit sheds and open storage area, etc; and 


5 


— 


Any special requirements, such as anchorages, 
navigational aids, pollution control. 


h) Time of completion allowed. 


C-2 SITE DATA 


The details of required site data are listed as given 
below. 


C-2.1 Location 
a) Designation of site; 


b) Latitude and longitude (Survey of India, Map 
sheet No. or Mercantile Marine Department Map 
with coordinates); 


c) Altitude; and 
d) Hinter-land characteristics including neighbouring 
towns or villages, and prominent local features. 
C-2.2 Communication 


a) Existing highways with particular reference to 
state and national highways; 


b) Railway gauge (sidings and other facilities); 


18 


c) Inland waterways (quantum of barge and 
lighterage traffic); and 
d) Air routes. 
C-2.3 Survey-Topographical Maps and 


Hydrographic Charts 


C-2.3.1 Topographical 


a) Plan showing Great Trigonometrical Survey 
(GTS) bench marks, cardinal points with 
coordinates for triangulation (scale 1 : 50 000); 


b) Contour plan with contour interval 1 па (scale not 
less than 1 : 5 000, 1 : 2500 ог 1 : 1 250 preferable); 


c) Auxiliary plan showing relative heights of 
important landmarks; and 


d) Relief maps. 
C-2.3.2 Hydrographic 
a) Sounding chart of coastal region (scale 1 : 50 000 
or 1 : 25 000); 


b) Sounding chart of shore region (scale not less 
than 1 : 5 000, 1: 2 500 or 1 : 1 250 preferable) 
showing sounding at 2 m intervals; and 


c) General plan showing location and description 
of shore fixes and other defined areas, such as 
dumping places. 


C-2.4 Meteorological Data 
C-2.4.1 Winds 


a) Wind roses — Direction/frequency; 


b) Combined direction and frequency wind roses 
with velocity superimposed; and 


c) Velocity data with frequency and intensity 
represented on Beaufort scale. 
C-2.4.2 Cyclones 
a) Tracks of severe cyclones — (Traces). 
b) Characteristics of design cyclone of frequency: 


1) 


Maximum wind velocities, in km/h; 


2) Radii of maximum winds, in km; 

3) Pressure drop at eye of cyclone, in mm of 
mercury; 

4) Speed of movement of eye of cyclone, in km/h; 
and 

5) Height of wave generated by the design 


cyclone at deep sea. 


С-2.4.3 Катай 


a) Annual 
(average) 

b) Months of maximum rainfall To be given in 
statement form for 
at least 3 past years 


total rainfall 


c) Maximum intensity (mm/h) 


d) Average number of wet days 
per year 


C-2.4.4 Relative Humidity 
a) Maximum for every month, 
b) Mean for every month, and 


c) Minimum for every month. 


С-2.4.5 Temperatures 


Daily and seasonal variation. 


C-2.4.6 Barometric Pressures 
a) Mean for every month year-wise, and 
b) Annual mean year-wise. 
C-2.5 Oceanographic Data 
C-2.5.1 General Tidal Data for the Place (from NHO 
chart) 
a) Lowest low water level, 
b) Mean lower low water spring, 
c) Mean low water spring, 
d) Mean low water neaps, 
e) Mean sea level, 
f) Mean high water neap, 
g) Mean high water springs, 


h) Mean higher high-water springs, and 
j) Highest high-water level recorded. 


C-2.5.2 Tide-table (predicted levels) for the area/place 
(if harmonic constituents are available). 


C-2.5.3 Harmonic constituents derived from long 
tidal observation (at least 1 year) at the nearest 
port/observatory. In case the site falls between 
two such observatories, a linear interpolation of 
constituents (phase and amplitude) will serve as a 
good approximation for predicting the tide at project 
location. 


C-2.5.4 Tide Data for a Specific Site 


a) Observed tidal records for a 12 month period for 
specific structures, 


b) Bore tides for estuarine harbours — over a 12 month 
period, and 


c) Any abnormal tidal phenomena. 
C-2.5.5 Waves 


a) Frequency of occurrence for design storm; 


19 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


b) Seasonal mean of significant wave height, period; 
c) Location of wave recorders and output; 


d) Monthly mean and yearly mean wave roses of 
observed waves; 


e) Local storm surge and harbour resonance data, if 
available; 


f) Long-period wave data; and 


g) Statistical distribution of wave parameters 
during one-year cycle: 
1) Single parameter distributions (see Table 4) 
i) Percentage occurrence of wave height 
[E]; 
ii) Percentage occurrence of period -T, [s]; 
and 


iii) Percentage occurrence of mean wave 
direction [degree]. 


2) Multi-parameter distributions (see Table 5) 


i) Significant wave height versus Wave 
period (7), and 


il) Significant wave height versus Mean wave 
direction. 


h) Design water levels and heights with respect to 
CD for structural elements: 


1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7 


C-2.5.6 Local Currents 


a) Charts showing tidal current direction and 
velocity at springs and neaps for the general area 
as available in NHO chart; 

b) Modification in current pattern due to flood 
discharges for riverine ports; 


Mean sea level, 

High tide level, 

Design significant wave height, 

Design wave setup, 

Design wind setup, 

Design storm surge, and 

Estimated MSL rise due to climate variation. 


— 


c) Current meter observations at depths of 0.25 d, 
0.5 d and 0.75 d from surface for a particular 
location/site under reference; and 


d) Statistics of currents derived from hydrodynamic 
model shall be included in the report after due 
validation using field observed currents. For this, 
the current observation shall be carried out at 
least two spells of one-month duration spaced six 
months in between. 


C-2.5.7 Suspended Load, Salinity and Temperature 


a) Wet and dry season observations for silt charge at 
depths of 0.1 d, 0.5 d and 0.9 d below water level 
for area in general; 


b) Littoral drift — Yearly cyclic observations; 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


c) Hourly observations of percentage content of silt 
and salinity (graphic) for the site; and. 


d) Seasonal observation (monthly) for variation of 
silt and salinity content (ppm and specific gravity 
observations respectively) (graph) (for the site). 


C-2.5.8 Sea-Bed Characteristics 
a) Sea-bed composition, and 
b) General characteristics of bed-slope. 


C-2.6 Geological Data 


a) Published information about site geology, 
geomorphology (reference of pamphlets/ 
periodicals/publications). 

b) Geophysical survey of site: 

1) Location and category of base rocks; 

2) Bed rock characteristics; and 

3) Geological features like faults, folds, 
unconformities, dip, strike, etc, observed at 
site. 

c) Quarry sites: 


1) Location of quarries, 

2) Distances from site of work, 

3) Type of rock and its crushing strength, and 
4) Type of rock formations. 


20 


C-2.7 Sub-surface Data 


a) Plan showing location and distribution of main 
borings and intermediate boring of first and second 
order; 


b) Bore hole logs; 

c) Longitudinal and cross-sectional profiles; 

d) Table of properties of soil strata found at site; 
e) Summary of test results for soil characteristics; 


f) Ground water level data over entire site with 
yearly variation; and 


g) Record of artesian head of water in pervious layers 
and pumping out test results. 
C-2.8 Seismic Data 
a) Design horizontal acceleration coefficient; and 
b) Design vertical acceleration coefficient. 


C-2.9 Location of Resources 

C-2.9.1 Materials 
a) Existing and proposed quarries with yields; 
b) Construction materials; and 


c) Facilities for transportation of materials like 
steel, cement by rail, road and by other means of 
transportation. 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Ports, Harbours and offshore installations Sectional Committee, CED 47 


Organization 


In personal capacity (3353, Sector D, 
Pocket 3, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110 070) 


Afcons Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Coastal Engg. For Fishery, 
Bengaluru 


Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 
Chennai Port Trust, Chennai 


CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography, 
Panaji 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Engineer-in-chief s, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Light House & 
Lightships, Noida 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon India Ltd, Mumbai 

Gujarat Maritime Board, Gandhinagar 

India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
Chennai 

ITD Cementation India Ltd, Kolkata 

Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust, Navi Mumbai 

Kolkata Port Trust, Kolkata 

Larsen & Toubro Infrastructure Engineering 


Limited, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in- 
Chief’s Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD 
(Army), New Delhi 


Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr M. HARIHARAN (Chairman) 


SHRI V. RAMAMURTY 
Ms МАЗОМТНА Јозн (Alternate) 


SHRI N. VENKATESH PRASAD 
Suri M. B. BELLIAPPA (Alternate) 


Dn PRABHAT CHANDRA 
Dn J. D. AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Ступ.) 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Ступ.) (Alternate) 


Suni D. ILANGOVAN 


Dr J RAJASANKAR 
Suri P GANDHI (Alternate) 


Bric J. S. ISHAR 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI BHASKAR PAL 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH P. JosHi 
SHRI AVINASH V. MAHENDRAHAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER 
Deputy CHIEF ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. PESHIN 
Dn S. D. Атта (Alternate) 


Pror R. SUNDARAVADIVELU 
ProF S. A. SANNAsIRA! (Alternate) 


SHRI Ркорүот KUMAR Ray 
SHRI PINKAI ADAK (Alternate) 


MANAGER (PPD) 
Deputy MANAGER (PPD) (Alternate) 


Suri A. К. MEHERA 
SHRI AMITABHA CHATTOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Suri N. SUNIL KUMAR 
Suri P. R. RAJESH (Alternate) 


Bric J. S. ISHAR 


Suri H. N. ASWATH 
SHRI ANIL Ркотнг (Alternate) 


21 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 2020 


Organization 
Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 


National Centre for Coastal Research, Chennai 


National Institute of Ocean Technology, 
Chennai 


Royal Haskoning DHV India, Noida 


Simplex Infrastructure Ltd, Kolkata 
Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Visakhapatnam 


In Personal Capacity (4-370, Casa Ansal Apts. 
18, Bannerghatta, Road, Bengaluru 
560 076) 


Directorate General, BIS 


Representative(s) 


Deputy CHIEF ENGINEER (D) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (D) (Alternate) 


Dr M. V. RAMANAMURTHY 
Dn R. S. КАХКАКА (Alternate) 


DR BASANTA KUMAR JENA 
Dn Vaya RAVICHANDRAN (Alternate) 


Suri Монр ASLAM BIJAPUR 
SHRI SATYANAND Kunta (Alternate) 


SHRI ATINDRA NARAYAN Basu 


SHRI AMAL KUMAR MEHERA 
Suri G. V. SATYANARAYANA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. VEDAGIRI 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST “Е АКО HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


| REPRESENTING DiRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


22 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 47 (14278). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

МОМВАТ 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


