( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 12043 ( Part 1 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ELECTRICAL CONNECTORS FOR AIRCRAFT
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Aircraft

Electrical

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

ETDC

55

Chairman
SBRI

M. K. KULSHREETHA

Directorate General New Delhi

of Technical

Development,

Members SHRI S. B. NIYO~I (Alternate Shri M. K. Kulrhrestha ) SEEI A. BANDOPADHYA to Development Industries, Commissioner, New Delhi Small Scale

Civil Aviation Dr>partrnent, New Delhi Aeronarrtical Establishment Drvrlopment ( R&U ), Hangalore Wo-Cr)a H. S. RAOIIIJNATH ( Alternate ) Indian Cable Cu Ltd, Calcutta SHRI K. V. R. RAO SHRI S. BHATTA~HAILYA ( Afternate ) Indian Space RwzarLh Organization, Trivandrum DR K. SU~HAKARA RAO SRRI A. BOSP: ( Alternate ) Electronics Testing & Development Centre, SHRI C. SITAPATI RAO Hyderabad Hindustan Acronaulics Ltd, Nasik SRRI B. L. SHAHI SHRI B. S. RI~DDI ( Alternote )

SHRI A. K. GOC+IA( Ahnatr ) SHRI MILAN KUMAI~ BASU SRRI S. K. B. PARimH ( Alternate SRRI P. Y. KALUSKAR ( Alternate SHRI J. E. COMPOSE SHRI YASHVIK Krrnna ( AltcrnatL DDAIS DDCS-I (Altcrnotc) Sum RAM KUMA~ GUPTA SHRI P. S. RAMAN ( Alternate ) SHRI MADAN MOHAN Snnr S. K. GAHQ ( Alternot~ ) SHRI R. NAR.ZSIMHAN SHRI J. S. PI<AI<+SII

Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Lucknow 1) II ) Indian Airlines Corporation, New Delhi ) Directorate of Common Systems, New Delhi Delton Cable Industries
nomhay

Pvt Ltd, New Delhi

Air India,

BUREAU

6 Copyright 1987 OF INDIAN STANDARDS

This publication is protected Imrlc,r thr Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or m part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringemcznt of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 12043( Part 1) - 1987 ( Continurd from page 1 )
Members
SEBI S.

Reprcstnting Directorate General of Technical ( DGTD ). New Delhi National Insulated Cable Co Calcutta Hindustan Director Aeronautics General, Ltd, Development of India Ltd,

P. TANEJA

DH V. K. TIEKU

Soar S. K. SEN ( Allrrnatr ) WI+CDR N. K. WADHWA SH~I B. PARIKH ( Alternate) SHRI S. P. SAOHDEV. Director ( Elec tech ) Joint

Bangalore Membrr )

BIS ( Ex-ojkio

Secretary Soar H. S. SWAMI Director ( Elec tech ), BIS

IS : 12043 ( Part 1) - 1987

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ELECTRICAL CONNECTORS FOR AIRCRAFT
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

0.

FOREWORD
the Indian finalized by had been

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part 1 ) was adopted by Standards Institution on 25 March 1987, after the draft the Aircraft Electrical Equipment Sectional Committee approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.

0.2 This standard ( Part 1 ) covers the basic design, mechanical and electrical requirements for aircraft electrical connectors and also the basic environmental conditions of operation. The requirements and methods of tests are covered under Part 2 of this standard. 0.3 This standard is not intended for a particular type For a specific range of connectors to be considered a detailed specification conformity with this standard, may be referred ( see Appendix A ). 0.4 In preparing following: IS0 this standard assistance has been of connector. as being in for the range

derived

from

the

1949-1973 (Ej `Design requirements plug and socket connectors', issued Organization for Standardization. connectors,

for aircraft electrical by the International issued by USA,

MIL-C-005015 P `Electrical Department of &fence.

aircraft',

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that nf the specified value in this standard. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rcuissd ).
'4

IS : 12043 ( Part 1. SCOPE

1) - 1987

1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) specifies the basic design, mechanical and electrical requirements for aircraft electrical connectors, and also the basic environmental conditions of operation. 1.2 This standard applies to types of connectors designed crimped, soldered and welded contacts accommodating aircraft It does not define a particular type of connector dimensionally. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For apply. 2.1 Barrel ( Conductor) - That to accommodate the conductor. part of the contact which is designed bucket ). That the conductor the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall to use cables.

2.2 Barrel (Insulation ) - ( Also known as insulation part of the contact which is designed to accommodate insulation.

2.3 Bunch Rating -The current rating ( derating) applied to specific number of cables when formed into looms thaw is bunched together. 2.4 Cable Clamp - A part of a connector or an accessox y attached to the connector body to support the cable or wire to provide stress would otherwise be relief and absorb mechanical stress which transmitted to the termination. 2.5 Cable Outlet - A part of a connector or an accessory consisting of rigid housing for attachment to the connector body. It may incorporate provision for a cable clamp or senl for ierminating screens, and provide shielding to e:cctrical in:ei.fcrcnce ( n~ay be straight or tingled ). Electrical - A component which permits 2.6 Connector, termination of conductors for the purpose of providing connection disconnection to a suitable mating component. 2.7 Connector Fixed A connector connector for attachment for attachment the and

to a rigid surface. to the free end of

2.8 Connector Free --A a wire or a cable.

2.9 Connector Interface - The two surfaces of the contact side of a pair of connectors which face each other when the connectors are mated. 4

IS : 12043 ( Part 2.10 Contact Holding Force a male contact gauge of specified The force which is reyuirctl weight and size itI a female

1) - 1987 to retain contact.

2.11 Contact Pin ( or Contact Male) engaging end kvhich makes contact by insertion

A contact having an into a female socket. direction displaced

2.12 Contact Retention Force - The axial force in either which a contact can withstand without being permanently from its position within the insulator. 2.13 Contact Socket ( or Contact Female ) - A contacl engaging end wllich will accept entry of a male contact. 2.14 Coupling -The mechanical device used to mate and pair of connectors in correct engagcmc~nt with each other. 2.15 Crimped Contact -A contact with designed to be p'lysically compressed ( deformed tn make znnd electrical and mechanical contact. 2.16 Datum Checks - Ghecks the specimens are in confol-mity 2.17 Generic il

leaving

an

retain

a

the conductor barrel ) around the conductor

tIesignet to clstablish that with Ihc detail drawing-s. tl~c same ' general

all parts of

Type ~~- 7'yl)c having
Au insulal iq connrc,tor. element

Cllilr.ilClcI~isliCS.

2.18 Insert coniacs in

tlcsigllc~cl to support

and position

2.19 Insert Retention - Ability of the insert to withstand specified axial load in either direction without being dislodged from its normal position lvithin the shell. 2.20 Key --- A projection cnnncctnl, during mating. 2.21 Keyway wllich rngagcs with ;> keyway to guide n

--- `1'11~YIOI01. groove

in which when

a key engages. mated, of twn connectors

2.22 Mated Pair -- A combination, designed f;,I~ beilig couplrd.

2.23 Orientation--~\ seccmtlary polarization system designed prevent, by rot.atioll of the keys from tile normal cross connection connect0l.s having the ~nie shell ant1 contact arrari,gements. 2.24 Plug ( Electrical ) - Arl prcpnnqlcr;rnrc~ of rni7l(' c:c)lll;Icts interconnecting fi)i. cnnl~rcliorl

to nf

device carrying a wit11 a corresponding

sncktt

IS : 12043 ( Part 2.25 Polarization to prevent incorrect

1) - 1987 -The provision mating. of features on mating connectors

2.26 Restricted Entry - Socket contact prevents permanent distortion of the socket or test probe. 2.27 Scoop--The the mating shell connectors. 2.28 Shell-The and contacts are 2.29 ( Socket preponderance plug. action during

or insert contact

hole design, which I)y a male contact

of touching contacts the search for

with correct

the front edge engagement

of of

outside assembled.

casr

of

a connector

into

which

the

insert

Electrical of female

) - An contacts

inter-connecting for connection

device carrying to a corresponding

a

2.30 Interchangeable - A component is interchangenl)le Mhcn it meets the original performance specifications and is interrrlounta),le. In the case of connectors interchangeability applies only to connector are not necessarily interindivitlu;ll connectors mated sets, since mateable. 2.31 Intermateable arc capable -of I)cing without regard to their Two cnnnectnrs are intermateable when connected electrically and mechanically performance and intetmnuntability. are intermnuntablc identical \\ithout they but

2.32 Intermountable - Two components their mechanical mounting parameters are intermateability or intercllangral)ilit). 3. CLASSIFICATION

\~hcn rq;tr(I to

3.1 The electrical connectors for aircraft sllall bc classified depending and insert arrangements and styles. upon their class, size, type However, temperature (see 5.1) and sealing ( VP 5.3) are the c)nly classifications imposed by this standard. 4. MATERIAL AND CONSTRUCTION

4.1 Whenever dissimilar metals are employed in intimate in contact with each other in a connector or in a mated pair of connectors, suitable protection against electrolytic corrosion shall be provided. All parts shall be made of materials which are classed as non-magnetic except where specified.

IS : 12043 ( Part

1) - 1987

4.2 Contact Materials - Contacts shall be made of suitably conductive materials. Thermocouple contacts shall be made of a material compatible with the thermocouple Mire to which attachment is intended and may be magnetic. 4.3 Contact Plating type or contacts gold shall plated be silver plated accnrding to

4.3.1 Crimp type and solder IS : 1067-1981" according to IS : 32661982t.

4.3.2 Thermocouple type contacts shall be cadmium plated according Accessory members of the socket contacts need to IS: 1572-1968:. not be plated but shall comply with the requirements of 4.1. 4.4 Dielectric Material - All inserts and grommets grade dielectric having hardness, electric and mechanical suitable for the purpose intended. shall be of high characteristics

and Alignment - 1Minirnum 4.5 Contact Spacing mechanical spacing and creepilge distance shall be as specified by the manufactI]rer depending upon the se!-vice rating of the connector. Inserts for socket contacls shall provide an overall side play of sclrkrt contacts to facilitate alignment of`mating pin COIltilClY:. 5. ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

5.1 Temperature Range -- <:onnectors shall be classified as follows according to that maximum working temperature for which they arc` suit;ll)lc: (:1X& 1 ----(iFI lo

, l.r~.r~o~'

A fircb1)roo

I' vtmion,

it` available,

sllall 1~ idcnlified for operation

by n suffix F. at altitudes

5.2 Altitude - (:onncxctors up to 31000 m.

shall be suitable

5.3 Sealing Classification - Connectors shall be classified according to the sealing for which they a1.e suitnblc. *Specification
purposes tSpecification for electroplated ( second reuJion ). for electroplated coatings coatings coatings of silver of gold of cadmium for dccornt?d and

as follows

protective purposes

for general

engineering

( first reumon ) .
tSpecification for electroplated on iron and step1 (first revision ).

IS : 12043 ( Part

1) - 1987

(_`:lass H Hermetic (fixed connectors or bulkhead types only ) sealed to leakage rate of 1 X lo-' cm'/s at a differential pressure of 100 kN/m". <XISS N Sealed to a leakage rate clifferential pressure of 100 kN/m". not cxcrcding 15 cm3/h at a

5.4 Vibration Acceleration and Climatic Proofness - The connectors shall be so designed and constructed as to satisfy the test in Part 2 of this standard in respect of vibration, requirements acceleration and climatic conditions. 5.5 Explosion Proofness this standard do not normally be tliaengaged in an explosive The engaged connectors complying with constitute an explosion hazard but must atmosphere while carrying current.

5.6 Resistance to Fluids - The connectors shall be so designed, together with their accessories, as to be resistant to aircraft fluids. Any limitations in this respect should be declared in the detail specification and on a declaration of desi,gn performance. 5.7 Salt Spray -The materials, finishes and design of the connectors shall 1~ such as to resist contamination by salt spray sufficient and shall hc suflicicnt to meet the requirements of 5.24 of Part 2 of this standard. 5.8 Dust - If required by the purchaser, with the requircmrnls of IS : 8252 ( Part the 7 )*. connector shall cnmply

5.9 Magnetic Interference - The connectors shall he dcsignrfl 10 satisfy the rcquircment of standard. 6. MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS

and their ncccssol?c>s 5.19 nf Part 2 of this

6.1 Engagement - Correct engagement shall bc achieved by the combined uxe of both the systems specifird below. No connector pair in any shell size or type of any orientation or polarization position, even mechanism if carrying like contacts, shall make or allow the coupling to engage, except those items which are truly intended to be mated pairs.

IS : 12043 ( Part 6.1.1 Shell-to-Shell ensure: Keying -Keys and keyways shall

1) - 1987 to

be provided

a) that the axis of the male shell remains substantially with the axis of the female shell during the search engagement;

coincident for correct

b) that, for circular connectors, each shell has not less than three keys and/or keyways widely disposed and that the keyways are not open slots in the shell but `blind' keyways; and c) that the operation 6.1.2 Insert-to-Insert angular coincidence of the of the insert keying system. Keying Insert keying shrlls precedes the

shall be provided

to ensure: the of

a) that all contacts are correctly aligned and engaged, contacts being mechanically engaged prior to engagement the coupling device; and b) that it is impossible arrangement with connector. insert-to-insert keying.
Nmx 6.2 2Orientation NOW 1 -Contact

to engage an insert any other contact

of a particular arrangement
for

contact in the

disposition is not to he usrd
by insert rotation is spwifically

the purpose of

prohibited.

Coupling

--The

coupling

arrangement

shall ensure:

a) that full engagement and disengagement, the maximum forces for which sh;~ll be declared, can be achieved without the use of tools; b) that the male and female shells mcl tllat position when engaged, visually checked; the in c) that bayonet tracks and are
cot

retained in the rect engagement

correct can be

such as screw coupling, devices threads, or cams arc' preferably accessible for cleaning; bent or otherwise of like sizes. shall comply be deformed of at

d) that contacts cannot be scooped, by the mating plugs or receptacles 6.3 Engagement Enduranceleast 500 engagements. 6.4 Thread Form established standards. Screw

Connectors threads shall

capable

with

the relevant

IS : 12043 ( Part 6.5 Inserts

1) - 1987

6.5.1 Inserts for hard-faced, restricted

housing female entry type.

contacts

should

be

of

the

6.5.2 Inserts for Class N connectors carrying either male or female contacts shall be capable of being contained in either fixed or free shells. 6.5.3 Inserts for Class N connector insulations support and shall be capable of the maximum size of cable of manufacturer. 6.6 Contacts the requirements of shall provide adequate cable of accepting a full complement by the the type declared

6.6.1 Crimped contacts, when used, shall satisfy detail specificat ion and control drawing.

6.6.2 The hardness of the crimped barrel portion of all contacts, shall be within the range of 60 except the thermocouple types, to 110 HV. The crimped barrel portion of the contacts shall also contain an inspection hole to prove correct insertion of the conductor within the Izrrrcl. 6.6.3 Female contacts shall be of the restricted entry types. the not

6.6.4 Means shall be provided to lock the contacts axially within Any movable part of the locking device should preferably insert. be part of the contaat. 6.6.5 The in the event contact locking 01 damage. device should be capable

of replacement

6.7 Declared Engagement ( Contacts ) - The manufacturer shall declare for each contact shell combination in the detail specification the maximum and minimum mechanical engagement of contact which electrical contact having regard to the ensure effective will accumulative tolerances on all detail parts. l'he minimum engagement shall be that which obtains free member has moved to the outward limit of any travel by the correctly engaged coupling device. 6.8 Sealing preferably IO panel; be sealed against air when the permitted

6.8.1 Class N connectors should 1)~ cshui'e at the following points: a) Fixed nr blrlkhead memller

IS : 12043 ( Part b) Insert to shrll; interface, and and preferably shell to shell;

1) - 1987

c) Connector d) Cable e) Contact entry;

to insert. may method he used on of sealing as described

6.8.2 Filler plugs, as specified by the manufacturer, those cable ways which are not wired. 6.8.3 The manufacturer when using small diameter 6.8.4 in 6.8.1 Class H connectors except (e). shall detail cables. shall any special

be sealed

at all points

7. ELECTRICAL

REQUIREMENTS

7.1 Voltage - The working voltages of the engaged ( or capped ) connectnrs between contacts and between contacts and shell under any natural combinatic~n of the cnvirnnmental conditions shall he at least 350 V dc or ac peak. The connectors shall satisfy t.hc requirements 0f5.13 of Part 2 of

this standard.
7.2 Current Rating - Four sizes of contacts, 22 and smaller, 20, IG and 12, shall I)e provided tn accommodate standard conductors not larger than size 12. Individual contacts, when assembled in the connector, shall be capable of carrying the appropriate cable bunch rating under quivalenl contlitions. Resistance -.-The connectors shall 7.3 Insulation insulation requirements of 5.5 of Parr 2 of this standard. 7.4 Contact Resistance - The connectnr` ments of 5.4 of Part 2 of this standard. shall satisfy satisfy the

the

requirr-

7.5 Shell-to-Shell Conductivity - Stable low resistance continuity shall be obtained between engaged connectors to satisfy the rec.luirements of 5.6 of Part 2 of this standard. 8. IDENTIFICATION 8.1 Contact Identification -. Contacts for Class N connectors shall be marked only by the manufacturers symbol. The marking shall not distort the contact dimensions or shape beyond the drawing limits. 11

IS : 12043 ( Part 8.2 Contact

1) - 1987 Identification and identification

Position

8.2.1 Unless otherwise agreed, the arrangement of contacts shall be as specified in 8.2.2 and 8.2.3.

8.2.2 All contacts shall be arranged in parallel straight rows in one This Identification of the contact position shall be provided. plane. shall be numerical, the commencement and direction of count in every line being indicated by anarrow. 8.2.3 A means of affording rapid identification of contact position shall be provided. This shall be legible, permanent, unambiguous, and It shall not affect the in a contrasting colour to that of the insert. sealing or electrical performance of the connector. 8.3 Connector shall be legible Identification and permanent. -The identification of the connector It shall appear on the body or shell.

8.4 Accessory Identification - Each accessory item shall be legibly There shall be no single reference and permanently identified. number for the complete assembly of the connector with its accessories. 9. FIXING AND ACCESSORIES Three basic types of fixed shells hall be

9.1 Attachment Methods provided, as follows: a) Panel h) Jamb and mounting,

suitable

for wall and box mounting; ronnectors only );

nut mounting

( Class N or H ) ( circular motlnt

c) Hermetic

solder/welded

9.2 Panel Thickness - Panel mounting shells shall accommodate panel thicknesses varying hctwecn 0'7 mm and 3'3 mm. .Jamb nut shells shall accommodate pan& of maximum thickness 6.5 mm. 9.3 Screening ( Shielding ) - Provision shall be made for terminating all types of cable screening overall cable screen, individual core screens or groups of core screens, bonded to or insulated from the connector shell. and elbow outlets shall 9.4 Cable Outlets - Straight These outlets should be capable of fitting to either connectors of the s;l.me shell size without adaptation. 12 be provided. free or fixed

IS : 12043 ( Part 1) - 1987 Caps - Protective caps fitted by normal connector engagement methods shall be available to provide protection against ingress of moisture or foreign matter, to protect live contacts and to preserve the performance of disengaged, live items. Caps shall be provided with a means of retention to the connector by a link chain or equivalent.
9.6 Cable Clamps - Provision the particular design necessitates may be made for cable clamps when the use of separate strains relievers.

9.5 Protective

10. QUALITY

ASSURANCE

PROVISIONS

10.1 Production and quality tests shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the appropriate individual specifications for the particular range of plugs and sockets.

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.3 )
INFORMATION A-l. A-l.1
A-1.2 A-l.3 The detail Description Marking Ordering specification

A

TO BE INCLUDED SPECIFICATION
shall include

IN DETAIL
information:

the following

of connectors. ant1 packaging information
SII ffi cient

A-l .4 Drawings a) b) (:ontact

ly dimensioned

to ensure:

arrangements

and polarization;

Intermateability

and interchangeability; panel Cut outs and mass; dimensions and mass;

c) Outline

dimensions, nutline tools:

tl) Acxxssories, e) Assembly 1)
g) Gauges;

Contacts,

outline

dimensions locators

and mass; and and positioners.

h) Crimp

tools, their

IS : 12043( Part 1) - 198f A-l.5 Ratings: a) Electrical; b) Environmental; c) Endurance. A-l.6 Characteristics: a) Electrical; b) Mechanical. A-l.7 A-l.8 Details to be included in tests records. Additional information. and and

14

