X$:6924-1973
( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF REFUSE CHUTES IN MULTISTOREYED BUILDINGS
( Second Reprint FEBRUARY 1989 )

XX

69.027.5:69,032.22:69.001.3

@ Copyright 1973
BUPEAU
hlANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MAR0

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 3

Jul9

1973

IS : 6924- 1973

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF REFUSE CHUTES IN MULTISTOREYED BUILDINGS
Water Supply and Sanitation Sectional Committee, BDC 24

Chairman Pnow N. MA JUMDER

Representing All India Institute Calcutta of Hygiene & Public Health,

Members Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta Sanr H. R. BADYAL SHRI K. R. PANDALAI ( Alternate ) In personal capacity ( Rustom Building, 29 Veer Nariman SHRI M. R. BAJIKA.R Road, Bombay I ) SHRI ANAND UPENDRA (Alternate) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay . SHRI J. R. BHALLA Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI U. J. BHATT Dorr-01 ver ( India ) Ltd, Bombay DR B. V. BHOOTA SHRI M. L. SHAE ( .-&raate ) Local Self Government Engineering Department, Cawv ENQINEER Lucknow Public Health Engineering Department, Government of Jammu 8t Kashmir Municipal Corporation of Delhi C~IIEF ENGINEER ( WATER ) DRAINAQE ENQI~EER ( Alternate ) Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SITRI R. C. P. CHOVDRARY SHRI K. RUDRAPPA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Health & Family Planning DEPUTY ADVISER ( PHE ) SERI V. A. ANANDADOUS ( Alternate) In personal capacity ( Model Engineers, 5th Floor, SRRI DEVENDRA SIN~H .Nanabhai Mansion, Sir P. M. Road, Bombay 1 ) SHRI M. DURAIRAJAN Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Board, Madras Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SERI M. Y. MADAN SHRI C. E. S. RAO (Alternate) Public Health Engineering Department, Government SHRI S. K. MAJUMDER of West Bemral In personal cap&ity (D-20 South Extekion, Part II, SHRI B. K. MALHAN .New Delhi 49 ) ( Continued on page 2 ) Q CoBright 1973 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This pubIication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

.

IS : 6924- 1973
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members SRRI H. S. L. MWRTRY SHRI K. S. NAXAYANAN SHRI V. P. NARAYANAN NAYAR Repesenting

Public Works Department, Government of Mysore Central Public Works Department Public Health Engineering Department, Government of Kerala SHRI N. S. BHAIRAVAN (Alternate ) Calcutta Metropolitan Planning Organization, SHRI S. K. NEOQI Calcutta University of Roorkee DR S. V. PATWARDHAN Central Public Health Engineering Research Institute SHRI V. RAMAN C CSIR ). Naeour SRRI V. HAXUMANULU (Alternate ) ' " "* Public Health Department, Government of Madhya SRRI D. R. JAOANNATH RAO Pradesh SHRI D. V. S. MURTHY ( Alternate ) L. R. Sehgal & Co, New Delhi SHRI L. R. SEHQAL Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army, Headquarters COL K. B. SETH SHRI R. B. SUJAN ( Alternate ) Public Health Engineering Department, Government SHRI JAOMOHANLAL SETHI of Haryana Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Bangalore SHRI M. T. SHETTY Public Works Deuartment, Government ef Punjab SI~R~D. R. SINGAL TOWN ENGINEER, CHITTARANJAN Ministry of Railways LOCOMOTIVE WORKS Corporation of Madras SHRI P. VISWANATHAN Director General, IS1 (Ex-o&o Member) SERI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI C. R. RAMA RAO Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

2

IS : 6924 - 1973

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF REFUSE CHUTES IN MULTISTOREYED BUILDINGS

0. 0.1

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 22 March 1973, after the draft finalized by the Water Supply and Sanitation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 6.2 With the increasing number of multistoreyed buildings in major cities in the country, need for developing suitable methods for collection and removal of refuse and garbage from buildings is receiving urgent consideration of the Civic and Public Health Authorities to avoid insanitary conditions in buildings and public places. This code of practice has been prepared to give guidance for proper methods of refuse collection from multistoreyed buildings.

6.2.1 This code covers the requirements of chute system and explains the design, construction and location of the three functionally important the inlet hopper and the collection components namely the chute, chamber. 6.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance The number of significant places retained in the with IS : 2-1960*. rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE I.1 This standard covers the requirements of the refuse chute system built in multistoreyed residential buildings for transporting and collecting in a sanitary way the refuse from flats at different heights. The refuse is received from the successive flats through the inlets located on the vertical into the system of pipes that convey refuse through it and discharges collecting chamber from where the refuse is cleared at suitable intervals.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised).

3

IS : 6%4 - 1973 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, .the following definitions shall apply.

2.1 ChuteA vertical pipe system passing from floor to floor provided with ventilation and inlet openings for receiving refuse from successive hats and ending at the ground floor on the top of the collecting chamber. 2.2 Inlet HopperA receptacle fitting flat and dropping it into the chute. for receiving refuse from each

2.3 Collection Chamber-A compartment situated the chute for collecting and housing the refuse during two successive clearings. 3. CHUTES

at the lower end of the period between

3.1 Number of Chutes-The number of chutes depends upon the convenience to the user and the quantity of refuse to be handled between two subsequent clearings. Appendix A gives the method of calculation of quantity of refuse f&m residential buildings. 3.2 Individual or Combined System-In continuation to 3.1, if the chute system is designed as individual system, where each flat is served by an independent hopper, it will be to the utmost convenience to the user. However, a common hopper may be provided in each floor for each chute whose number is further decided by the quantity of refuse to be handled. 3.3 Material of Construction - Chutes may be constructed asbestos cement or R.C.C. pipe with smooth inside finish. out of

3.4 Diameter of the PipeChutes shall be of a minimum internal diameter of 38 cm in order to avoid any chokage inside the chute and to enable provision of a choke-free inlet hopper connection. 3.5 Finish -The inside surface of the chute should be finished as smoothly as possible so as not to allow any sticking of refuse particle that may cause choking eventually. 3.6 Location-The chute may be carried through service shafts meant for carrying drainage pipes. However, the location shall be mostly determined by the position of inlet hopper and the collecting chamber that is most convenient for the user. It should also be considered to locate the chute away from living rooms in order to avoid noise and smell nuisance. 3.7 Construction-The chute pipes should be assembled vertically and properly clamped to the wall. The joints should be of cement mortar and the chute may be squarely embedded into the surrounding walls. A section through a typical chute installation is given in Fig. 1. 4

IS : 6924 - 1973

3f3cm

DIP\ MIN

HOPPER

FLOOR LEVEL . I . ..a_, . .._..,. .

FLOOR LEVEL .I ...<.. ..... . q,,!\-....e

FLOOR LEVEL ,_.;. ., :. .:::.. . ... `._:,

SHUTTER AND CUT-

Of F

GROUNO Fxc.

F LO( 1 SECTION THF_OUGH TYPICAI REFUSE CHUTE INSTALLATION

3.8 Ventilation---The upper end of the chute, that is, beyond the uppermost floor should be provided with a ventilation pipe to the full bore which should rise 2 to 2.5 m above the roof or terrace of the building. An umbrella type cowl with wire mesh at the top will be helpful to prevent rainfall and other external objects of nuisance potential. For high rise buildings mechanical ventilation of the exhaust type is recommended. 5

IS : 6924 - 1973 3.9 Chute Maintenance with an access and door

3.9.1 Access-Each chute pipe should be provided at intervals not greater than every third floor.

3.9.2 M'ru~~ing of Refuse-To help preventing spillage the residents should be encouraged to wrap their refuse.

blockage,

3.9.3 Flushing of Chute-Y-connection at terrace level may preferably be provided in order to direct a waler hose for cleahing purposes, if needed. 4. INLET HOPPER

4.1 Location - In individual chute system, the inlet hopper shall be located in the passage near the kitchen and in the common chute system towards the end of the common passage. Natural ventilation should be adequate to prevent any possible odour nuisance. There should be adequate lighting at this location. For ground floor flats the inlet hoppers may be placed at a higher level and a flight of steps may be provided for using the same. 4.2 Design and Construction-Hopper shall be constructed such that there should be minimum escape of odour or any other vapour when the hopper door is kept open or closed that the inside portion of the hopper does not lodge any refuse while projecting it into the chute. The door and the frame should be fire-resistant. A typical construction of an inlet hopper is given in Fig. 2. 4.2,l Size of size of 25 cm than the size be larger than the Mouth and 7hfoat -The mouth shall have a maximum height and 36 cm width. The throat should not be less of the mouth. The diagonal of the mouth should not the chute size.

j

4.2.2 Height of the Hopper- The hopper should be constructed at a height of 75 cm measured from the floor level to the lower edge of the inlet opening. 4.2.3 Inner Surface -The interior of the hopper should slope towards the main chute at an angle not less than 45" to the horizontal preferably 60' for better performance. This portion may be specially built or may be had by providing a suitable Y-connection. If built specially, the inside finish should be as smooth as possible. If provided by the use of Y-connection, it may be of asbestos cement or cast iron or cement concrete pipe. 4.2.4 Ddor, Head, Frame and Receiving Unit-These should be of mild steel, cast iron or aluminium adequately protected against corrosion. The door should be designed to be self-closing, to have a latch for closing it securely 6

1s : 6!YZ4 - 1973 after use and to have a rubber gasket in between the door and the frame for ensuring gas tightness and minimizing noise. The receiving plate should be fitted with two retaining side plates to prevent spillage (see Fig. 2). 4.2.5 Counterbalance of Door-The door when not in use, should fly back to its closed position and be firmly closed. 4.2.6 Hinge--The hinge shall be such as to satisfy the requirements in 4.2. It should not have sharp edges to harm the user. It should be fitted such that the door can be taken out for maintenance. 4.2.7 Handle-There operating the hopper 5. COLLECTION 5.1 Location -The should door. CHAMBER collection chamber shall be situated at ground level. be a handle fixed properly to the door for

5.2 Capacity --If the refuse is discharged directly on the floor of the collection chamber; the capacity is designed on the quantity of refuse expected from the chute between two consecutive clearings. It may be recommended to provide a minimum capacity of 0'054 m3/family or In the case of chutes serving small number of apartapartment per day. ments, the minimum size of the collection chamber shall be 1.2 x 1.2 x 1-g m in order to facilitate providing trolley and easy cleaning of'the In case of proposals to collect refuse directly into a wheeled chamber. receptacle the capacity of the chamber should be sufficient to accommodate In that case, a mild steel as many containers as would be necessary. container suita.bly protected against corrosion or a container of any other suitable material may be used. If more than one container is in use, the minimum clearance of 15 cm between the container will be necessary. Normally the height of chute bottom above the top of the container shall be about 30 cm in order not to allow any refuse to spill on the floor of-the chamber. It will be preferable to provide a minimum head- room of 2 m for the collection chamber to facilitate easy entry into it. 5.3 Construction-The walls and roof of the chamber shall be constructed of brick masonry or any non-combustible material. The door should be of steel or any fire resistant material. The door fitting should be properly done with the provision of rebate and reveals in the opening The inner surface of the so as not to allow any gas or fume to escape. walls, the floor and the ceiling should be plastered with cement mortar in order to provide a smooth finish. Preferably the chamber may be lined with glazed tiles for better cleaning and upkeeping. The junctions of the walls with each other and with the floor shall be smoothly rounded off to prevent lodging of dust and refuse. 7

IS:6924-1973

r

CAST IRON FRAME

SECTION AMouth FIG. 2

XX
B-Throat

TYPICAL INLET HOPPER 8

IS : 6924 - 1973 5.4 Cleating and.Maintenance - Provision of water tap in the vicinity and drainage facility with a trapped gully shall be made in order to arrange for periodic cleaning of the chamber.
5.5 Shutter-There should be a cut-off plate or shutter at the chute bottom in order to close off the chute at the time of handling refuse in the chamber or while cleaning. The shutter shall be made of sheet iron sliding horizontally inside angle-iron rebates. These should be made non-corrodible with proper painting. 5.6 Lighting - Adequate artificial light should be provided in the chamber with its control switch located on the outside wall near entrance. 5.7 Access -There shall be easy access to the chamber Car the cleaners and refuse collectors. There should be a well paved pathway leading to the collxtion chamber from the nearest road in.order lo facilitate easy transport of refuse at site.

APPENDIX ( czause 3.1 )

A

METHOD OF CALCULATION OF TOTAL REFUSE AND GUIDE LINES FOR DETERMINING NUMBER OF
CHUTES AND SIZE OF COLLECTION CHAMBER Quantity of domestic of refuse refuse 680 g/capita/day ( average 1000 x ~~0 of Bomba), survey )

Quantity Density Volume

of refuse = 240 kg/m" of refuse/capita/day = so

= 2'83 litres Assuming that a family residing in a flat would consist of an average of 6 members plus 2 servants, the average volume of refuse per family would be 2'83 x 8 = 22.64 litres/day, or say 0'027 ms/day.

Example:
To consider a multistoreyed building of 20 flats with 2 flats per floor. from the local Refuse/flat : O-027 ma/day. (Th is is to be ascertained municipality. ) a) No. of C/&es 1) To be decided on convenience to the user; and number of containers, if used in 2) To be decided on the total the collection chamber. 9

IS:6!324-1973 Assuming that individual hopper system will be convenient residents, the number of chutes will be two. To provide ftir irregularity in municipal collection chamber be designed to accommodate = 1.08 ms As there are two chutes, capacity for each collection chamber will be 1.08 __ - 0'54 m3 2 However, a chamber of size 1.2 x 1'2 x 2 m will be necessary as a minimum requirement. b) Zf containers are to be used in the collection chamber: Container size = 0'9 m dia x 1'3 m high of capacity of 0826 Volume of refuse/clearing = 0'54 ma Number of containers/chute = one The above collection chamber size will be adequate. ma refuse cleaning 2 days refuse. to the service,

Hence, volume of refuse/clearing = O-027 ma x 20 flats x 2 days

10

lS:6924-1973 Assuming that individual hopper system will be convenient residents, the number of chutes will be two. To provide far irregularity in municipal collection chamber be designed to accommodate refuse cleaning 2 days refuse.
x

to the service,

Hence, volume of refuse/clearing = 0'027 ms = 1.08 ms As there are two chutes, capacity l-08 r) = 0'54 m3 H:wever, a chamber of size 1.2 minimum requirement. b)

20 flats

x

2 days will be

for each collection

chamber

x

1'2

x

2 m will be necessary

as a

If

containers are to be used in the collection chamber:

Container size = 0'9 m dia x 1.3 m high of capacity of O-826 ms Volume of refuse/clearing = 0.54 ma Number of containers/chute = one The above collection chamber size will be adequate.

10

