INRI AAF IS 12891 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


TACT, chleh A formats] cht aen h 
TTA AT ATT HAT 


( Teel TREAT ) 


Determination of Fusibility of Ash 
from Coal, Coke and Lignite 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 73.040, 75.160.10 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH APT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2021 Price Group 4 


Solid Mineral Fuels and Solid Biofuels Sectional Committee, PCD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Solid Mineral Fuels and Solid Biofuels Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and 
Related Products Division Council. 


Coal, coke and lignite are utilized in various industries where high temperature is involved and the thermal 
behavior of the mineral matter/inorganic residues or ash fusibility needs to be determined to evaluate the 
performance of the fuels. These fusion characteristics are particularly significant for pulverized fuel fired 
electricity generation plants and industrial boilers which often face operational problems due to clinker 
formation. In combustion of coal, many factors govern the behavior of ash and correlation between temperature 
of clinker-slag formation in practice and fusion temperature as determined in the laboratory are not identical. 
However, the thermal behavior of ash as determined in the laboratory provides basic information on its probable 
behavior in practice. 


The method for determination of the fusibility temperatures of coal ash and coke ash described in this standard 
provides information about the fusion and melting behavior of the composite inorganic constituents of the ash 
at high temperatures. The standard method is based on the “Seger Cone” method, which is well known in the 
ceramic industry, the use of which predates the year 1900. The conditions of the test, as well as basic studies 
on the influence of ash chemistry and of gas composition on ash fusibility temperatures (which have led to the 
standardization of the method), arose from the pioneering work of Fieldner, Hall and Field”. 


In the laboratory, the ash used for the test is a homogeneous mixture prepared from a representative sample of 
the coal or coke, and the determination is performed at a controlled rate of heating in either a reducing or an 
oxidizing atmosphere. In contrast, under industrial conditions, the complex processes of combustion and fusion 
involve heterogeneous mixtures of particles, heating rates (that can be several orders of magnitude greater than 
those used in the standard test) and variable gas composition. 

Coal ash having iron in the ferric state has higher fusion temperature than the ash containing iron in the ferrous 
condition. In view of this, generally two types of atmospheres-one strictly oxidizing wherein iron in ash is 
converted to the ferric condition, and the other mildly reducing when iron will be in the ferrous condition are 
maintained during experiment. However, in practice, to have data under worst working condition, the experiment 
is generally carried out under mildly reducing atmosphere. 

This standard was first published in 1990. In formulation of this standard, considerable assistance was taken 
from ISO 540 : 1981 ‘Determination of fusibility of ash, high temperature tube method’ and DIN 51730 : 1984 
‘Determination of fusibility of fuel ash’. 


This revision of the standard has been carried out to harmonize it with latest version of ISO 540 : 2008 ‘Hard 
coal and coke — Determination of ash fusibility.’” The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 
observed that the complete adoption of ISO 540 : 2008 is not possible in the Indian context and therefore, the 
following modifications have been made: 


a) Scope (1) has been extended for lignite; 

b) Definition of ash (3.1) has been incorporated; 

c) For preparation of ash from test sample (9.1), IS 5062 has been referred in place of ISO 1171; 

d) Clause 10 has been modified; 

e) Clause 11.1.2 has been incorporated; and 

f) The information ‘Any peculiar behavior observed during the determination’ has been incorporated in Test 

Report (12). 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this Indian Standard is given at Annex A. 
In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed 


or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off 
numerical-values ( revised )’. 


1) FIELDNER, A.C., HALL, A.E. AND FIELD, A.L., The fusibility of coal ash and the determination of softening temperature, US Bureau 
of Mines, Bulletin 129, 146 pp, 1918. 


IS 12891 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


DETERMINATION OF FUSIBILITY OF ASH 
FROM COAL, COKE AND LIGNITE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes a method of determining the 
characteristic fusion temperatures of ash from solid 
mineral fuels, coal, coke and lignite. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standard contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
IS 5062 (Part 2) Methods of test for brown coals 
: 1969 and lignites: Part 2 Determination 
of ash 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions apply. 


3.1 Ash — Inorganic residue left when powdered coal, 
coke or lignite is incinerated in air to constant mass 
under specified conditions. 


3.2 Deformation Temperature (DT) — Temperature 

at which the first signs of rounding, due to melting, of 

the tip or edges of the test piece occur. 
NOTE — Shrinkage or distortion of the test piece or rounding 
of cracks and fins, are not criteria for deformation and should 
be ignored if the tip and edges remain sharp. However, 
for some solid mineral fuels, the temperature at which the 
test piece shrinkage begins can be of interest and should be 
reported as a feature noted during the determination. 


3.3 Sphere Temperature (ST) — In the case 
of pyramidal and truncated-cone test pieces, the 
temperature at which the height is equal to the width 
of the base, and in the case of cubical or cylindrical test 
pieces, and the temperature at which the edges of the 
test pieces become completely round with the height 
remaining unchanged. 


3.4 Hemisphere Temperature (HT) — Temperature at 
which the test piece forms approximately a hemisphere, 
that is, when the height becomes equal to half the base 
diameter 


3.5 Flow Temperature (FT) — Temperature at which 
the ash melt is spread out over the supporting tile in a 
layer, the height of which is one-third of the height of 
the test piece at the hemisphere temperature. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


A test piece made from the ash of coal, coke or lignite 
is heated under standard conditions and continuously 
observed. The temperatures at which characteristic 
changes of shape occur are recorded. The characteristic 
temperatures are defined in 3.2 to 3.5 (see also Fig. 2, 
3 and 4). 


Although the determination is usually performed 
in a reducing atmosphere, additional information 
can sometimes be obtained by performing a further 
determination in an oxidizing atmosphere. In general, 
the reducing atmosphere in 7.1 gives the lowest 
characteristic temperatures. 


5 REAGENTS 


5.1 Dextrin (100 g/l solution) — Dissolve 10 g of 
dextrin in 100 ml of water. 


5.2 Petroleum Jelly 


5.3 Gold Wire, of diameter 0.5 mm or larger, or gold 
plate, of thickness 0.5 mm to 1.0 mm, with a purity of 
99.99 percent and a melting point of 1 064°C. 


5.4 Nickel Wire, of diameter 0.5 mm or larger, or 
nickel plate, of thickness 0.5 mm to 1.0 mm, with a 
purity of 99.9 percent and a melting point of 1 455°C. 


5.5 Palladium Wire, of diameter 0.5 mm or larger, 
or palladium plate, of thickness 0.5 mm to 1.0 mm 
with a purity of 99.9 percent and a melting point 
of 1 554°C. 


5.6 Carbon Dioxide 


5.7 Hydrogen or Carbon Monoxide 


IS 12891 : 2021 


6 APPARATUS 


6.1 Furnace, electrically heated, which satisfies the 
following conditions: 


a) It shall be capable of reaching the maximum 
temperature at which the properties of the ash are 
determined (a temperature of 1 500°C or more can 
be required). 

NOTE — Some furnaces can have a practical upper operating 
temperature, for example, 1 480 or 1 540°C, due to the type of 
heating elements used in their manufacture. 

b) It shall provide an adequate zone of uniform 
temperature in which to heat the test piece(s). 


c) It shall provide means of heating the test piece(s) 
at a uniform rate from 815°C upwards. 


d) It shall be capable of maintaining the required test 
atmosphere (see 7.1) around the test piece(s). 


e) It shall provide a means of observing the change 
of shape of the test piece(s) during heating. 


f) It is recommended to provide a facility for 
inserting, between the end window of the furnace 
and the optical viewing instrument, a piece of 
cobalt-blue or similar glass to protect the retina 
of the operator from radiation emitted at elevated 
temperatures. 


Dimensions in millimeters 


-32401 
e—a 


5.2+ 0.1 


6.2 Pyrometer, comprised of a platinum/platinum- 
rhodium thermocouple. The thermocouple is positioned 
so that the thermo-junction is on the longitudinal axis in 
the center of the zone of uniform temperature. 


6.3 Mould, of brass, stainless steel, or other suitable 
material, for preparing the test piece. (see Fig. 1). 


6.4 Support for the Test Piece, of such a material 
that the support does not either become distorted or 
reacts with or absorbs the ash during the determination. 
Supports of sintered alumina or fine-textured mullite 
are generally satisfactory, but difficulties can arise 
with individual ashes, in which case a non-absorbent 
interface such as platinum foil can be used between the 
original support and the test piece. 


6.5 Flow Meters, two, for measuring the components 
of the reducing gases (see 7.1). It is not necessary to 
measure the flow rate when using an oxidizing gas. If 
the flow meter contains a liquid, this liquid shall be 
non-volatile oil. 


6.6 Agate Mortar and Pestle 


6.7 Test Sieve, of aperture 0.075 mm (or less) and 
diameter of approximately either 100 mm or 200 mm, 
complete with lid and receiver. 


= 


40 


15 


22 22 


|a 
1240.1 
{og | 


22 22 


1 Base Plates 


2 


2 Mould (s) F 1 


15+0.1 


45 


Fic. 1 AN EXAMPLE OF A MOULD THAT IS SUITABLE FOR MAKING A PYRAMIDAL SPECIMEN 


6.8 Optical Instrument, which enables the profile 
of the test piece to be observed throughout the 
determination. The relative dimensions of the profile 
can be conveniently assessed by using a graticule. 
Additional use of photographic equipment such 
as a camera or video equipment is optional but 
recommended. 


7 TEST CONDITIONS 


7.1 Test Atmosphere 


The reducing atmosphere is obtained by introducing 
into the furnace one of the following mixtures of gases 
at a minimum linear rate of flow of 400 mm/min past 
the test piece, calculated at ambient room temperature; 
the rate is not critical, provided that it is sufficient to 
prevent any leakage of air into the furnace: 


a) 55 volume percent to 65 volume percent carbon 
monoxide with 35 volume percent to 45 volume 
percent carbon dioxide; or 


b) 45 volume percent to 55 volume percent hydrogen 
with 45 volume percent to 55 volume percent 
carbon dioxide. 


NOTES: 


1 If a mixture of CO/CO, is used to produce the reducing 
atmosphere, ensure that the contents are totally mixed in 
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions and that the 
temperature of the cylinder is maintained above the critical 
temperature at which CO, can liquefy and separate. 


2 Ashes rich in iron oxide can react with any oxygen present in 
the furnace, resulting in poor repeatability and reproducibility 
of characteristic temperatures. 


WARNING — when using the reducing atmospheres 
given above, the gases emerging from the furnace 
contain a proportion of carbon monoxide. It is 
essential, therefore, to ensure that these gases are 
vented to the outside atmosphere, preferably by means 
of a hood or an efficient fan system. If hydrogen is 


| 
WA | | 


1. Original 2. Deformation 


3. Sphere 


IS 12891 : 2021 


used in the reducing atmosphere, great care shall be 
taken to prevent an explosion occurring, by purging 
the furnace with carbon dioxide both prior to the 
introduction of the hydrogen and after the hydrogen 
supply is shut off. 


An oxidizing atmosphere is obtained with air or carbon 
dioxide; the rate of flow is not critical. 


7.2 Shape of Test Piece 


7.2.1 The test piece shall have sharp edges to facilitate 
observation. The mass of the test piece shall be such 
as to ensure equalization of the temperature within the 
test body. Hence, dimensions that are too large shall be 
avoided. 


7.2.2 The following shapes are acceptable: 


a) pyramid, the base of which is an equilateral 
triangle; the height shall not exceed 12 mm and 
shall be two to three times the length of the side of 
the base (see Fig. 2); 


b) Cube of side 3 mm to 7 mm (see Fig. 3); 


c) upright cylinder of height 3 mm to 9 mm and with 
diameter equal to the height (see Fig. 3); and 


d) truncated cone of height 4 mm and with diameters 
3 mm at the base and 1.5 mm at the top (see Fig. 4). 
NOTE — If, when using the pyramidal test piece, the degree 
of bending becomes severe enough to preclude the direct 
observation of the dynamic state of the test piece at any time 
during the test, another shape should be used. 


8 CALIBRATION CHECK 


Check the pyrometer regularly under routine test 
conditions by observation of the melting point of gold 
(see 5.3) and, if possible, the melting point of palladium 
(see 5.5). Test the reducing atmosphere by observing 
the melting point of nickel (see 5.4). 


2r 


1/3r 


4. Hemisphere 5. Flow 


r = Radius of the hemisphere 


Fic. 2 CHARACTERISTIC SHAPES OF THE PYRAMIDAL TEST PIECE 


IS 12891 : 2021 


WAAL 


r = Radius of the hemisphere. 


1. Original 2. Deformation 


3. Sphere 


LLY i AZ ZVI 
2r ~~ 1/3r 
4. Hemisphere 5. Flow 


Fic. 3 CHARACTERISTIC SHAPES OF THE CYLINDRICAL OR CUBICAL TEST PIECE 


HZH H 


r = Radius of the hemisphere. 


1. Original 2. Deformation 


3. Sphere 


a S _ 1/3r 


4. Hemisphere 5. Flow 


Fic. 4 CHARACTERISTIC SHAPES OF THE TRUNCATED-CONE TEST PIECE 


If the observed melting points for gold or palladium 
differ by more than 10°C from the melting points given 
in 5.3 and 5.5, readjust or recalibrate. 
NOTE — An alternative to the observations of the melting 
points of gold and palladium is to check the pyrometer using a 
thermocouple certified by a recognized reference laboratory or 
with a calibration that is traceable back to a standard reference 
laboratory. 


If the observed melting point for nickel differs by more 
than 10°C from the melting point given in 5.4, it can be 
due to oxidation of nickel caused by an insufficiently 
reducing atmosphere. Examine the apparatus for 
leakages, control the flow rate and the quality of the 
gases, and recheck the melting point of nickel. 
NOTE — The correct melting point of nickel is not a guarantee 
that the composition of the reducing atmosphere is correct, as 
the fusibility is not likely to be affected until the deviations are 
considerable. 


9 PREPARATION OF THE TEST PIECE 


Prepare the ash according to the method specified in 
IS 5062. 


Grind the ash thus obtained, in an agate mortar until 
the maximum particle size is less than 0.075 mm. 
To maximize the number of particles in the peak 


of the pyramid, grinding to less than 0.063 mm is 
recommended. 


Moisten a sufficient quantity of the prepared ash with 
demineralized water or, if necessary, with an adhesive 
dextrin solution, and make the mixture into a paste. To 
facilitate the removal of the test piece, the mould may 
first be coated with a thin layer of petroleum jelly. 


Fill the mould uniformly and completely with the 
prepared paste of ash so that the edges and tip of the 
specimen are sharp. Allow the test piece to visually dry 
before attempting to remove it from the mould. If the 
ash paste dries too quickly, it is acceptable to moisten it 
slightly with additional water or solution. 


After removal, mount the specimen onto its support, 
using a thin layer of paste of the prepared ash to affect 
adhesion, taking care not to damage the tip or edges. 
The specimen(s) should be examined with the optical 
instrument and those that do not have sharp edges and 
tips should be discarded. 


Allow the test piece to dry, and remove any organic 
matter by heating the test piece slowly up to a 
temperature of about 815°C. If preferred, this 
preliminary heating may be performed in the furnace 
used for the test. 


10 PROCEDURE 


10.1 Transfer the test piece on the support to the 
furnace, and adjust the composition and flow rate of the 
atmosphere, taking into account the warning in 7.1. The 
specimen shall be positioned on the tile so that, when 
inserted into the furnace, its vertical face is parallel to 
the longitudinal axis of the inspection opening. Further, 
the specimen shall be placed as close as possible to 
the end of the thermocouple sheath. Ensure that the 
thermocouple is in the correct position. If using a 
camera or video camera, focus on the specimen so that 
all parts of the specimen(s) are in sharp focus for the 
duration of the test. Adjust the focus if required during 
the test. 


10.2 Raise the temperature of the furnace to a point 
below the expected deformation temperature, so that 
the temperature interval between the point and the 
expected temperature exceed 150°C. After a period of 
10 min, raise the temperature at a uniform rate within 
the range of 3 — 7°C/min, for small test pieces, a rate 
up to 10°C/min is satisfactory. Commence observing 
or photographing the specimen and recording shapes 
at intervals of temperature change not greater than 
20°C until the maximum temperature of the furnace is 
reached or the flow temperature of the specimen has 
been attained. 


10.3 Record the temperatures at which the following 
characteristic changes of shape occur: 


a) First sign of change of the sharp edge of the 
specimen indicating deformation temperature; 


b) Spherical shape of the specimen as indicated 
in 3.3 is observed; 


c) Hemispherical shape of the specimen is observed 
indicating hemispherical temperature; and 


d) The flow temperature at which the sample has 
spread out on the support. 
NOTE — Shrinkage or distortion of the test piece or rounding 
of cracks and fins, are not criteria for deformation and should 
be ignored if the tip and edges remain sharp. However, 
for some solid mineral fuels, the temperature at which the 
test piece shrinkage begins can be of interest and should be 
reported as a feature noted during the determination. 


10.4 If the characteristic shapes for the specimen lie 
between two successive frames using photographic or 
video techniques, the temperature should be recorded as 
the average temperature of the two consecutive frames. 
With some ashes, difficulties can be encountered owing 
to such effects as blistering, distortion, shrinkage, and 
swelling, non-wetting of the support (caused by high 
surface tension) and bursting of internal gas bubbles. 
In such cases, it is desirable to record these phenomena 
and possibly repeat the experiment using a different 
type of support. 


IS 12891 : 2021 


10.5 In case of lignite ash, it is observed that the 
intervals between initial deformation temperature 
and hemispherical temperature and flow temperature 
are comparatively short. In view of this, a slower 
rate of heating preferably not exceeding 3°C/min is 
recommended for proper observation of the changes. 


10.6 Where photographic equipment is used, a standard 
grid shall be placed over the viewing screen to assist 
in interpretation of characteristic shapes. Process any 
film and examine the negatives or transparencies at 
magnification equivalent to a minimum of 10 times 
the original specimen height. Where films are used, 
results shall be based on the examination of negatives 
or transparencies, not of prints. If a hydrogen/carbon 
dioxide atmosphere is used, turn off the hydrogen and 
continue the flow of carbon dioxide for at least 30 s, 
and then turn off the carbon dioxide flow. 


10.7 Remove the specimen and tile from the furnace, 
allow cooling, and examine for evidence of chemical 
reaction between the ash and tile, which can cause 
difficulties in obtaining the characteristic shapes. 


11 PRECISION 
11.1 Repeatability Limit 


11.1.1 The results of independent duplicate 
determinations, performed on the same day in the 
same laboratory by the same operator using the same 
apparatus on the same preparation of ash, shall not 
differ by more than the values given in Table 1. 


11.1.2 In case of lignite ash, the values require to be 
modified as in many cases the difference between the 
characteristic temperatures does not exceed even 25°C. 
In view of this, repeatability and reproducibility may be 
considered in the levels of 20°C and 25°C. 


11.2 Reproducibility Limit 


The means of the results of duplicate determinations, 
performed in each of two different laboratories on 
representative portions taken from the same sample 
after the last stage of preparation as specified in IS 
5062, shall not differ by more than the values given in 
Table 1. 


12 TEST REPORT 


The test report shall contain the following information: 
a) Identification of the sample tested; 
b) Reference of the method used; 
c) Deformation temperature, rounded to the nearest 
10°C; 
d) Sphere temperature, rounded to the nearest 10°C; 


e) Hemisphere temperature, rounded to the nearest 
10°C; 


IS 12891 : 2021 


f) Flow temperature, rounded to the nearest 10°C; 
g) Type of atmosphere used (reducing or oxidizing); 


and 


h) Any peculiar behavior observed 


determination. 


Table 1 Maximum Acceptable Difference between Results 


( Clauses 11.1.1 and 11.2 ) 


SI No. Fusibility of Ash All Atmospheres 
Repeatability (°C) Reproducibility (°C) 
a) (2) 8) (4) 
i) Deformation temperature, DT! 30 80 
ii) Sphere temperature, ST 30 60 
iii) Hemisphere temperature, HT 30 60 
iv) Flow temperature, FT 30 80 


D Ifthe sphere temperature is not reached, the precision on deformation temperature might not be achievable. 


during the 


IS 12891 : 2021 


ANNEX A 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Solid Mineral Fuels and Solid Biofuels Sectional Committee, PCD 07 


Organization 
CSIR Central Institute for Mining and Fuel Research 
(CIMFR), Dhanbad 
Bharat Coking Coal Ltd (BCCL), Dhanbad 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd (BHEL), Tiruchirapalli 


Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd (CMPDI), 
Ranchi 


Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), New Delhi 
Central Revenue Control Laboratory (CRCL), New Delhi 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA), New Delhi 


Cement Manufacturer’s Association (CMA), New Delhi 


Coal Controller Organization, Kolkata 


Coal India Limited (CIL), Kolkata 


CSIR Institute of Minerals And Materials Technology 
(IMMT), Bhubaneswar 


CSIR National Metallurgical Laboratory (NML), 
Jamshedpur 


Geological Survey of India (GSI), Kolkata 
Hindalco Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Metals & Ferro Alloys Ltd (IMFA), Bhubaneswar 
Indian School of Mines (ISM), Dhanbad 
Ministry of Coal, Department of Coal, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement & Building Materials 
(NCCBM), Faridabad 


Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC Ltd), 
Neyveli 


Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), Singrauli 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), 
New Delhi 


Personal Capacity 


Representative(s) 
Dr PRADEEP KUMAR SINGH (Chairman) 
Sarı T. B. Das (Principal) 


SHRI V. K. JHA 
Suri J. Dutta (Alternate) 


Suri R. ELANKOVAN 
SHRI GANESH PALAPPAN (Alternate) 


SHRI N. RAMAKRISHAN 


SHRI NAZIMUDDIN 
Dr T. A. SREENIVASA RAO 


SHRI S. K. THAKUR 
Suri L. D. PApney (Alternate) 


SHRI K. V. REDDY 
SHRI SANJAY JAIN (Alternate I) 
Suri VAIBHAV Gupta (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANJANI KUMAR 
SHRI SUBHASIS SAHU (Alternate ) 


SHRI DEBASISH GUHA 


SHRI SUDDHASATWA Basu 
Suri D. S. Rao (Alternate I) 
Suri B. K. Nayak (Alternate II) 


Ms SANCHITA CHAKRAVARTY 
Ms Rupa Das Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRI BISWAJIT GANGOPADHYAY 


SHRI PRADIP KUMAR BANERJEE 
SHRI VIVEK Kumar (Alternate I) 
SHRI DIPANKAR Kuan (Alternate ID 


Suri D. K. MOHANTY 
DR S. BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI ANINDYA SINHA 
Suri Pryusu (Alternate) 


SHRI ANKUR MITTAL 
SHRI V. MANOHARAN 


SHRI SATISH JHA 


SHRI KANCHAN KUMAR SINGH 
SHRI ANIL Kumar Durey (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. GROVER 
SHRI DR KALYAN SEN 


IS 12891 : 2021 


Organization 


Research & Development Centre For Iron and Steel 
(RDCIS), SAIL, Ranchi 


Singareni Collieries Co Ltd (SCCL), Khammam, 
The Energy And Resources Institute (TERI), New Delhi 


Tata Steel Pvt Ltd, Jamshedpur 


The Tata Power Company Limited, Noida 
Director General, BIS 


Representative(s) 
Suri K. K. MANJHI 
SHRI B. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 
SHRI G. RAJENDER REDDY 


SHRI SUNIL DHINGRA 
Suri N. K. Ram (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. SINGH 
Suri H. N. Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVASH SINHA 


Suri V. K. Diunni Scientist ‘G’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Smt NisHA BURA 
Scientist ‘C’ (PCD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 07 (13246). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


