( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 6229

n

1980

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF REAL-EAR PROTECTION OF HEARING PROTECTORS AND PHYSICAL ATTENUATION OF EARMUFFS (

First Revision )
LTDC 5
Chairman DR M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist National Physical Laboratory New Delhi Representing Ministry of Dcfence ( R & D )

Acoustics Sectional Committee,

Members

Dn K. AC~YUTHAN SI~RI R. S. Vorrn~ ( Alternate ) SERI I. S. AHUJA COL T. R. BHALOTRA LT-COL KISHAN LAL (Alternate) DRA.F. CHEAPGAIL DR R. C. CHOPRA SZIRI S. KALIDAS

Ahuja Radios, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( DC1 ) National Delhi Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New

DR T. K. SAXENA (Alternate)

Department of Electronics, New Delhi Railreei;liBoard ( Ministry of Railways Bolton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi

),

New

SHRI V. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate )

SRRI J. S. MONQA S~rnr M. S. MONQA (Alternate ) SFIRI P.R. MULCEANDANI SHRIJ. S. MONGA SHRI P. S. MULLICK
(Alternate) )

Electronic Component New Delhi

Industries

Association,

Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of Tourism and Civil Aviation ), New Delhi All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani ( Contim~cd on Page 2 )

SNT V. RATNAVATI (Alternate

DR (KUMARI)SEAILAJA NIKAM
SHRI K. D. PAVATE

SHRI M. R. KAPOOR ( Alternate :)

I
INDIAN STANDARDS

.

_^^^
INSTITUTION

I

This publication is protected under the Indian Ccjyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :6229 - 1980
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members RIX~EAROEENQINEEI~ SHRI M. SANKARALINUAM
SHRI A. v. RAMANAN

Representing Films Division, Bombay Directorate General of All India Radio ( Ministry of Information and Broadcasting ), New Delhi Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi

SHRI J, S. PASSI ( Alternate ) SENIOR SURVEYOR OF WORKS Central Public Works Department, New Delhi ( FOOD ) SURVEYOR OF WORKS ( FOOD ) ( Alternate ) Posts & Telegraphs Department, New Delhi SHRI M. N. SEUKLA SHRI s. K. TAND.4N ( Alternate) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. SITARAMA RAO SHRI B. S. NARAYAN ( Alternate ) Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and SHRI L. K. VISHWANATH The Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay &RI R. R. IYER ( Alternate ) SHRI D. P. SHARMA ( Alternate) The Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics ) Secretary SHRI PAVAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI

Panel

for Hearing

Aids and Audiometers,
Convener

LTDC

5 : P4

DR M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist National Physical Laboratory New Delhi Mem hers DR B. M. ABROL SHRS PHIROZE A. PESTONJAMES DR ( KUMARI ) SEAILAJA NIKAM DR P. C. SAQAR All Refiresenting India Institute of Medical New Delhi Arphi Incorporated, Bombay All India Institute of Speech and Mysore The Association of Otolaryngologists Bombay Sciences,

Hearing, of India,

2

IS I 6229 -1980

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF REAL-EAR PROTECTION OF HEARING PROTECTORS AND PHYSICAL ATTENUATION OF EARMUFFS

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 7 April 1980, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard specifies the definitions, requirements and procedures for the measurement of acoustical performance of personal hearing This standard is not appropriate to the evaluation of protective devices. hearing-protective devices designed to operate exclusively against impulsive noise. 0.3 This standard was first published in 197 1. The revision has been undertaken to bring it in line with the corresponding ANSI publication. The principal changes are the inclusion of a method for the measurement of physical attenuation of earmuff devices and the substitution of narrow bands of noise for discrete tones as the test stimuli. The physical measurement method is intended for production test and engineering design, it is not suitable for earplug testing. 0.4 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from ANSI S3.19-1974 ` Method for the measurement of real-ear protection of hearing protectors and physical attenuation of earmuffs ' issued by American National Standards Institute. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test made in standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values

accordance with is to be rounded

this ofl,

( mid).
3

I

I

6229

-

1980

1. SCOPE

standard specifies the psychophysical procedures, physical requirements, and means of reporting results for measuring the protective and attenuation characteristics of wearable devices that are used to protect the auditory system against excessive sound. 1.2 Real-Ear Protection Method - Procedures described real-ear ( primary ) method are performed by psychoacoustic human subjects and are designed to measure real-ear protection at threshold for completely developed hearing protectors. This method is described in 3, in the tests on hearing primary

1.1 This

1.3 Physical Attenuation Method - Procedures described in the physical attenuation ( supplemental ) method are performed by physical tests on a dummy head and also may be used to measure sound attenuation at relatively high sound pressure levels ( see Note ). The supplemental method applies to earmuff-type devices and provides data for use in earmuff design and production quality control, as well as for various other attenuation performance specification purposes.
NOTE - A real-head physical attenuation method ( that is, microphone under an earcup worn by subject ), as has sometimes been applied in research and development work, is not standardized in this document. Data and experience with this method have been examined and found to be insufficient for development of a uniform procedure suitable for standardization at this time.

1.4 Applications - This standard applies to communication units, special helmets including safety helmets, pressure suits and other systems with sound-protective features, and hearing-protective devices used in combination with one another, that is, earplugs plus earmuffs. Earplugs may not be evaluated by this method. Neither the primary nor the supplemental method is applicable for testing nonlinear devices, amplitudesensitive devices, and other hearing-protective devices with features designed to operate exclusively against impulsive noises. These devices are included only to the extent that their performance complies with the requirements of the standard. Standard methods for the real-ear evaluation of these devices are not established, consequently, the effectiveness of their special features cannot be adequately described in a uniform manner.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. the harmful

2.1 Hearing Protector - A device that is worn to prevent effects of sound on the auditory system. 4

IS : 6229 - 1980 2.1.1 Earplug -A hearing protector worn within the external ear canal ( aural ) dr in the concha against the entrance to the external ear canal ( semi-aural ). 2.1.2 EarmuffA hearing protector usually comprised of headband and earcups with a soft outer ring intended to fit snugly against the pinna ( supra-aupal ) or the sides of the head around the pinna ( circumaural ). 2.1.3 Communication Headset - A device ( earplug or earmuff) designed primarily for communication which may also provide or be used for hearing protection. 2.1.4 Helmet - A device, sometimes functioning as a hearing protector, that usually covers a substantial part of the head. 2.2 Open Threshold of Audibility - The minimum effective sound pressure level for a specified signal that is capable of evoking an auditory sensation when a hearing protector is not worn. 2.3 Occluded Threshold of Audibility - The minimum effective sound pressure level, for a specified signal, that is capable ti evoking an auditory sensation when the hearing protector under test is worn. 2.4 Real-Ear Protection at Threshold -- The bels ) of the occluded threshold ( hearing protector minus the open threshold of audibility ( ears open listeners on all trials under otherwise identical test mean value ( in deciin place ) of audibility and uncovered ) for all conditions.

2.5 Dummy Head - A device that approximates certain physical characteristics and dimensions of an average adult male, human head and is ,used for measuring the attenuation of circumaural hearing protectors. difference (in decibels) 2.6 Earmuff Attenuation - The algebraic between the band pressure levels of the test signals measured at the microphone of the dummy head with and without the earmuff in position. 2.7 Random Incidence Field - A sound field in which the angle of arrival of sound at a given point is random in time. 2.8 Reverberation Time - The time that would be required for the meansquare sound pressure level, originally in a steady state, to fall 60 dB after the source is stopped. 3. REAL-EAR METHOD (PRIMARY )

3.1 Physical Requirements 3.1.1 Acoustic Ewironments of Test Room 5

IS : 6229 - 1980
3.1.1.1 Ambient .noise - The ambient noise ( with instrumentation on and no test signal present ) at the position of the listener in th.e test room shall not exceed the values given in Table 1, measured with the listener absent from the room.
TABLE r----------Lower 90 180 355 710 1400 2 800 5 600 1 MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE AMBIENT NOISE* OCTAVE~BAND LEVEL IN DECIBELS REF TO 20 FPat 24 I8 16 16 14 9 30 FREQUENCY LIMITS ( Hi ) *-------_7 Upper 180 355 710 1 400 2 800 5 600 11 200 Centfe 125 250 500 1 000 2 000 4 000 8 000

*The levels in Table 1 were obtained from the calculations in Appendix A. The octave band levels specified above are based on preferred centre frequencies in accordance with IS : 6964-19732, in order to correspond with third-octave band test signals emyloyed in this standard. TPa = MN/m2. iOctave, vibration. half-octave and third octave band filters for analysis of sound and

3.1.1.2 Test sounds - Third-octave bands of noise shall be used as test sounds for measuring real-ear protection at threshold for at least the bands with the following centre frequencies: 125, 250, 500, 1 000, 2 000, 3 150, 4 000, 6 300 and 8 000 Hz. Test signals interrupted or pulsed a maximum of one time per second with a 50 percent duty cycle and without audible transients are required for the psychophysical procedures. When hearing protectors provide small or negative protection at some test bands, measurements should also be taken at the third-octave bands immediately adjacent to these bands and results reported in the data. 3.1.1.3 Sound jield characteristics - An acceptable sound field as approximated by the following conditions is desired: 4 The sound shall be generated in a room whose reverberation time in the test space ( without subject ) shall be between 0.5 and 1*6 seconds for each of the test bands, and

b)

The sound pressure level measured at six positions relative to the centre of the subjects's head ( without subjects ), & 10 cm in front-back dimensions and & 15 cm in the up-down and right-left dimensions, shall remain within a range of 6 dB for all test bands (see 3.1.1.2). The difference in sound pressure level between the right-left positions shall not exceed 2 dB. 6

IS : 6229 - 1980 3.1.1.4 Soundfield measurement - A directional ( cosine or cardioid ) microphone that exhibits in its free field polar response at least 10 ciB front-to-side and front-to-back rejection for each test band shall be used to measure the sound field at the test space. The sound field shall be considered to approximate a random incidence field if, when the microphone is rotated about the centre of the test space through 350" in each of the three perpendicular planes of the room, the observed sound pressure level in each test band remains within the variation allowed in Table 2. Any audible noise in the room is likely to cause masking over a portion of the range of test signals. This will elevate the open threshold and result in erroneously small values of real-ear protection for the device under test. Many rooms that cannot meet the limiting ambient noise continuously will be suitable if test periods are selected during times of minimum noise. In case extraneous noise becomes audible in such rooms, means should be employed whereby the listener may signal the tester to stop the test. Physiological noises may occur under earmuff devices at sufficient levels to cause masking over the low-frequency portion of the range of test signals. This will elevate the occluded threshold and result in erroneously high values of real-ear protection for the device under test.

TABLE

2 ALLOWABLE RANDOM INCIDENCE FIELD RESPONSE VARIATION FOR CORRESPONDING MICROPHONE FREE-FIELD REJECTION* ALLOWABLERAND~IJ INCIDENCE FIELD RESPONSE VARIATION 6 5 4 3

MICROPHONE FREE-FIELD REJECTION( dB ) >25 20 15 10 < 10, microphone not suitable

*The variation in microphone response as the microphone is rotated in a random incidence field is related to the directional characteristics of the microphone and the degree of randomness of the field. Allowable round field response variations must be presented in terms of the free-field directional response characteristic of the microphone. values of directional microphones and Table 2 presents the free-field rejection corresponding allowable sound field variations for purposes of this standard. The microphone free-field rejection may be obtained by measurement or from the microphone manufacturer.

7

IS : 6229 - 1980
3.1.2 Test Apparatus - Test equipment shall generator, third-octave band filter set, control and calibrated attenuators ), loudspeakers with head-positioning device. include a white noise circuits ( on-off switch power amplifier, and a

source shall generate 3.1.2.1 White noise generator _ - . The signal _. signal voltage whose spectrum level measured in a band 1 Hz wide uniform within & 2 dB over the frequency range of 50 to 10 000 Hz.

a is

filter set whose parti3.1.2.2 Third-octaveJiller set - A third-octave cular band-widths, band-edge frequencies, and other characteristics The mode of operation of conform to those as specified shall be used. the filters in changing from one contiguous band to another shall be a discrete step function; a gradual, continuously adjustable mode of change Only filter sets allowing direct access to band outputs is not acceptable. prior to summing shall be used. 3.1.2.3 Control circuits

4

Attenuators that provide a test signal range of at least 90 dB in each test frequency band shall be used. Attenuation steps shall be 2.5 dB or smaller. The attenuators shall be calibrated at levels at which the system is used, in the minimum steps, when connected in the system. Corrections for measured departures from linearity shall be applied to the data. Procedures which employ an attenuation network that is operated manually by the subject shall have some calibrated means to vary the signal presented to the subject attenuator. Performance characteristics of attenuation networks shall be at least equal to the requirements of (a). The signal on-off switch shall operate in such a manner that no transient or extraneous noises are audible to the normal ear. After operation of the switch, the time required for the sound pressure level of the test signal to rise from - 20 to - 1 dB, with reference to its final steady value, shall be not less than 0.02 second and not more than 0'10 second, and the time required, for the sound pressure,of the signal to fall by 20 dB shall be not less than 0.005 second aird not more than 0.10 second. This requirement is consistent with IS : 9098-1979* and shall be met by the electronic system feeding the loudspeakers.

b)

4

*Specification for pure tone audiometers. 8

IS : 6229 - 1980
3.1.2.4 Loudspeakers

a) The loudspeakers used in conjunction with the appratus described in 3.1.2 shall provide a sound field such that at any test band the sound pressure level at the listener's position can be varied from at least 20 dB above the occluded threshold of hearing to 10 dB below the open threshold of hearing. For most protective devices, this is equivalent to a level of 70 dB above to a level of 10 dB below (see Note ) the threshold of audibility; and NOTE -This may be calculated on the basis of a electrical calibration. b) At least one loudspeaker shall be placed on the surface of each of the three major planes (ceiling-floor plane and two opposing wall planes) of the room ( see Notes 1 and 2 ). Each loudspeaker shall be housed in a configuration that approaches an c infinite ' baffle. No loudspeaker shall have its axis oriented directly towards the subject ( minimum orientation of 5" off ).
order to achieve the desired sound field, it may be necessary to NOTE 1 -In A simple employ as many as nine loudspeakers, three in each room plane. installation is to mount three individual speakers. on each of the three single sheets of plywood ( at least NOTE 2 -Loudspeakers 1.9 cm thick ), one for each of the three room planes ( axes ) shall be installed. At least one 30.5 cm or larger diameter loudspeaker should be employed in each room plane. Base reflex, ducted port, acoustic suspension, etc, loudspeaker systems should not be used.

3.1.2.5 Head-positioning device - Some means shall be used to provide a reference for maintaining the listener's head in a constant position (it should not a head rest, however a plumb bob to the nose of the This device shall not transmit to the listener has proved acceptable ). listenet's head any vibrations that might affect the measurements or present a reflective or absorptive surface that might alter the level of the sound at the ears of the subject. 3.1.3 Distortion - The entire system shall produce less than 5 percent total harmonic distortion, measured at the position of the subject's head while the stimulus system is operated at maximum sound pressure level, with discrete tone inputs corresponding to the centre frequencies of the test band ranging from 250 to 6 300 Hz. When the test room is excited with a test band at maximum sound pressure level, the levels measured in adjacent bands shall be consistent with the filter characteristics specified for the third-octave band filter. 3.1.4 Earmuff Device Force Measurement - Some means shall be provided for the measurement of force exerted against the sides of the head by The measurements shall earmuff devices mouted on suspension systems. represent the force found in new, unused, hearing protectors separated to 9

IS : 6229 - 1980

a distance of 14.35 cm between 13.08 cm between the inside of through the pivot points of the earcups ( medium head height ). the real-ear protection data. 3.2 `Listeners

earcups ( medium head width) and the headband and an imaginary line attachments of the headband to the These data shall be reported along with

3.2.1 Listeners to be used in the tests described in the following section shall have hearing threshold levels in either ear no higher than 10 dB at the 250-l 000 Hz test frequencies and no higher than 20 dB at any other test frequency as measured by a standard audiometer, as specified. 3.2.2 No listener shall be selected as a subject for these tests whose variability for the open threshold of audibility described under 3.3.2 is such that the range on three successive open threshold measurements at any test band between the 250 and 4 000 Hz bands is greater than 6 dB. 3.2.3 Listeners who satisfy the other requirements of this standard and who do obtain an adequate fit with the test item ( 3.3.3.1 ) may not be dismissed for reporting small amounts of protection. In reporting the results, listeners for whom an adequate fit cannot be obtained should be noted, but should not be included in the evaluation. 3.3 Test Procedures 3.3.1 Instructions to Listeners 3.3.1.1 Listeners shall situation and procedure. be completely informed regarding the test

3.3.1.2 The listener shall be seated in such way that, using the head-positioning reference device, the listener's head will be placed in the same ` fixed' position in the sound field for all repeated measurements. 3.3.2 O/m Threshold of Audibility Procedure

3.3.2.1

a)

In order to allow for accommodation to the test situation, listeners shall be seated sin the test room, with no signals present, for a minimum period of 5 minutes prior to the initial trial of a test session, after which time the threshold determinations may begin. The listener should not have been exposed to excessive noise for at least 1 hour prior to the test. 10

I

IS

I

6229

I

1980

The listener's ears shall be uncovered and unprotected. The control attenuation for each of the test bands listed in 3.1.1.2 shall be varied until a level is reached at which the signal is just audible (see Note ). This level shall be the open threshold of audibility. An open threshold for all test bands shall be measured immediately before or after each set of occluded thresholds, the order to be alternated.
until the tone is just heard. Threshold level is considered to be the lowest level of the signal which is heard on at least 50 percent of the trials during three or four ascents and descents across this lowest-level value.

to decrease the level until the signal is not heard, and then to increase the level

NOTE -A

recommended

procedure

is to present the signal

at an audible level,

4

Any psychophysical or audiometric technique suitable for threshold determinations of individual signals within the limits of 3.1.1.2 shall be used, and the same technique shall be used for measuring the open and the occluded thresholds. Some means shall be provided to vary each presentation so that the level of the test signal presented to the subject attenuator shall differ from trial to trial. The total value recorded for each trial shall be the variation introduced by the experimenter, combined with the subject's response and shall be reflected in the subject's attenuator setting.

4

3.3.2.2 Recording data - The final results of the hearing protection test will be exposed in terms of the difference between attenuator settings, that is, the mean-occluded minus the mean-open threshold levels in decibels. Therefore, only attenuator settings (which represent threshold levels) need to be recorded. 3.3.3 Determining Occluded Threshold of Audibility

3.3.3.1 Fitting hearing protectors - The fitting of hearing-protective devices is critical to acoustic fit and the amount of hearing protection obtained; therefore, the method of installation for occluded threshold determinations shall be reported as ` subject ( average) fit ' or ` experimenter (best ) fit `. Eyeglasses should not be worn during earmuff evaluations. Special studies of earmuff effectiveness with eyeglasses should be clearly identified. SubjectJit - The experimenter should give each listener precise instructions on fitting the hearing protectors, in accordance with instructions from the manufacturer, and should select a proper size hearing protector for the listener. Earplugs shall be inserted and earmuffs shall be put on by the listener. In addition, the following shall be complied with: 11

IS : 6229 -

1980
protector has been installed, a white noise shall be introduced whose overall sound pressure level at the listener's position is 60 to 70 dB with reference to 20 PPa. The listener shall be instructed to manipulate the hearing protector until satisfied that the noise is minimal.

i> After the hearing

of the hearing ii) After the test is begun, further manipulation protector in order to gain attenuation approvement at a specific test signal is prohibited. b) optimum protector performance is Experimenter J;t - When desired, the experimenter shall personally check each hearing protector installation to assure a good fit and acoustic seal after 3.3.3.1 ( a) (i ) is completed. When he deems necessary, the experimenter shall re-insert earplugs and re-adjust other protectors to a ` best ' fit prior to testing, but not after the test has begun. The results obtained using this fitting procedure shall be reported as ` experimenter fit ' protection. - After the hearing 3.3.3.1, a threshold of exactly the same way These levels shall be protector has audibility for as prescribed the occluded

3.3.3.2 Occluded threshold levels been installed in accordance with the test signals shall be measured in for the open thresholds ( 3.3.2 ). thresholds.

3.3.3.3 Number of hearing protector units - A minimum of two individual units of a hearing protector model, that is manufactured in standard sizes shall be used alternately in the execution of this test. 3.4 Processing and Reporting the Data

3.4.1 Minimum Samples - The real-ear protection at threshold for each listener shall be based, for each test signal, on measures of open thresholds made on no less than three separate trials and on measures of occluded thresholds made on no less than three separate trials. Each separate trial shall include a refit of the hearing protector. Frequent rest periods shall be provided to the subject during the threshold determinations. Measurements shall be made on not less than ten subjects. 3.4.2 Measurements to be Reported - The measurements shall be summarized for at least each of the nine specified test signals ( one-thirdoctave band ) in terms of a grand mean and a standard deviation of the protection values. Standard deviations ( u ) shall be computed using the formula:

:12

IS : 6229 - 1980
where d is the difference between the grand mean and an individual observation and .Nis the number of observations ( 30, ten subjects with three measures each). There will be as many real-ear protections and standard deviations as there are test signals, and the data shall, therefore, be summarized in a table or graph that displays real-ear protection at threshold and standard deviation as a function of the frequency of the one-third-octave test bands of nbise. 3.4.2.1 When hearing protection data are presented in graphic form, a paper shall be used whose frequency scale along the abscissa is in equal intervals of one-third-octave band centre frequencies and whose hearing protection scale along the ordinate is linear in decibels. The length for a decade of third octaves shall be equal to the length for 25 dB. 3.4.2.2 The method used to establish that the ambient in&the test room did not mask thresholds of audibility (3.1.1.1 described. 3.4.2.3 of selection. Listeners shall be described noise level ) shall be

in terms of age, sex, and manner used for obtaining thresholds

3.4.2.4 The psychophysical procedure ( 3.3.2 and 3.3.3 ) shall be described.

3.4.2.5 The manner of hearing protector installation shall be described as subject fit or experimenter fit and also noted on the graphic or tabular displays of the protection data. 3.4.2.6 The earmuff force measurements shall be described and noted on the graphic or tabular displays, or both, of the hearing protection data, 4. PHYSICAL 4.1 Physical METHOD Requirements ( SUPPLEMENTAL )

4.1.1 Test Room 4.1.1.1 Acoustic tut jtld - A random incidence sound field, as approximated by the following conditions, is desired for each third-octave band test frequency from 80 to 10 000 Hz: a) A broad-band electrical noise source, whose spectrum level in 1 Hz bands is uniform within f 2 dB over the frequency range of 50 to 12 500 Hz. shall be presented to a third-octave contiguous filter set ranging from 80 to 10 000 Hz centre frequency to provide the test signals. Each of the test bands beginning at 125 Hz and extending to 8 000 Hz centre frequency shall be measured. 13

IS : 6229 b)

1980

The band pressure level at the microphone for each test band frequency shall be not less than 85 dB with reference to 20 PPa and shall be at least 60 dB higher than the level of the test room ambient noise in each test frequency band.

c) The random incidence characteristics of the sound field shall be determined in accordance with 3.1.1.4. The sound field used in the primary method is adequate for the physical measures when the band pressure level requirement of (b) is satisfied. 4.1.2 Apparatus 4.1.2.1 Dummy head - The dummy head shall be constructed in accordance with the critical surface dimensions as shown in Fig. 1. The two non-parallel surfaces, representing the sides of the human head, and the curved surface representing the top of the human head shall be covered with artificial flesh. There shall also be provided, in one or both surfaces, as shown in Fig. 1, a centrally located mounting means that shall accrpt a laboratory standard type microphone or a microphone normallly used on sound level meter. Adopters shall be used with microphones having outside diameters less than 23.774 f 0.005 mm. The diaphragm of the microphone shall be co-planar with the outer surface of the artificial flesh. NOTEAlternate types of headform may also be used but the results for
different

types

of headform

may

not

give

the

same

results

as with

the

real-ear

method.

4

The acoustic isolation of the dummy head shall be not less than 60 dB in any test frequency band in the range of interest. Isolation shall be determined as the difference at each test band between the output of the microphone uncovered and of the microphone covered with a thick-walled metal cup, grease sealed to the hard surface of the dummy head ( before artilicial flesh is A sample test cup is shown in Fig. 2. attached ). The artificial flesh shall be fabricated to a thickness of 6.0 f 1.0 mm and applied to the critical surface as shown in Fig. 1. The material, as applied, shall exhibit a reading of 20 -j= 5, when measured with a Shore ` 00 ' durometer, or the equivalent.

b)

4.1.2.2 0 bserved sound pressure level apparatus -- An automatic graphic level recorder ( pen speed of 10 mm/s and paper speed of 25 mm/s have proved satisfactory ) synchronized with either a stepping-type or a continuously swept third-octave filter set is the recommended instrument for A manually scanned filter may be measuring the sound pressure level, used with a voltmeter readout (slow meter response is mandatory ). A simultaneous visual/graphic analyzer or a standard sound pressure level meter with third-octave band analyzer may also be employed. The 14

IS : 6229 - 1980

UIFICIAL ESH

I \

I
`-_
I IMICROPHONE " I CENTER

W-50.04

All dimensions Norm 1 cial flesh. NOTE 2 All dimensions Dashed lines i

in millimetres.
to the hard

are references indicate FIG.
r

surface

beneath

the artifi-

unspecified

contour

or structure.

NOTE 3 -Tolerance

2.0 mm unless

otherwise

noted.

1 DUMMY HEAD
MACHINED

SURFACE

All dimensions
NOTEOne

in millimetres. to the dimensions TEST CUP shown has provided

adequate

isolation

metal cup in practice. FIG.

fabricated

2 ACOUSTIC

ISOLATION

IS t 6229 - 1980
measuring system used shall be calibrated with reference to 20 PPa. 4.1.2.3 of headband
Headbandforce apparatus -

to measure

band

pressure

level

force is described

The apparatus in Fig. 3.

for the measurement

4.2 Test Procedures
4.2.1 Attenuation Measurement

4.2.1.1 Earmuffplacement -- The earmuff shall following manner: The adjustable headband shall be extended to hearing protector shall be spread and placed with the circumaural seals centrally located surfaces. The headband shall be contracted so the curved surface of the dummy head.

be positioned

in the

its largest size. The on the dummy head on the appropriate as to rest firmly upon

NOTE -Nape spring hearing protectors, or those that do not have rigid headband springs, shall be positioned on the dummy head in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The applicable conditions of 4.2.1.1 shall be met.

4.2.1.2 Measurement - The band pressure levels at the microphone The shall be measured for the acoustic best field without earmuffs. hearing protector shall be placed over the microphone in accordance Readings are with 4.2.1.1 and the band pressure levels measured again. taken at the preferred centre frequency when continuously swept filter sets cre used.

a) The b)

measurements shall be taken for each earcup protector in position, covering the test microphone.

of the hearing

When the measured difference in band pressure levels between the right and left earcups is less than 5 dB, the arithmetic average of the two values shall be reported. When the measured difference between earcups is 5 dB or greater, the attenuation of each earcup shall be reported.

4.2.1.3 Hearing protector attenuation - The algebraic difference in band pressure level, in decibels, for each test frequency band with and without the hearing protector in place on the dummy head is considered to be the attenuation of the device.

4.3 Reporting

the Data

4.3.1 The hearing protector attenuation data shall be presented in graphic form, with the data points connected by straight lines, on a paper whose frequency scale along the abscissa is in equal intervals of one-third octave band centre frequencies and whose attenuation scale along the ordiThe length for a decade of third-octaves shall nate is linear in decibels. 16

IS : 6229 - 1980

d=

NOTE 1 headband.

A: Centreline

passes through headband

pivot point of earcup is obtained,

attachment

to

NOTE 2 - B: After correct force measurement.

distance

move out of way for

NOTE 3 - Construction - Almost any material can be used provided that the The only critical dimensions are the earcup units are made sufficiently rigid. separation distance ( 14.35 cm ) and the headband extension distance ( 13.08 cm ). For best results, dimension a should be 12.0 cm to 15'0 cm and dimension c should be 30'5 cm. A good free-working hinge with a small centre pin is satisfactory as the pivot point, Weight is recommended to be about 900 g. NOTE 4 - Calibration faces must be read 14.35 be moved over the pivot the weight where itjust that the weight - With the ointer aligned_, the distance between the two & 0.2 cm. Pf the constructron is such that the weight can point, then the zero force location is found by positioning balances. The force (F) at any location at a distance b from the zero point is found by F = Lay. A scale of

has moved

grams can be marked. NOTE 5 - Operation -The earmuff to be measured is positioned so that the points of attachment of the headband to the earcups are located at the centreline marks ( 13.08 cm ) and the headband contacts the vertical post. The post is moved away, and the weight is positioned to where the pointers are aligned. The force is read from the scale which converts weight location into grams. When the pointers are aligned, the distance of 14.35 cm is automatically satisfied. NOTE 6 - Accuracy -The positiooing of the earcup must be done with care in order to ensure that the point of attachment of the cup to the headband is the distance a from the pivot point. Practically, this is the largest source of error. With care, the position will be in error less than 0.3 cm for a maximum measurement error of 0.3 cm + 12 cm = 2'6% (2.1% for a = 15 cm ). Actual measurements of ten different hearing protectors by three different persons have shown that 95% of the measurements will be within & 5 g. FIG.

3

FORCE

MEASUREMENT

SYSTEM

IS:6229

-1980

be equal to the length for 25 dB. The ordinate shall be labelled in 14 equal intervals of 5 dB ranging frsm 60 dB at the abscissa to -10 dB. Subdivision of the ordinate is acceptable. 4.3.2 The graph shall be clearly labelled to indicate a physical measurement method. The date, model number, headband force, individual conducting the test, and any other appropriate data shall be included on the graph,

APPENDIX ( Table 1 )
CALCULATION OF MAXIMUM NOISE LEVELS

A
PERMISSIBLE

A-l.

The maximum permissible noise levels in the octave bands contained in Table 1 of the standard were calculated applying the data. in Table 3 to the following formula: L, = T f where the masking T = hearing CN = and Cn = critical
TABLE FREQUENCY (Hz) (1) 125 250 500 1000 2 000 4 000 8 000 *Reduced 3 DATA

CN -

c,

level is assumed threshold (NB/l Hz),

to be zero,

levels at ( ref 20 ,J?a ) ,

10 log,,

band for two-ear

listening.
PERMISSIBLE

FOR CALCULATING MAXIMUM NOISE LEVELS Cd% (3) 180 355 710 1400 2 800 5 600 20.8 11.2 6.0 4.2 1.0 - 3.9 15.3 ,& (4) 19.5 22.4 25.5 28.4 31.5 34.5 37.5

Norse BAND (Hz) (2) go180355710 1400 2 800 -

(2) (5) 16.0 15.5 15.5 16.5 10.5 21.0 23.0 (6) 24 18 16 16 14 9* 30

5600-11200

from 10 to 9 dB to be equal to level in band centred at 3 000 Hz.

18

