UDC

621'6711'674 : 620.16

IS:10981 --_--_

-1983 __--

Indian Standard
CODE OF ACCEPTANCE TEST FOR CENTRIFUGAL, MIXED FLOW AND AXIAL PUMPS-CLASS B

988"
( Reaffirmed 2002 )

CONTENTS 1. Scope 2. Symbols 3. Terminology 4. Guarantees 5. Tests 6. Procedure 7. Cavitation 8. Tests 9. Analysis Appendix Appendix Appendix Appendix Appendix Appendix Appendix ixplanatory for Measurement Testing ... ... ... . .. . .. .. . ... ... .. . ... ... . .. ... . .. .. . and Power Input ... ... . ..

Page 2 2 4 7 8 14 21 25 26 28 .. . . .. . .. .. . . .. -.. ... 29 29 33 33 35 36 36

of Rate of Flow, Head, Speed of Rotation .. . . ..

on Pumps for Liquids of Tests A Pumping Installation

other than Clean Cold Water ... Under Non-standard of Tests. . .. Induced .. . by the Pumps ... Conditions . .. ... ... ... ... .. . ... ... . ..

B Costs and Repetition C Friction Losses

D Effect of Pre-swirl E Pump Test Sheet F Conversion G Check List Note

to SI Units

Adopted

9 September

1983

@ March 1985, ISI STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 NEW BAHADUR DELHI

Gr 12

INDIAN
MANAK

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002

IS:10981

- 1983

1. Scope 1.1 Lays down a code for acceptance

testing of pumps, defining the terms and quantities that are used, establishing the methods of testing and the ways of measuring the quantities involved according to Class 6, so as to ascertain the performance of the pumps and to compare them with the manufacturer's guarantee. 1.2 In general this code applies to any size of pumps tested liquids behaving as clean cold water such as defined in 8. with clean cold water and other

1.3 This code is not concerned properties of their components.

with

the structural

details

of the pumps nor with

the mechanical

1.4 This test code specifies the standard methods of measurement and instruments to be used for the determination of rate of flow, inlet total head, outlet total head, pump total head speed of rotation and pump power input. 2. Symbols Given in Table 1.
TABLE Reference Number in* Relevant Part of IS : 1890 1 SYMBOLS

Quantity Mass Length Time Temperature Area Volume Angular velocity Velocity Acceleration of free fall Speed of rotation Density Gauge pressure Viscosity (dynamic viscosity) Kinematic viscosity Energy Power (general term ) Reynolds number Diameter Mass rate of flow Volume rate of flow Distance to reference plane Pump total head Inlet total head Outlet total head Specific energy Loss of head at inlet Loss of head at outlet Net positive suction head Atmospheric pressure (absolute Vapour pressure ( absolute ) Pump power output Pump power input Motor power input Pump efficiency Transmission efficiency Motor efficiency Overall efficiency Type number Friction factor = Mass L = Length T = Time reference

Symbol

Dimensions M L T 0 L" LS T-1 LT-1 LT-3 T-1 ML-3 ML-IT-2
ML-lT-1

SI Units

-

m I f, A V
W V 9 n

kg m s "C ma ms radjs m/s m/s2 s-1 kg/m3 PS pa-s ms/s J W m kg/s m3/s m m m m j/kg m m m Pa Pa W W W

P Pe I(
V

L3T-1
ML"T-3 M

3.2.1 .l 3.2.1.2 3.2.3.2 3.2.3.8 3.2.3.6 3.2.3.7 3.2.3.9 3.2.3.10 3.2.3.11 3.2.3.12

E P Re D Qm w ;I HI Hz Y Hh Hh
(NPSH)* )

L*T-3

pure number L MT-1
L3T-1

L L L L
L3T-3

L L L
ML-IT-3 ML-IT-3

Pb P-f: P& p&T qin't

3.2.4.1 3.2.4.2 3.2.4.3 3.2.5.1 3.2.5.2 3.2.5.3 3.2.5.4 3.2.6 6.2.1.2 Note 1 -_M Note 2 for quantities *An optional

M LZT-3 M LBT-3 M LBT-3

pure number

, qmot
rlw

pure number pure number pure number pure number pure number

K x
0 = Temperature. may be made to various parts

Where no number and units `. symbol

is given,

of IS : 1890 I Recommendations

for net positive

suction

head is HIT.

2

IS : 10981 - 1983
2.2 Alphabetical Lists of Basic Letters and Subscripts -As given in Tables 2 and 3.

TABLE

2

LETTERS

USED

AS

SYMBOLS

Symbol A D I5 B H HI K k I m n ( NPSH ) P P 4m QV Re t
V

Quantity Area Diameter Energy Acceleration Head Losses Type in terms of head of liquid of free fall

SI Units ms m

i
m/s* m m pure number m m kg of rotation suction head s-1 m Pa W kg/s ms/s pure number
S

number roughness

Absolute Length Mass Speed

Net positive Pressure Power

Mass rate of flow Volume Reynolds Time Velocity Volume Tolerance Specific Distance Efficiency Temperature Friction Dynamic Kinematic Density Angular velocity factor viscosity viscosity energy to reference plane rate of flow number

m/S

V X Y I r) 0 A P
V P 0

ms pure number

J/kg
m pure number "C pure number P&S me/s kg/m3 rad/s

IS:10981-1983
TABLE 3 LETTERS AND FIGURES USED AS SUBSCRIPTS

( Clause

2.2 )

Subscript

Meaning

0

value at the specified inlet outlet absorbed available atmospheric effective guaranteed unit ( overall )

speed

1 2 a av b e G gr int

intermediate loss 1) general 2) related case to 9

i
m

: mean : mass

M mot P r

manometric motor pump required eye specified* total useful 1) general 2) related case to 9

S
sP t
U V

: vapour : volume

*This

indication

applies

to the values

of quantities

relating

to the guarantee

point.

3. Terminology
In order to avoid any error of interpretation it has seemed preferable to reproduce the definitions of quantities and units as given in various parts of IS : 1890 and to supplement these definitions by some specific information on their use in this test code.
here

3.1 General-

Acceleration of free fall* gn -Speed of rotation : The quotient P -Density
P -

of the number

of rotations

by the time.

: Mass per unit

volume. specified, all pressure ). pressures are

Pressure : The quotient of force by area. Unless otherwise gauge pressures (measured with respect to the atmospheric

*For Class B tests, the local value of g should be used. Nevertheless, in most cases, a value of 9'81 m/se would The local value should be calculated by the formula : g = 9'806 17 ( 1 2'64 x 10-3 cos 2(p + 7 the latitude
x

not involve cos'J2(p ) -

significant

error.

IO+

3,086 x IO-SZ

where `p and Z are respectively

and the altitude. 4

IS:10981-1983
p-Viscosity (dynamic expression: viscosity, some times called
UO

absolute

viscosity)

is

defined

by

7=p---

h

where u. is the velocity fixed flat wall; h is the distance 7 is the friction
Note-h should fixed flat wail.

of a flat plate

moving

in its own

plane

while

keeping

parallel

to a

from the flat plate to the fixed flat wall; force of the fluid
be small enough

on the unit area of the flat plate during
laminar flow of the fluid between the flat

its motion.1
plate and the

to obtain

Y-

Kinematic

viscosity

: the quotient

of the viscosity v = 2 P

( dynamic

viscosity

) by the density

:

PRe-

Power : The quotient of this interval. Reynolds number

of the energy

transferred

during :

a time interval

by the duration

is defined

by the expression

3.2 Definitions Peculiar together with associated

to the Test Code-The definitions symbols, if any have been allocated. in current use, which

of concepts

used

in this

test code, of

Concepts, even though this code are not defined. 3.2.1 Flow rate?

are not strictly

necessary

to the application

3.2.1.1 om- In this test code, mass rate of flow designates the external mass rate of flow of the pump, that is, the rate of flow discharged into the pipe from the outlet branch of the pump.
Note delivered: 1 -The a) b) c) d) following losses or abstractions inherent to the pump are not to be reckoned in the quantity

Discharge necessary for hydraulic balancing of axial Cooling of bearings of the pump itself; Water seal to the packing; and Leakage from the fittings, internal leakage, etc.

thrust;

Note 2 -On the contrary, if the losses or abstractions the flow measuring section, the following derived quantities a) Cooling b) Cooling of motor bearings; and of gear box, bearing, oil cooler,

as indicated in Note 1 above are taken at a point should be added to the measured rate of flow : etc.

before

3.2.1.2 ov-

The outlet

volume

rate of flow has the following

value :

In this test code, this symbol may also designate the volume rate of flow in a given section*; it is the quotient of the mass rate of flow in this section by the density. (The section may be designated by the proposed subscripts. ) 3.2.2 Velocity of flow (v) -The the pipe cross-section* : mean velocity of flow equal to the volume rate of flow divided by

v =-- 9v A 3.2.3 Head *Attention

The energy

per unit weight
in this case

of fluid. qv may vary for different 5
reasons across the circuit.

is drawn

to the fact that

IS:10981 - 1983
3.2.3.1Reference plane - The horizontal plane through the centre of the circle described by the external point of the entrance edges of the impeller blades; in the case of double inlet pumps the plane should be taken through the higher centre. points The manufacturer on the pump. should indicate the position the level of this plane with respect to precise reference and the

3.2.3.2 The difference between level of the reference plane (z) is : a) positive, b) negative,

of the horizontal

plane under consideration plane; plane. to atmospheric pressure,

if the plane in question `f the plane in question I ( PC, ) -The pressure

is above the reference is below the reference effective pressure, is :

3.2.3.3 Gauge pressure head corresponding a) positive, b) negative, to this

relative

The

is $.

Its value

if this pressure if this pressure head-The

is greater

than the atmospheric

pressure; pressure. of the liquid in movement. It is

is less than the atmospheric kinetic energy per unit
P -2g

3.2.3.4 Velocify expressed by :

weight

where v is the mean velocity 3.2.3.5 Total head -

of the liquid

in the section

considered,

In any section, z + +

the total + -C2g

head is given by :

This is related

to atmosphere. z+

The absolute _P- +_P!L+ Pg Pg

total head in any section y' 2g section

is given by :

3.2.3.6 /n/ef fofal head ( HI)

-

The total head in the inlet

of the pump :

3.2.3.7

Outlet

total head ( Ha ) -

The total Pzg

head in the outlet

section

of the pump :

Ha=za+~
3.2.3.8 Pump fofal head ( H 1 inlet total head. The algebraic

+x

2g between the outlet total head and the

difference

H=Ha-HI If the variation of density of the pumped liquid is not significant,

If the variation mean value ( Pm )

of density

of the

pumped
Pm=

liquid p,+p, 2

is significant,

p should

be replaced

by the

3.2.3.9

Specific

energy ( Y) -

The energy

per unit mass of liquid. Y=gH

It is given by the equation

3.2.3.10 Loss of total head af inlet (HII ) - The difference the measuring point, or possibly of the liquid without velocity head of the liquid in the inlet section of the pump. 6

between the total head of the liquid at in the suction chamber, and the total

IS:10981-1983
between the total head of the 3.2.3.11 Loss of total head on delivery ( Hjr ) - The difference in the outlet section of the pump, and the total head of the liquid at the measuring point.

liquid

3.2.3.12 Nef posifive suction head (NPSH) -The total inlet head, pluse the head corresponding to the atmospheric pressure, minus the head corresponding to the vapour pressure: NPSH=Hl+ Thus NPSH, as well as inlet make a distinction between: -the NPSH required manufacturer; -the NPSH available at given total flow 2 head, -2 is referred to the reference for a given plate. pump It is necessary specified to

and speed

of rotation

by the

by the installation; This value is that which causes in the first -the NPSH determined during the cavitation test. stage a drop of (3+K/2) percent in total head of the first stage or in efficiency at a given rate of flow, or in a rate of flow or efhciency at a given total head. (NPSH) 1. when the

for the same flow determined

Subscripts may be used to differentiate these quantities [ for example required value is concerned and (NPSH) when the avaiiable value is concerned 3.2.4 Power 3.2.4.1 Pump power oufpuf the pump: 3.2.4.2 Pump power input 3.2.4.3 Mofor power input 3.2.5 Efficiency 3.2.5.1 3.2.5.2 3.2.5.3 ( P, ) The power transferred Pu=qmgH=qmY=pqvgH The power measured The power absorbed to the liquid

at its passage

through

( Ps ) ( Pgr ) -

at the pump cooling. by the pump driver.

pump efficiency (7 1 =
Transmission efficiency

pump power output input
pump

power

(shafting,

coupling,

gears, etc 1 ( rlht 1 =

pump power input power at motor s,.,aft

Motor

efficiency ( ?mot ) K The type

power at motor shaft motor power input pump power output
motor power input

3.2.5.4 Overall efficiency 3.2.6 Type number formula*:

( 7gr 1 = ( r )vnt Ylmot = number,

a dimensionless 27~n ( 4'v Is w-d

quantity,

is defined

by the following

K= where qlp is the volume

rate of flow per eye, and

H' is the head per stage.
Note - Attention is drawn rate, which is not in conformity the maximum efficiency. to the fact that, in this standard, the type number applies to the guaranteed with common practice whare K is calculated from the flow rate corresponding flow to

3.2.7 Oscillations - Short-period reading is being made. 3.2.6 Variafions 4. Guarantees 4.1 Subjects manufacturer Those changes

fluctuations

about a mean value

during

the time

that

a single

in value which

take place between

one reading

and the next.

of Guarantees - One or more of the following quantities under the specified conditions and speed of rotation: rate qvo, or flow

may be guaranteed rate of the pump

by the qvg at

a) total head of the pump ( HG ), at the agreed flow the agreed total head Ho ( see 9,4.1 ); *This formula is the same as the bask
formula K = WQ'V a YR2 .

7

IS : 10981 - 1983
b) power input or efficiency point; c) NPSH required d) other points or increased of the pump or combined pump-motor unit at guaranteed greHG

by the pump at the agreed flow rate gvo;

of the gvH curve may be indicated by guaranteeing the total head at a reduced flow rate, in which case separately agreed increased tolerances will apply. in the contract, are stated, it shall be taken that

4.2 Ofher Condifions for Guarantee - Unless otherwise specified that the following conditions apply to the guarantee values: a) unless the chemical and physical properties of the liquid the guarantee points apply to clean cold water; b) the relation between the guarantee values performance under other liquid conditions

it shall

be taken

under clean cold water conditions shall be agreed in the contract;

and the likely

c) guarantees shall apply only to the pump as tested by the methods ments specified, in this standard; and d) the pump manufacturer shall not be responsible for the specification

and in the test arrangeof the guarantee point.

4.3 Fulfilmenf of Guarantee - The nominated guarantee for any quantity shall be deemed to have been met if, when tested according to this standard, the measured performance falls within the tolerance specified in 9 for the particular quantity. Other points on the Q& curve shall not be guaranteed unless the points and tolerances for fulfilment of guarantee are agreed in the contract. 5. Tests 5.1 Organization of Tesfs or

5.1.1 P/ace of testing - Acceptance tests shall be carried out at the manufacturer's works, alternatively at a place to be mutually agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 5.1.2 Time purchaser. of testing The time of testing shall be mutually agreed by the manufacturer time shall be allowed

and the for pre-

When tests are not carried out in the manufacturer's works, liminary adjustments by both the manufacturer and the installer.

depend not only on the quality of the measuring instru5.1.3 Staff - Accurate measurements ments used but also on the ability and skill of the persons operating and reading the measuring devices during the tests. The staff entrusted with effecting the measurements should be selected just as carefully as the instruments to be used in the test. Specialists with adequate experience in measuring operations in general shall be charged with operating and reading complicated measuring apparatus. Reading simple measuring devices may be entrusted to such helpers who, upon short prior instruction, can be assumed to effect the readings with proper care and the accuracy required. A chief of tests possessing adequate experience in measuring operations shall be appointed, Normally, when the test is carried out at the manufacturer's works, the chief of tests is a staff _ member of the manufacturing firm. All persans charged with effecting the measurements are subordinated during the tests to the chief of tests, who conducts and supervises the measurement, reports on test conditions and the results of the tests and then drafts the test report. All questions arising in connection with the measurements and their execution are subject to his decision. The parties concerned shall provide all assistance that thechief of tests considers necessary.

51.4 Test programme - Only the guaranteed operational data shall form the basis of the test; other data determined by measurement during the tests shall have merely an indicative ( informative ) function and it shall be so stated if they are included in the programme. for the selection and operation 5.1.5 Testing equipment - The chief of tests shall be responsible of measuring equipment. All of the measuring equimpent shall be covered by reports showing, by calibration or by comparison with other relevant Indian Standards, that it complies with the requirements of accuracy of measurements given in 5.4, These reports shall be presented, if required. 5.1.6 Tesf reporfs - All test records and record and by the representatives of both the purchaser provided with a copy of all records and charts. 8 charts shall be initialled by the chief of tests and the manufacturer, each of whom shall be

IS : 10981.1983
The evaluation of the test results, including graphical plotting of the pump perfomance curve, shall be made as far as possible while the tests are in progress and, in any case, before the installation and instrumentation are dismantled in order that suspect measurements can be repeated without delay. 5.2 Test Arrangements ( see Appendix A ) practical steps shall be taken to ensure that flow through

5.2.1 Standard test arrangements the measuring section shall result a) an axially b) a uniform c) freedom symmetric static from swirl

- All in:

velocity induced

distribution; and by the installation.

pressure

distribution;

Some methods below.

for ensuring

these

conditions under

for standard standard

test arrangements for

are suggested where the

Acceptance tests may be carried out type' number is less than or equal to 1'5.

test conditions

pumps

When the type number is greater than 1.5, it shall be agreed contractually that the results of such tests will be held to apply only to specified conditions. The purpose of such tests will be to provide an assurance that the pump will, if suitably installed, perform the specified duty. It is recommended that for standard test circuits leading from reservoirs with a free surface or from large stilling vessels in a closed circuit, the inlet straight length L shall be determined by the expression: L ---K-j-5 D where D is the pipe diameter. This expression is also valid for an arrangement that includes, at a distance L upstream, a simple medium-radius right angle bend that is not fitted with guide vanes. Under these conditions, flow straighteners are not necessary in the pipe between the bend and the pump. However, in a closed circuit where there is neither a reservoir nor a stilling vessel immediately upstream of the pump, it is necessary to ensure that the flow into the pump is free from swirl induced by the installation and has a normal symmetrical velocity distribution. Significant a) careful swirl design can be avoided by: upstream of the measurement to minimize section; their influence on tha

of the test circuit

b) judicious use of a flow straightener; and c) suitable arrangement of the pressure tappings measurement.

5.2.:! Simulated test arrangements - When pumps are tested under simulated site conditions, flow straighteners shall not be installed immediately before the pump. It is important that the characteristics of flow to the simulated circuit should be controlled; that the flow should, as far as possible, be free from significant swirl induced by the installation and have a symmetrical velocity distribution. If necessary, the velocity distribution of the flow into the simulated circuit shall in order to establish that the required flow be determined by careful pitot tube traverse, characteristics exist; if not, the required characteristics can be obtained by the installation of suitable means, such as the Zanker flow straightener ( Fig. 1 ); care shall be taken to ensure that the conditions of test will not be affected by the high, irrecoverable pressure lcsses associated with efficient straightening devices. 5.2.3 Pumps tested with fittings on a combination of a pump, and If specified in the contract, standard tests can be carried out

a) associated fittings at the final site installation; b) an exact reproduction thereof: or c) fittings introduced for testing purposes and taken as forming 5.2.4 to 5.2.6 ). Connection on the accordance with 6.2.2. inlet and outlet sides of the whole

part of the pump itself shall

( see in

combination

be made

9

IS:10981 -1983
Measurements shall then be taken in accordance with 5.3.2.2 and 5.3.2.3.

of a 5.2.4 Pumping installation under submerged conditions - Where a pump, or a combination pump and its fittings, is tested or installed in conditions where the standard pipe connection on either inlet or outlet as described in 6.2.2 cannot be made owing to inaccessibility oi submergence, measurements shall be taken in accordance with 6.2.1.6. be tested 5.2.5 Borehole and deep well pumps - Borehole and deep well pumps cannot usually with their complete lengths of delivery main and consequently the loss of head in the portions omitted; therefore the power absorbed by any shafting therein cannot be measured. Any thrust bearing would also be more lightly loaded during the test than it would be in the final installation ( see 6.2.1.6 ). the priming ability of self-priming pumps shall always 5.2.6 Self-priming pumps - In principle be verified at the contractual static suction head with the attached inlet piping equivalent to that in the final installation. When the test cannot be carried out in the described manner, the test arrangement to be used shall be specified in the contract. 5.3 Test Conditions of the test shall 5.3.1 Execution of tests - The duration results having regard to the degree of accuracy to be achieved. Where multiple readings at unequal intervals of time. are taken to reduce be sufficient to obtain consistent be taken to make between

the error margin

( see 5.3.2 ), they shall

All measurements shall be made under steady conditions of operation but a decision measurements when such conditions cannot be obtained shall be a matter of agrsement the parties concerned. Verification of the guaranteed point shall be obtained by recording measurements closely and evenly grouped around the guaranteed point, and 1'1 gva.

at least five points of for example between 0.9

Where, for special reasons, it is necessary to determine performance over a range of operating conditions, a sufficient number of measurements points shall be taken to establish the performance within the limits of error stated in 5.4 ( see also Appendix B ). 5.3.2 Stability of operation

5.3.2.1 Permissible oscillations in readings and use of damping - Where the construction or operation of a pump is such that oscillations of great amplitude are present, measurements may be carried out by means of an instrument capable of providing an integration over at least one The calibration of such an instrument shall comply with the complete cycle of oscillation. provisions of the appropriate clauses. 5.3.2.2 Restricted lines where necessary
TABLE 4

damping may be introduced in measuring instruments and their connecting to reduce the amplitude of oscillations to within the values given in Table 4.
PERMISSIBLE OF MEAN VALUE AMPLITUDE OF SPECIFICATIONS OF QUANTITY BEING MEASURED 5.3.2.1 and 5.3.2.3.1 ) Maximum Permisslbie of Oscillations f It1 rate, the maximum permissible amplitude 3 percent Amplitude AS A PERCENTAGE

MAXIMUM

( Clauses Measured Quantity

Rate of flow 7
Head Torque Power J Speed of rotation Note 1 -When of the oscillations using a differential pressure device to measure flow of the observed differential head may be 6 percent.

Note 2 -In the case of inlet total pressure head and outlet total pressure head measurement, permissible amplitude oscillation is to be calculated individually on the pump total head.

the maximum

Where it is possible that damping will significantly affect the accuracy of the readings, the tests shall be repeated using a symmetrical and linear damping device, for example a capillary tube. 11

IS : 10981. 1983
5.3.2.3 Number of sets of observations

test conditions, only one set of 5.3.2.3.1 Steady conditions - In steady and well controlled readings of individual quantities will be recorded for the specified test conditions. This set shall be recorded only after the observers have been satisfied that the oscillations have settled down within the limits specified in Tables 4 and 5. 5.3.2.3.2 Unsteady conditions rise to doubts concerning the accuracy In such cases where the unsteadiness of test conditions of the tests, the following procedure shall be followed. gives

Repeated readings of the measurements shall be made at the guaranteed point, only speed and Throttle valve water level, gland, balance water, temperature being allowed to be controlled. The difference between these repeated readings of settings, etc, shall be left completely unaltered. the same quantities will be a measure of the unsteadiness of the test conditions, which are at least partly influenced by the pump under test as well as the installation. A minimum of three sets of readings shall be taken at the guaranteed point and the value of each separate reading and of the efficiency derived from each set of readings shall be recorded. The percentage difference between the largest and smallest values of each quantity shall not be greater than that given in Table 5. It will be noted that a wider tolerance is permited if the number of readings is increased up to the maximum requirement of nine readings. These tolerances are designed to ensure that the errors due to scatter, taken together with the systematic error limits given in Table 6, will result in overall measurement errors not greater than those given in Table 7.
TABLE 5 LIMITS OF VARIATION QUALITY ( BASED BETWEEN REPEATED MEASUREMENTS OF THE SAME ON 95 PERCENT CONFIDENCE LIMITS )

Number of Sets of Readings

3 5 7 9

Maximum Permissible Difference Between Largest and Smallest Readings of Each Quantity, Percent A--_-----~ --Rate of Flow Head Speed of Rotation Torque Power 0'25 0'8 1.6 2-2 2.8 0'5 0'7 0'9

The arithmetic mean of all the for the purposes of the test.

readings

for each

quantity

shall

be taken as the actual

value

If the values given in Table 5 cannot be reached, the cause shall be ascertained, the conditions rectified and a new complete set of readings made, that is, all the readings in the original set shall be rejected. No reading(s) in the set of observations may be rejected because it lies outside the limits. In the case where the excessive variation is not due to procedure and cannot therefore be eliminated, the limits of error may be calculated 5.3.3 Speed of rotation during rotation and the test speed test ( see 4.1 ) -The of rotation may be difference expressed or instrumentation errors, by statistical analysis.

between the specified speed of as a percentage as follows:.

(
This shall be within the following 5.3.3.1 For flow rate and head 5.3.3.2 For pump efficiency From f

n-nllp nap

>

x 100

limits. From 2:: percent 20 percent of the specified of the specified value. value. between specified and test shall

For a combined motor-pump unit, the motor efficiency change speeds, shall be established at the time of agreeing the contract. The lower speeds be applied: * where `11 = efficiency at actual speed, 12 are also acceptable. -Ei The following formula

for efficiency

correction

IS : 10981-1983
efficiency at specified speed, specified speed, N1- actual test speed, and by test data, its value of exponent n = exponent established ne Ne -

is 0'17. the

5.3.3.3 For ( NPSH ) fesfs - From f 20 percent provided that the pump flow rate during test lies within 0.50 and 1'20 of the flow rate corresponding to the maximum eficiency,

Note -For tests conforming to the requirements of 7.1.1.1, the variation mentioned in 5.3.3.3 may always be allowed. For tests conforming to the requirements of 7.1.1.2, it may be allowed for pumps with type numbers less than or equal to 2; for pumps with type numbers greater than 2, agreement between the parties concerned is required.

may be obtained, among other methods, by throttling 5.3.4 Control of head - The test conditions in either or both the inlet and outlet pipes. When throttling in the inlet pipe is used, due consideration shall be given to the possibility of cavitation or of air coming out of the water, which might affect the operation of the pump ( see 7.1.2 ) the flow measuring device ( see 6.1.3 ) or both. errors laid down in this standard are 5.4 Accuracy of Measurement - The limits of measurement those which refer to measurements taken and to quantities calculated therefrom; they apply to the maximum permissible discripanciesbe tween measured and actual performance ( see 9.4 ). For the purpose of this standard, the tolerance on the measurement of a variable is defined as twice the standard deviation of this variable. The tolerance shall be calculated and indicated as such for any mea,surement in accordance with this standard. When partial errors constituting and numerous, and have a gaussian less than the tolerance. the tolerance are independent distribution, there is 95 percent one from probability the other, are small that the true error is

Any device or method which by calibration or comparison has been- demonstrated to be capable of measuring with systematic errors not exceeding the limits given in Table 7 may be used. The devices or methods shall be agreed upon by both the parties concerned. If the recommendations concerning the systematic errors and those concerning the actual test procedure are followed, limits of error will not exceed those given below.
TABLE 6 PERMISSIBLE SYSTEMATIC ( Clauses Measured Quantity Rate of flow Pump total head Pump power input Electrical power input ( for overall efficiency tests Speed of rotation 1 ,> ) J ERRORS

of instruments as given in Table 6 it shall be assumed that the overall

OF MEASURING

INSTRUMENTS

5.3.2.3.2 and 5.4 ) Permissible f f f Limit, percent 1'5 1'0 0'35

TABLE

7

MAXIMUM ( Clauses

LIMITS 5.3.2.3.2

OF OVERALL and 5.4 )

ERROR

Quantity Rate of
flow

Permissible
f

Limit, percent 2.0

Pump total Pump power

head input tests

1 f ) 1 f i f 0'5 2'5 2% 1'5

E.lectrical power input (for overall efficiency Speed of rotation

Overall efficiency ( computed from the rate of flow, total head and electrical power ) Pump efficiency

13

IS:

10981-1983

6. Procedure for Measurement of Rate of Flow, Head, Speed of Rotation and Power Input 6.1 Measurement of Flow Rate 6.1.1 Weighing tank method - This method is capable only of measuring the mean values of the flow rate during the period concerned. It is subject to the errors of the weighing, of. the time-measuring apparatus employed, of the time taken for the diversion of the flow into and from the weighing tank and those involved in the determination of density. during the measuring period, the flow being diverted Note - In the case where two tanks are used alternately
from one to the other, be taken into account, only the times of initial diversion not the times of the intermediate into and final diversion from diversions from tank to tank. the measuring system are to

method, is only 6.1.2 Volumetric tank method - This method, as in the case of the weighing capable of measuring the mean value of the flow rate during the period concerned. In every case a leakage test of the tank shall be carried out and correction made for leakage, if necessary. Where possible, initial calibration shall be carried out by weighing a liquid of known density into the measuring tank. Outdoor tanks should be adequately sheltered so that the level and the level-measuring devices are not disturbed by wind or rain. In the case of big outdoor tanks the method is in general subject to errors in measurement of levels which are not stationary and which may be non-uniform. In such a case the levels shall be simultaneously measured within stilling tubes, at not fewer than four widely-separated positions within the tank. Water levels may be measured with hook gauges, float gauges, piezometer or other instr uments capable of maintaining the required accuracy. 6.1.3 Orifice plates, venturi tubes and nozzles - The measurement of flow rate may be carried out using devices designed and installed in accordance with relevant part of IS : 2952 ` Recommendation for methods of measurement of fluid flow by means of orifice plate and nozzles ' for orifice plates and nozzles and relevant part of IS : 4477 ` Method of measurement of fluid flow by Minimum straight lengths required upstream means of venturimeters ' for venturi tubes. from the pressure difference device, especially, are given in Table 1 of IS : 2952 ( Part 1 )-I964 in the case of orifice plates and nozzles and in Table 1 of IS : 4477 ( Part 1 )-I967 in the case of venturi tubes. For the purpose of this standard the pump will be considered to cause a flow disturbance equivalent to a single 90" bend lying in the same plane as the pump volute or the last stage of a multistage pump or the outlet bend of the pump. Care shall be taken to ensure that neither cavitation, nor air is present in the flow measuring devices. Special care should be taken to ensure that the indications of the device are not affected The presence of air can usually be detected by by air coming out of solution at the control valve. operating the air vents on the measuring device. It shall be possible at any moment to check the equipment for differential pressure measurement using liquid column or dead weight manometers. 6.1.4 Other flow measurement devices-Some other methods, such as electromagnetic flowmeters or ultrasounds, etc, may be used only after mutual agreement between the parties conerned on the installation conditions and obtainable accuracy. 6.2 Measurement of Head 6.2.1 Pump total head 6.2.1.1 The pump total head is calculated in accordance with the definition given in 3.2.3.6. However, in certain cases the pump total head may be measured using one differential pressure device. This type of installation and the corresponding formulae are given in Fig. 6. When this is deemed preferable, the pump total head may be replaced by an expression giving the increase in specific energy of the fluid conveyed by the pump ( Y = gH, see 3.2.3.9 ). The ` specific energy ' increase is obtained by multiplying both sides of the pump total head equation given above by g. 6.2.1.2 Friction losses at inlet and outlet - The guarantees under 4.1 refer to the pump inlet and outlet flanges, and the pressure measuring points are in general at a distance from these flanges ( see 5.2.1 to 5.2.4 and 6.2.2 ). It may be necessary to add to the measured pump total head, the head losses due to friction ( HJ1 and HJB ) between the measuring points and the pump flanges. Such a correction shall be applied only if: HJI = HJ~ > 0.002 H If the pipe between the measuring constant circular cross-section: points and the flanges is unobstructed, straight, and of

IS:10981-1983 The value of X shall be derived
. -&

from:
= 2 log10

where Re = k -=_ D P~f~~~~

ure number

)

( pure number)

Appendix C gives guidance on how to check whether a correction need be made, and on how to calculate the correction if necessary. If the pipe is other than unobstructed, straight, and of constant circular cross-section, the correlation to be applied shall be the subject of special agreement in the contract. 6.2.1.3 lnsfallations in accordance formulae are given in Fig. 2 and 3. with 52.1 These installations and the corresponding

6.2.1.4 Installations in accordance with 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 - Where a pump is tested in combination with fittings forming part of the site or test installation, the provisions of 6.2.1.3 shall be applied to the inlet and to the outlet flange of fittings and not to the inlet and outlet of the pump. This procedure debits against the pump all head losses caused by fittings on the inlet and outlet side. During the acceptance test, fhe pump shall be fitted with the pipe arrangements corresponding to the final arrangement at site. In this case the friction losses between the section for measuring the inlet pressure and the inlet flange as well as between the outlet flange and the section for measuring the outlet pressure, shall be determined in accordance with the method mentioned in 6.2.1.2 and added to the sum of the differences of positional head, of pressure head and of velocity head. 6.2.1.5 Pumps with inaccessible ends - In the inlet or outlet or both sides of the pump are inaccessible, the procedure prescribed below shall be followed in measuring the pump's head. Under certain circumstances, friction losses, such as mentioned in 6.2.1.2 and 6.2.1.4, shall be taken into account. 6.2.1.6 Installations corresponding formulae in accordance with are given in Fig. 4. 5.2.4 and 5.2.6 The installations and the

However, if the pump discharges equal to the positional head of the still gauge pressure head.

into a sump with a free surface the outlet total head is surface of the liquid into which the pump delivers plus the

The inlet total head is equal to the positional head with respect to the reference plane of the still surface of the liquid in which the pump is tested or from which it draws, plus the pressure head equivalent to the gauge pressure on that surface. outlet This assumption side. debits against the pump all losses caused by fittings on the inlet and the

6.2.1.6.1 Submersible pumps - If the outlet flange of this type is, for practical purposes, defined as placed at a certain distance from the pump proper, and is thus preceded by an outlet pipe. length and a bend(s) being always parts of the installation, the measurement of outlet head shall be made in accordance with 5.2.3. 6.2.1.6.2 Deep-we// pumps - In this case friction losses between the pressure measuring points and the inlet or outlet flanges, respectively, that may have to be taken into account, shall be determined in accordance with the method given in 6.2.1.2 and Appendix C. Friction losses at the inlet are primarily caused by resistance to flow within the inlet strainer, All of these head losses shall as far as possible be indicated in the foot valve, and the inlet pipe. the contract by the pump manufacturer if he supplies such accessories, or by the purchaser, if they are fitted by the latter. Should it prove impossible to submit such data, the purchaser and the manufacturer, prior to the acceptance test, shall arrive at an agreement concerning the flow resistance data to be applied. Friction losses at outlet result from resistance to flow within the column-pipe and the outlet bend. Since deep-well pumps in general are not tested with the entire stand pipe attached, unless the acceptance test is performed at site, the pipe friction losses in regard to the pump total head shall be estimated and declared by the manufacturer to his purchaser. Should it be considered necessary to verify the data indicated by an acceptance test at site, such a test shall be specified in the supply contract. For tests on installations conforming to the requirements of 5.2.3(a), 5.2.4 and 5.2.5, the guarantees also apply to fittings. 15

IS : 10981.1983
Tube containing Tube contaNning air

HI=&.,+k
_ pumped liquid

PMS (Za4 P3

-

za.1)

+

VS' %I
AIR

-

VENT

Tube containing manometric liquid

2 PIPE ( SEE

DIAMETERS 6.2.2 1

2 PIPE ( SEE

DIAMETERS 6.=-fl,H

AIR

VENT

PLANE

.

H, =-

PM1 Pl

(2,2 -z,.,)

+$

+ (z,., -4

a)

The pump inlet is under vacuum
;s':E'E6.121$ETERS ;i'

-

POSLTION

OF

b)

The pump inlet FIG. 2

is under pressure TEST OF A CENTRIFUGAL PUMP

The drawings BY MEANS

show the principles OF LIQUID COLUMN

but not full technical GAUGES

details.

16

`IS : 10981; 1983
REFERENCE PLANE OF

THE MANOMETER I ATMOSPHERIC h ...I. . . . .. Tube containing pumped liquid

a)

Arrangement for determining reference plane of Bourdon type gauge

Tube containing air

AIR VENT \ PRESSURE RE ADlNG P2

2 PIPE DIAMETERS ( SEE READING P1 6.2.2

1

PRESSURE

AIR VENT

\

\ `\. '

H, =--I--

Pl

Vl

2

P19

29

POSITION

OF REFE:;z/

`-w

b)

The pump inlet is under vacuum

PRESSURE

RE ADlNG

PI

2 PIPE DIAMETERS SEE 6.2.2 1

. / =/-

. /

c) The pump inlet is under pressure
FIG. 3 TEST OF A CENTRIFUGAL

The drawings PUMP BY MEANS

show the principles OF BOURDON

but not full

technical

details.

GAUGES

17

IS:10981-1983
Hl = 21
I

Hs = +

+I.+;

H = $-

+ zl.g + ;
-PRESSURE _/READING pz

PRESSURE /i7i?ADlN~ p2

L

i

REFERENCE
rLANC
_I ..I_

The drawings FIG. 4 MEASUREMENT

show the principles TOTAL HEAD

but not full technical H FOR VARIOUS TYPES

details. OF SUBMERGED PUMPS

OF PUMP

pressure tappings are to be provided symmetrically 6.2.2 Pressure fappings - Four static These tappings shall be disposed around the circumference of the inlet and of the outlet pipes. located at a distance of 2 pipe diameters upstream of the pump inlet flange when the length of this When pipe allows it and at a distance of 2 pipe diameters downstream of the pump outlet flange. the distance of 2 pipe diameters upstream cannot be reached ( for example, in the case of a rather short inlet bellmouth ) the available straight length shall be divided so as to take the best possible advantage of the local conditions between the upstream and downstream parts of the measuring section. The pressure tappings shall be connected through shut-off cocks to a ring manifold Of cross-sectional area not less than the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the tappings, so that the pressure from any tapping may be measured if required. Before making observations, the shall be taken at the normal test pressure with each individual tapping successively open, If one of the readings shows a difference of more than 0.5 percent of the condition of the pump. total head with respect to the arithmetical mean of the four measurements, or if it shows a deviation of more than once the velocity head in the measuring section, the cause of this spread shall be ascertained and the measuring conditions rectified before the proper test is started. Note -When
1 percent the same pressure tappings are used for of the NPSH value or once the dynamic head. NPSH measurements, this deviation shall not exceed

The inlet head shall be determined from the pressure head measured at the ring manifold, the positional head of the point of measurement and the velocity head calculated as though there were Appendix D covers corrections required if swirl exists. uniform velocity in the inlet pipe. The outlet head shall be determined from the pressure head measured at the ring manifold, the positional head of the point of measurement and the dynamic head calculated as though there were uniform velocity in the outlet pipe. Possible errors of measurement of local velocity distribution. of energy at discharge aie caused by swirl and/or variations

18

IS :10981-1983
Figures 2 to 6 show the application of U-tube and Bourdon type manometers to measure the head. Where single-leg manometers, Bourdon or pressure pressure head plus positional transducers are used, an allowance for the difference in altitude between the manometer reference plane and the mean height of the pressure tappings shall be added to the pressure head as read. Static pressure tappings shall comply with the requirements shown in Fig. 5 and shall from burrs and irregularities and flush with, and normal to, the inner wall of the pipe. be free

I > Pd where d = 2 to 6 mm or -!,6 FIG. 5 REQUIREMENTS

pipe diameter FOR STATIC

whichever HEAD

value

is less.

TAPPING

This equation is valid for pl= pI, which may be assumed for Class C tests. FIG. 6 DIRECT MEASUREMENT OF PUMP TOTAL HEAD

The diameter of the pressure tappings shall be between 2 and 6 mm or equal to one-tenth of The length of a pressure tapping hole shall not be less the pipe diameter, whichever is the less. than two and a half times its diameter. The bore of the pipe containing the tappings shall be clean, smooth and resistant to chemical reaction with the liquid being pumped. Any coating such as paint applied to the bore shall remain intact. If the pipe is welded longitudinally, the tapping hole shall be displaced as far as possible from the weld. Pipes connecting pressure tappings to possible damping devices ( see 5.3.2.1 and 5.3.2.2 ) and to instruments shall be at least equal in bore to the bore of the pressure tappings. The system shall be free from leaks. It is recommended that transparent tubing be used so as to allow determination of the amount of water or air in the tubing. 6.2.3 Instruments for pressure column distance measurement No calibration is required. shall be 1 mm.

6.2.3.1 Liquid
The minimum

manometers between

two scale graduations 19

IS : 10981- 1983
If possible, this is impossible the use of differential liquid attention shall be specially columns less than 50 mm high shall drawn to errors of measurement. by using one manometric tubes be avoided. in place If of

The length of the liquid column another or by an inclined manometer.

may be modified

liquid shall

For readings below 100 mm of liquid column, the bore of manometer least for mercury and 10 mm for water and other liquids. The cleanliness of the liquid variation of surface tension. The design of the manometers in the manometer shall shall be maintained errors

be 6 mm at errors due to

to avoid

be such that parallax

are minimized.

Water column manometers may be either open ended or closed with the air in the column connecting both limbs permit the differential head to be read on the scales. The use of the liquid reference shall be made. Connections between as shown diagrammatically column manometer is shown pressure

( for low pressure measurement only) compressed to the amount required to in Fig. 2 and 6 to which shall be made failure

diagrammatically

the pipes where in Fig. 2.

is measured

and the manometer

It is essential that there is no break in continuity ( for example, by air pockets through to vent properly ) of the water between the pipe and the reading surface in the. manometer.

the possibilities of the liquid column 6.2.3.2 Weight manometers - For pressures exceeding manometer, weight or piston manometer is of practical utility whether in its simple or differential form. The effective diameter de of the simple type manometer can be taken equal to the arithmetic mean of the pistion diameter dpr measured directly, and of the cylinder diameter dc; it can then be used for calculating pressures without further calibration if the following condition is satisfied before testing: s< 0.1 percent by adjusting rotational manometer

Friction between the piston and cylinder may practically be made zero movement of the piston to a speed at least equal to 30 rev)min.

It is desirable to check the weight manometer by comparison with a liquid column to determine the effective piston diameter in a pressure range to be as wide as possible.

For the meansurement of Similar principles apply to the differential type weight manometer. variable pressures it can be profitable to use a weight manometer mounted in series with a liquid column manometer or a special weight manometer in corporating a liquid column manometer. 6.2.3.3 Bourdon dial gauges - When this type of gauge is used for inlet and outlet pressure measurements to ascertain pump total head, it is recommended that the difference between two consecutive scale graduations be within l-5 and 3 mm for both measurements, and that this of these difference corresponds to not more than 5 percent of the pump total head. The calibration measuring devices shall be checked for each test, 6.2.3.4 Other types of manometer specifications given in 6.1.3, are met with. Other types of manometer may be used provided the

6.3 Measurement of the Speed of Rotation - The speed of rotation shall be measured by counting revolutions for a measured interval of time, by a direct indicating tachometer, a dynamo or a tachometric alternator, an optical counting and a frequency meter, or in the case of a pump driven by an ac motor, from observations of the mean frequency and motor slip data either directly measured ( for example, using a stroboscope ) or supplied by the motor manufacturer. Where the speed of rotation cannot be directly measured usually sufficient to check the frequency and voltage. ,( for example, immersed pump ),' it is

6.4 Measurement of Pump Power input -The, pump power input shall be derived from measurement of the speed of rotation and torque, or determined from measurements of the electrical power input to an electric motor of known efficiency, directly coupled to the pump. 6.4.1 Measurement of torque - Torque shall be measured meter, capable of complying with the requirements of 5.4. 20 by a .suitab'le dynamometer or a torque

IS : 10981 - 1983
6.4.2 Electric power measurements - Where the electrical power coupled directly to the pump is used as a means of determining following conditions shall be observed: a) the motor shall accuracy; and be operated only at conditions input to an electric motor the pump power Input, the is known with sufficient of

where the efficiency

b) motor efficiency shall IS : 4889-1968 ` Methods

be determined of determination

with the recommendations in accordance of efficiency of rotating electrical machines'.

The electric power input to the ac driving motor shall be measured by either the two-wattmeter or the three-wattmeter method. This allows using either single-phase wattmeters or a wattmeter measuring two or three phases simultaneously or integrating watt-hour-meters. In the case of a dc motor, either a wattmeter, or an ammeter and a voltmeter instruments for measuring for direct cutting electrical may be used. electrical indicating power instru-

The type and grade of accuracy of the indicating shall be in accordance with IS : 1248-1968 ` Specification ments ( first revision ) `.

Where the power input to an electric motor coupled to an intermediate gear, or the speed of rotation and torque measured by a dynamometer between gear and motor are used as a means for determining the pump power input, it shall be stated in the contract in what way the losses of the gear shall be determined. motor-pump units (for example, 6.4.3 Pumps with inaccessible ends - In the case of combined submersible pumps or monoset pump, or separate pump and motor with overall efficiency guarantee ), the power of the machine unit shall be measured at the motor terminals if accessible. When a submersible pump is involved, the measurement shall be effected at the incoming end of the cables; cable losses shall be taken into account and specified in the contract. The efficiency given shall be that of the combined unit proper, excluding the cable and the starter losses, 6.4.4 Deep-well pumps - In this case the power shafting and bearings shall be taken into account. absorbed by the thrust bearing and the vertical

Since deep-well pumps in general are not tested with the entire stand pipe attached, unless the acceptance test is performed at site, the thrust and vertical shaft bearing losses in regard to power and efficiency shall be estimated and stated by the manufacturer to his purchaser, 6.5 Measurement of Pumping Unit Overall EJfciency - To determine the efficiency of a pumping unit, only the power input and output are measured, with the driver working under conditions specified in the contract. In this test, the proportion of losses between driving agent and pump is not established, nor any losses associated with intermediate machinery, such as gear box or variable speed device. 7. Cavitation Testing to verify

a guaranteed NPSH, a test may be conducted 7.1 General - When the contract specifies that the NPSH required by the pump is equal to or less than the guaranteed NPSH. In no case shall the cavitation erosion during its service life, 7.1.1 Test fypes a) A check specified There

tests be used to check that the pump will be free from cavitation possible types of cavitation test: at the until

are two distinct

may be made simp,ly to show that the pump is sufficiently free of cavitation duty and NPSH. This type of test is described in 7.1.1.1. NpSH

b) In the other type, cavitation performance is explored more fully by reducing measurable effects are noted. This type of test is described in 7.1.1.2. 7.1.1.1 A test at thd.ip&ei rate and NPSH the pump is sufficiently free of cavitation at the specified `higher

flow

This test may be made simply duty and NPSH. of cavitation

to show that test at a

The pump meets the requirement to be free of the effects NPSH gives the same total head at the same rate of flow.

if another

7.1.1.2 During the cavitation test NPSH carried according fo 3.2.3.12 - A safety margin previously agreed will be added to the cavitation test NPSH. The pump meets the requirement if the NPSH resulting from the addition of the cavitation test NPSH, and the agreed safety margin is equal or less than the required NPSH. From this test the behaviour of the pump at various departures from the specified NPSH may be judged. When negotiating the safety margin, account 21

IS:10981-1983
shall be taken of the type of pump, of the number of stages, of the physical properties of the liquid to be pumped and of materials of construction and the operating conditions to be expected. 7.1.2 Methods of varying the NPSH

7.1.2.1 The pump is installed in a closed pipe loop ( Fig. 7 ) in which the pressure level or, by an alteration of temperatures, the vapour pressure may be varied without changing the pump head or rate of flow until cavitation occurs in the pump.
Cavitation in outlet valves may be required. and inlet regulating valves may make this test more difficult and special

Arrangements for cooling or heating the liquid in the loop may be needed in order to maintain the required temperature, and a gas separation tank may also be required. The tank shall be of sufficient size and so designed as t6 prevent the entrainment of gas in the pump inlet flow.

TO VACUUM OR PRESSURE CONTROL c

I

f-3
, /II\\

I II

SPRAY NOZZLE FOR ~-AERATING WATER

,8...\`\

T _
t
OTTLE
I-

FLOWMETER

THE SETTLING TANK MAY NOT BE NEEDED IF AIR CONTENT OF WATER IS CONTROLLABLE

VALVE

I I

COOLING HEATING

PUMP UNDER TEST MAY BE PUT IN SYPHON IF (NPSHI W IS NEEDED

<

Note - Cooling by means of a coil and an extraction of heated water. The drawing shows the principle

may be replaced by an injection
technical details.

of cool water above the liquid free surface

but no full

FIG. 7

CAVITATION

TESTS

-

VARIATION

OF ( NPSH ) BY MEANS OF A CLOSED LOOP

De-aeration of water used practice with de-aerated water. Stilling tank. screens

for a cavitation

test

is necessary

if the pump

is to be used

in

may be needed

if `;

> 0'25 m/s,

where A is the cross-sectional

area of the

7.1.2.2 The pump draws liquid from a sump in which the level of the free be adjusted through a pipe showing no cross-sectional restriction ( Fig. 8 ). 22

liquid

surface

may

IS:10981 -1983

TO THROTTLE FLOWMETER

i -

-t
T -. ----

F -

-

--

.

~
The drawing FIG. 9 CAVITATION TESTS shows

1
the principle but no full technical BY CONTROL details. OF LIQUID LEVEL AT INLET

VARIATION

OF (NPSH)

7.1.2.3 The pressure of the liquid entering installed in the inlet pipe at the lowest practical

the pump is adjusted level ( Fig. 9 ).

by means of a throttle

valve

The cavitation induced by the throttle valve can sometimes be avoided by using two or more throttle valves mounted in series or by directly discharging the throttle valve into a closed vessel, or a large diameter pipe interposed between the throttle and the pump inlet. Baffles and a means for extracting air from such a vessel may be needed, especially when the NPSH is low.

The drawing FIG. 9 CAVITATION TESTS -

show the principles VARIATION

but not full technical ) BY MEANS

details. VALVE AT INLET

OF ( NPSH

OF A THROTTLE

When the throttle valve is to be partially closed and it is situated at a distance less than 12 inlet diameters from the pump inlet flange, it is necessary to make sure that the pipe is full of liquid at the position of the inlet pressure tappings. 7.2 Determination of NPSH Required by the Pump - Tests described in 7.1.1.2 can be conducted by any of the methods indicated in Fig. 7 to 9. It is possible to vary two control parameters and thus keep flow rate constant during a test, but this is a usually more difhcult (see also Fig. IO). 7.3 Limits of Error in Deferminafion of ( NPSH) - The maximum limits of error concerning NPSH measurements shall be assumed to be 3'0 percent of the measured NPSH, or 0'15 m, whichever is greater, provided that the measurements are made with a liquid column manometer. 23

Type of Installation Independent variable

Open Sumr

Open Sump

Closed Loop

Closed Sump or Loop Temperature (vapour pressure ) Outlet

Open Sump

Open Sump

Closed

Loop

`Open Sump

Closed

Loop

Inlet throttle valve

Water

level

Reference pressure

throttle

valve

Inlet throttle valve Flow rate

Pressure the tank Flow rate

in

Water level

Temperature ( vapour pressure ) Flow rate

Constant

Outlet throttle valve Head, flow rate, NPSH, water level

Inlet and outlet throttle valves Head flow rate, NPSH

Inlet and outlet throttle valves

Inlet

throttle

valve

Flow rate

Quantities the variation of which is dependent on control

Head, flow rate, NPSH

after onset of 1 cavitation

Head, level

flow

rate, NPSH,

water

Head NPSH, Outlet throttle outlet throttle valve ( for valve ( for constant constant flow flow rate ), rate, when head, NPSH head begins to drop )
H

NPSH, head, outlet throttle valve

NPSH, head, outlet throttle valve (for constant flow rate, when head begins to drop )

I
Head characteristic curves various flow rate and NPSH
HI HI Hk

p3*

!$H,/lOO

I

q", = CONS7

qv, :CONST

> qvi

I

III

q,,.CONST

> qvl

I I 1 1

0 ; I I

1---c 6 1 k (NPSHI MEASURED

k

- -----_

_ ----

NPSH

Charact-

4")
FIG, IO r,qETHQDS OF DETERMINING REQUIRED (NPSH) for a H/i-/=(3+x

1%

IS:10981-1983
The case of tests with liquids special care in the contract. at high temperature or near their critical points shall be studied

with

7.4 Measurement of Pump Head, Out/et Flow Rate, Speed of Rotation, Power Input ( if Necessary 1 of 6 regarding the measurement of head, outlet rate of and Vapour Pressure - The requirements flow, speed of rotation and power input shall also apply during cavitation tests. If the test conditions are so unsteady as to require repeated readings, variations of NPSH are permitted up to a maximum of l-5 times the values given for head in Table 5, or O-15 m, whichever is greater. Particular care is needed to ensure that in the flow measurement cavitation dose not affect the accuracy of the flowmeter. It is also necessary to take care to avoid the ingress of air through joints and glands. The vapour pressure of the test liquid entering the pump shall be determined with sufficient accuracy to comply with 7.3. When the vapour pressure is derived from standard data and the measurement of the temperature of the liquid entering the pump, the necessary accuracy of temperature measurement may have to be demonstrated. The active element of a temperature-measuring probe shall be not less than one-eighth of the inlet pipe diameter from the wall of the inlet pipe. If the immersion of the temperature measuring element in the inlet flow is less than that required by the instrument manufacturer, then a calibration at that immersion depth may be required. Care shall be taken to ensure that temperature measuring pipe do not influence the measurements of inlet pressure. probes inserted into the pump inlet

8. Tests on Pumps for Liquids other than Clean Cold Water -The performance of a pump may Although it is not possible to give vary substantially with the nature of, the liquid being pumped. general rules whereby performance with clean cold water can be used to predict performance on dnother liquid, it is often desirable for the parts to agree on empirical rules to suit the particular circumstances and test the pump with clean cold water. of the water corresponding to what 8.1 Characteristics of ` Clean Cold Water `- The characteristics is called in this standard ` clean cold water ' shall be within the limits indicat (Dd in Table 8.
TABLE Temperature 8 SPECIFICATION OF

` CLEAN

COLD

WATER' Max 40�C 1.75 x 10-s rn2l.s 1 050 kg/m3

Characteristic

Temperature
Kinematic viscosity Mass density Non-absorbent Dissolved free solid content

2'5 kg/ma 50 kglms

solid content

The total corresponding:

dissolved

and free gas content and temperature

of the water

shall

not

exceed

the

situation

volume

a) to the pressure b) to those existing

in the pump sump for an open circuit, loop.

and

in the tank for a closed

8.2 Characteristics of Liquids for which Clean Cold Water Tests are Acceptable - Pumps for liquids other than clean cold water may be tested for head, flow rate and efficiency, with clean cold water*, if the liquid is within the specifications in Table 9.
TABLE Characteristics Kinematic viscosity Mass density Non-absorbent free solid content of Liquids 10 x 10-s m%/s, Max 450 to 2 000 kg/ms 5.0 kg/ms, Max 8 CHARACTERISTICS OF LIQUIDS

*The usual NPSH curves of pump manufacturers values are always given for clean cold water.

are established

using

clean

cold

water

and the

required

NPSH

25

IS:10981

-1983
volume

The total dissolved and free gas content of the liquid shall not exceed the saturation corresponding: a) to the pressure and temperature in the pump sump for an open circuit, and b) to those existing in the tank for a closed loop.

Tests on pumps for liquids other than those specified above shall be subject to special agreement. In the absence of a special agreement cavitation tests shall be carried out with clean cold Attention is drawn to the fact that the results may be affected by this procedure when the water. liquid to be pumped is not clean cold water. 9. Analysis of Tests quantities in 6. required to verify the characteristics

9.1 Test Data Required for the Analysis -The guaranteed by the manufacturer are given in 4.1. Methods for measuring these quantities

are given

9.2 Translation of the Test Results to the Guarantee Basis-Such translation serves to determine whether the guarantee would have been fulfilled if the tests had been concluded under the same conditions as those on which the guarantee is based. 9.2.1 Translation of the test results into data based on the specified speed of rotation of frequency All test data obtained at the speed of rotation, in deviation from the specified speed of rotation nap do not exceed the permissible variations stated in 5.3.3, the measured data on the discharged flow rate qv the total head H, the power input P, the net positive suction head NPSH and the efficiency q can be translated as follows:
QTO-

qv nsp n

( >

no = n If the deviations in speed of rotation from the specified speed of rotation missible variations stated in 5.3.3 it will be necessary to stipulate the formula test results to the basis of the specified speed of rotation. nsp exceed the perfor translating the

In the case of combined motor-pump units or where the guarantees are with respect to an agreed frequency and voltage instead of an agreed frequency and voltage instead of an agreed speed ( see 4.1 ), the flow rate, pump total head, power input, and efficiency data are subject to the above-mentioned translation laws, provided that n sp is replaced by the frequency fsp and n by the frequency f. Such translation, however, shall be restricted to the cases where the frequency during the acceptance test varies by no more than 1 percent from the frequency prescribed for the characteristics under guarantee. If the voltage used in the acceptance test is no more than 5 percent above or below the voltage on which the guaranteed characteristics are based, the other operational data require no change. If the above-mentioned tolerances, that is 1 percent for frequency exceeded, it will be necessary for the purchaser and the manufacturer and 5 percent for voltage, to arrive at an agreement. are

at a high NPSH 9.2.2 Tests made with NPSH different from that guaranteed - Pump performance cannot be accepted ( after correction for speed of rotation within the permitted limits of 5.3.3.2 ) to, indicate performance at a lower NPSH. Pump performance at a low NPSH can be accepted after correction for speed the permitted limits of 5.3.3.2, to indicate performance at a higher NPSH provided of cavitation has been checked in accordance with 7.1.1.1. of rotation within that the absence

is inevitably subject to inaccuracies, even if the 9.3 Measuring Inaccuracies - Every measurement measuring procedure and the instruments used, as well as the analysis directives, fully comply with When comparing the test results with the guaranteed characteristics, prevailing acceptance rules. The fact should be stressed that the these inaccuracies shall be given adequate consideration. with all measure-term ' measuring inaccuracies ' merely covers the errors that are unavoidable ments; they refer in no way to the pump and the guaranteed characteristics. The maximum permLssible limits of overall error for the quantities used in Class B measurements are defined in Table 7.. 26

IS : 199819 1983
9.4 Verification of Guarantee

9.4.1 Curves q, H and qg - The guarantee points qvHa and qvQylo are plotted on a graph and a continuous curve is then drawn through the measured points qvH and another through the points ovq of which qv is measured and q is calculated ( Fig. 11 ). If the test is made at a value of speed that is different from that specified as relevant to the particular guaranteed values, the test values shall be corrected to the specified speed of rotation in accordance with 9.2.1. Similarly, if the test is made at a value of frequency different from that relevant to the particular guaranteed values, the tests shall be corrected to the specified frequency. Tolerances f Xq, and XH shall be applied to the guaranteed duty point qvoHa. These tolerances include the maximum permissible limits of overall error e pV and eH ( see Table 7 ) and the constructional tolerances. In the absence be taken: of a specific agreement as to the values xg, = & 0.04 xlr = zt 0'02 If the guaranteed point ties at a vertical from the test curve ( see Fig. 11 ), the following distance f AH and shall be evaluated: a horizontal distance . f Aqv to be

used, the following

values

may

(&J+(!+$+v)1

If the amount is greater than or equal to 1 the guarantee condition will be deemed to have been met; but if the total amount is less than 1, the guarantee condition has not been achieved.
Note - This quantity expresses the fact that there is at least one point of the test Which the eentre is the guaranteed duty point and the semi-axes the limiting errors: curve Within an ellipse Of

' qvaxqv' and `Hgx H'
This, however, does not allow to check that a given flow rate azgiven head H is obtained for the guaranteed flow rate qva.

qv is obtained for the guaranteed
imply that:

head Ho nor that

It should actually

be noted that checking flow rate

this relationship

does not necessarily

a) for the guaranteed b) for the guaranteed

qvG, a head H is obtained such that:
H~-&JXH~H<H~+&IXH

head Ha a flow rate

qv is obtained such that:
Qva x cv <Qv< 9vo + qra x

Qva -

qv

Ii

GUARANTEED

DUTY

Po'NT

q,,ll,

FIG. 11

CURVE

qv H FOR VERIFICATION 27

OF GUARANTEE

IS:10981 -1983
9.4.2 Efficiency - The guaranteed efficiency shall be checked for the duty point as defined by the point of intersection of curve +/-/ with a straight line passing through the guaranteed duty point The efficiency at this point shall be read on the qvq curve versus gVoHo and the zero of gJ-/ axes. the corresponding abscissa. The efficiency For combined These at the point of intersection motor-pump units this value shall be of at least 0,972 of that specified. errors ( see Table 7 ). is 0.975.

values take into account

the measuring

the range Q"O f X,, Ha f XH defined 9.4.3 Pump power input - The pump power input within in 9.4.1, shall not exceed that agreed between the manufacturer and purchaser at the time of contract. This value applies to the conditions of use of the pump as specified in the contract. gland Such an arrangement may have to take into account different and seal torques between works test and site operation. transmission losses and different

9.5 Test Report -After actual scrutiny, the test results shall be summarized in a report, that is signed by the chief of tests alone; or, together, by him and representatives of the manufacturer and of the purchaser. All parties to the contract completion of the contract. The test report should b) Manufacturer's c) Guaranteed d) Specification e) Description data; f ) Observed g) Evaluation h) Conclusions: 1) comparison of the test results with the guarantees; certain specific or should
decision whether

shall

receive

a copy of the report information: number, conditions

as an essential

condition

for the

contain

the following test;

a) Place and date of acceptance characteristics of the pump's of the test readings: and analysis

name, type of pump, serial and operational drive;

and possibly during

year of construction; test; calibration

the acceptance used including

procedure

and the measuring

apparatus

of test results;

and

2) determination whether the guarantees covering only partly fulfilled or not fulfilled at all; 3) recommendation what conditions; whether and the
are

areas were completely be rejected and

or

pump
fully

can be accepted
satisfied the final

under

NoteIf the guarantees or not is up to the purchaser.

not

the pump can be accepted

4) statements arising were made.

out

of

action

taken

in connection

with

any special

agreements

that E,

The pump test sheet `SI' conversion F and G respectively.

factors

and check list pro forma are given in Appendices

APPENDIX ( CIause 5.2 )
PUMPING INSTALLATION UNDER

A

NON-STANDARD

CONDITIONS conditions pump, not or where the pump

A-l. Where it is impracticable to test a pump in accordance with the standard test specified in 5.2, or where alternatively it is required to ascertain the performance of a under standard conditions, but under the conditions in which it will work when installed, it is desired to test the performance of a pumping installation including items other than itself, then the following decisions shall be made and recorded with the test results: a) The precise range of the items to be included
is involved, whether

in the installation
the consumption

to be tested.
of each individual item is or is not

auxiliary plant Note -Where to be debited to the installation.

28

IS : 10981-1983
b) The exact positions in the proposed difference ) are to be measured. c) The point in the circuit, the flow of layout at which inlet head and outlet head ( or their

past which energy

is to be credited

to the installation. electric, fuel, steam,

d) The nature of the supply hydraulic or pneumatic ). e) The position, f) or positions,

( for example, of energy

mechanical,

at which

the supply

is to be measured.

The method as laid down in the foregoing specification which is to be used for hydraulic measurements; the method as laid down in other relevant Indian Standards to be used for measurement of power, fuel, etc, both quantitative and, where necessary, qualitative; the method of measurement to be used where no Indian Standard exists. the conditions pertaining during the tests may vary from into the specified the dura-

g) The extent to which conditions.

h) Where lubricating oil or other consumable stores methods of measurement to be used for these. j) The proposed date(s), tion and the frequency

are to be taken

consideration, their

usually referred to the date of installation, with which readings are to be taken.

of the tests,

APPENDIX

B

( Clause 5.3.1 )
COSTS AND REPETITION OF TESTS

8-O. Matters of a purely commercial nature, such as the cost of the tests are not included in the scope of this Indian Standard and shall be made the subject of special agreements between the parties concerned. 8-l. Costs acceptance of Acceptance Tests and Special Tests - It is recommended tests and special tests be clearly stated in the contract. that the costs of

8-2. Repetition of TestsIn case of doubt as to the correctness or adequate accuracy of the measurement data obtained, both the manufacturer and the purchaser are entitled to demand that the test be repeated. Should the new measurement fail to justify the doubts expressed, the party demanding the renewed test shall assume the cost of repetition.

APPENDIX

C

( CIauses6.2.1.2 and 6.2.1.6.2)
FRICTION C-l. The formula calculation, which applied. given would LOSSES

in 6.2.1.2 for calculating head loss due to friction involves a lengthy lead only in many cases to the conclusion that a correction need not be

C-2. The chart in Fig, 12 may be used as a preliminary check as to whether be made. It applies to straight steel pipes of constant circular cross-section, Outlet and inlet pipes are assumed of equal diameter, and measuring points and downstream of the inlet and outlet flanges respectively. C-3. If the pipes are of different diameters, the diameter of the smaller if ` no correction ' is indicated, the calculation need not be made. C-3.1 If ` correction ' is indicated, Fig. 13, which may be used to determine the value of A. applies only to steel

a calculation needs to handling cold water. 2 diameters upstream

pipe should pipes

be used. cold

Then water,

handling

29

IS:10981 -1983

SO

180

100

150

160 200 250 300 350 400 500 600 750

80

60

40

40

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

VELOCITY
FIG. 12 CHART SHOWING VELOCITIES ABOVE

( m Is I
WHICH LOSS CORRECTIONS ARE REQUIRED

30

IS : 10981 - 1983
C-4. In cases where pipes are of other material, or the liquid is not cold water the graph by Moody For aiven in Fig. 14 may be used, or the formula for h given in 6.2.1.2 may, if preferred, be solved. the pipe roughness k one m&y take the values given in Table 10.

L AMINAR A

FLOW

CRITICAL

ZONE

0.06 0.05 0.01 0.03 0.025 0.02

000

lo3

2

34566104

2

3 4566lt-f'

2

346661@

2

346661

REYNOLDS

NUMBER

Re=$

FIG.

14

VALUES

OF FRICTION

FACTOR

A MOODY

CHART

TABLE Commercial Glass, Pipe drawn ( New brass,

IO

ABSOLUTE

ROUGHNESS

k FOR PIPES Absolute Roughness of the Surface Smooth 0.05 mm 0.12 mm 0.15 mm 0'25 mm 0.3 to 3.0 mm 1.0 to 10.0 mm k

) Material copper or lead

Steel Asphalted cast iron Galvanized iron Cast iron Concrete Riveted steel

32

IS:10981 -1983
APPENDIX ( EFFECT D

C/ause 6.2.2 )
INDUCED BY THE PUMP due to pre-swirl.

OF PRE-SWIRL

D-l. Errors in the measurement of pump inlet head can occur at part capacity These errors can be detected and corrected on the following basis.

D-2. The differential head is measured between the specified inlet measuring section and another position further upstream where the pre-swirl induced by the pump is known to be absent ( for example the sump ), This differential head should follow a quadratic law with flow; any departure from this law will show the amount by which an inlet head measurement shall be corrected for the effect of pre-swirl induced by the pump ( see Fig. 15 and 16 ).
GAUGE USED FO DETERMINATION

FIG. 15 EXAMPLE

OF INSTALLATION

WITH

PRE-SWIRL

ONSET

OF PRE-SWIRL

FIG.

16

CORRECTION

OF MEASURED

INLET

HEAD

APPENDIX

E

( Clause 9.5 )
PUMP TEST SHEET

E-l. The pump test sheet is given for guidance for presenting pump test results and to assist in their interpretation. It does not purport to include all the information required from a pump test and modifications may be necessary depending on the type of pump, its application, and the mode of calculation. 33

IS:10981 -1983
`UMP TEST :ustomer SHEET ( Class B )

1 Sheet No.

Nature

of test

Maker's

Order

Number

iuaranteed

Volume

rate of flow

( qvo )

Speed of rotation

(f&p)

Power

input suction head (V) ( NPSH )

Net positive kinematic

viscosity

Test cetirficate Speed of rotation

`est conditions

Room temperature

Head correction Barometric pressure

to

lesults of measurement

Notes

Chief

of tests

Representatives of the customer of the manufacturer

34

APPENDIX ( Chose 9.5 )
CONVERSION

F

IS : 10981 - 1983

TO SI UNITS

F-l. This Appendix gives factors for conversion to St for covering units of some of the quantities expressed in multiples or sub-multiples of SI units and in units other than SI units. The conversion factor is the number by which the value expressed in various units should be multiplied to find the corresponding va1u.e in SI units.
TABLE Quantity Symbol of SI Unit 11 CONVERSION Various Name Volume rate of flow' ms/s iitre cubic litre litre per second metre per hour per hour per minute gallon per minute FACTORS Units Symbol I/s ma/h I/h I/min
IO-3

Conversion Factors

1 I3 600 l/3 600 000 l/60 000 0,000 075 77 0,028 316 8 0,000 063 09 0,000 044 16
103

imperial cubic gallon barrel Mass rate of flow kg/s

gal ( UK )/min
ff3/S gal

foot

per second per minute

( US)

( US)/min
( US)/h t/s th kg/h lb/s

( US ) per hour ( petroleum)

barrel

ton per second ton per hour kilogram pound per hour per second per square per centimetre square centi-

l/3.6 1 I3 600 0,453 592 37 -l J> 98 066,5 7

Pressure

Pa

kilopond

kp/cms kgf/cms bar hpz torr

kilogram-force metre bar hectopieze torr conventional conventional poundal standard

t 105 J
1 > 133,322

millimetre millimetre foot

of mercury of water

mmHg mmH,O pdl/fts atm

J

9,806 65 1,488 16 101 325

per square atmosphere

pound-force Density. kg/m3 kilogram

per square per cubic

inch

Ibf/ins

(psi

) 7 !

6 894,76

decimetre

kgjdms g/cm3 Ib/fts kW

gram per cubic pound Power W kilowatt kilopond I. T. kilo cheval per cubic

centimetre foot

`OS 16,018 5
103

metre per second calorie 1) per hour

kp'm/s kcalIT/h ch hp

9,806 65 1,163 735,5 745,7 0,293 071 9,806 65 1 7 1 10-l J 9,806 65

vapour

horsepower') British thermal unit metre per hour per second kilogram-force Viscosity (dynamic Pa.s ( kg/m.s viscosity) ) decapoise poise dyne second gram per square centimetre centimetre per square metre

Btu/h kgt.m/s daP P dyn.s/cma glsmcm kp*s/m"

per second second

kilopond centipoise poundal Kinematic viscosity Fj ;z/L(;;

second

per square

foot

pdl.s/ftz St = ems/s

per second

f;;L

1) No international

symbol

exists

for this

unit;

the symbol

shown

is the most common.

35

IS:10981 -1983 APPENDIX ( Clause 9.5 )
CHECK LIST

G

G-l. The following is a check list of items where agreement is recommended between manufactuIt should be noted that it will not always be necessary to agree rer and purchaser before the test. upon all these items during the elaboration of the contract: a) extent of guarantee: 1) pump without motor ( see 4.1 ); 2) combined motor-pump unit ( see 4.1 ); 3) guarantee values ( for example flow rate, etc. ) ( see 4.1, 4.2 and 9.4.3 ); b) method of verification of guaranteed

total

head,

power

input,

efficiency,

NPSH,

NPSH ( see 7.1.1 );

c) rotational speed deviations outside permissible tolerance ( see 5.3.3.2 ); d) voltage and frequency deviations outside permissible tolerance (see 9.2.1); e) method of prediction of pump performance from a test using clean cold water ( see 8 ); f) liquid to be used for acceptance test; g) inlet and transmission losses in vertical well pumps ( see 6.2.1.6 and 6.4.4 ); h) cable losses ( see 6.4.3 ); j ) gear losses ( see 6.4.2 ); k) arrangement for proving priming ability of self-priming pumps ( see 5.2.6 ); m) time of tests ( see 5.1.2 ); n) test equipment ( see 5.1.5 ); p) test arrangement ( see 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 ); q) use of recognized methods of measurement other than those described in this standard; r) chief of test when test is not carried s) test costs ( see Appendix B ); out at manufacturer's works ( see 5.1.3 );

t) number of pumps to be tested in a batch of identical pumps; and u) any other aspect of pump behaviour to be checked during the test.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This standard is the second of a set of three dealing with acceptance tests of centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps; they correspond to three classes of Tests A, B and C; Class A is the most accurate and Class C is the least accurate; the use of Classes A and B pumps is restricted to special cases when there is need to have the pump performance more precisely defined. It should be borne in mind that tests for Class A and B pumps require moreaccurate apparatus and methods, which increase the cost of such tests. The standard arrangements and procedures described pump individually, without reference to its final installation which a pump is tested at the manufacturer's works. are those to be employed for testing conditions or the usual conditions a in

Pump performance may be affected by conditions of the final site installation, and procedures are described for carrying out ` Standard Tests ' on certain types of installations of which an overall performance is required. The conditions in which pumps are finally installed, however, often do not permit reliable tests measurements, and recommendations are made concerning the procedure to be adopted here the layout precludes tests in conformity with the standards, or where the tests cover the pump and the plant ancillary to the pump itself. While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from International Standard IS0 3555-1977(E) `Centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps - Code for acceptance Class B' issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 36
Printed at New lndla Printlno Press, Khuria, lndla

