INA WAP IS 10047 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


sa TENT fee Sik Hers Galea 
 — atten at Tact 


( TET FRAT ) 


Refractory Plastic and Ramming 
Mass — Method of Test 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 81.080 
© BIS 2023 
ads A SCT 


Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WD A TH, 9 Te Me SHE AMT, AS faeet - 110002 
SS ANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Refractories Sectional Committee, MTD 15 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Refractories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1981. While reviewing this standard, in the light of the experience 
gained during these years, the committee decided to revise it by incorporating the following major modification: 


a) Scope has been modified to include refractory plastic in the standard; 

b) Addition of an exclusion clause in the scope for excluding dry vibratable masses from the standard which 
requires different method for sample preparation altogether; 

c) The maximum mass of any lot has been limited to 50 tonnes; 

d) Size of the specimen has been modified; 

e) Test method for evaluation of workability of ramming mass or plastic has been incorporated; and 


f) Physical test on determination of porosity measurement of refractory plastic and ramming mass has been 
incorporated and determination of moisture has been withdrawn. 


The test methods prescribed in this standard are intended to be used for assessment of the quality of refractory 
plastic and ramming mass as well as for checking their conformity to the specification. 


This standard contains clauses which call for an agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. Such clauses 
are 4.2, 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 7.3, 9.1, 11.2, 13.2 and 15.1. 


In the preparation of the standard due consideration has been given to manufacturing and trade practices followed 
in the country in this field and assistance has been derived from ISO 1927-5 : 2012 ‘Monolithic (unshaped) 
refractory products — Part 5: Preparation and treatment of test pieces’, issued by International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO). 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the in the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same 
as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 10047 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


METHOD OF TESTING REFRACTORY PLASTIC AND 
RAMMING MASS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the methods of 
sampling and tests of refractory plastic and ramming 
mass. 


1.2 This standard does not prescribe the methods of 
sampling and tests for dry vibratable masses. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through references in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definition, in addition to those given in IS 4041 shall 


apply. 


3.1 Ramming Mass — Mixtures of graded 
refractory aggregate with or without air/heat setting 
binder/additive(s) and with or without liquid(s). It is 
usually supplied at a consistency which requires 
mechanical method of application that is ramming. 
A plasticizing agent may also be incorporated in the 
ramming masses. 


NOTE — According to the type of product, the main bond 
may be ceramic, chemical, or organic. Ramming mixes are 
used as-delivered or after the addition of binder/additive(s) 
additives and/or liquid(s). They harden under the action of 
heat above ambient temperature. 


3.2 Plastic Refractory — Unshaped refractory, 
supplied ready for use, with a high workability, 
made up of aggregate, binder/additives(s) and 
liquid, and which hardens after placing by the action 
of heat. A plastic refractory is also defined as a 
refractory material, tempered with water that can be 
extruded and that has suitable workability to be 
ponded into place to form monolithic structure. 


NOTE — According to the type of product, the main bond 
may be ceramic, chemical or organic. Plastic refractory 
materials are normally supplied in soft, pre-formed blocks 
or slices and placed by ramming (mechanical or manual). 
They harden under the action of heat above ambient 
temperature. 


3.3 Workability Index — Measure of the ease of 
moulding or shaping an unshaped refractory. 


NOTE — The terms ‘plastic’ and ‘ramming mass’ are 
generally intended to describe the workability of the 
material. In this regard, plastics are considered to be 
materials having high workability index than ramming 
masses. 


3.4 Dry Mix or Dry Vibratable Refractory — 
Unshaped refractory specially designed to be placed 
in the dry state by-vibration or ramming. 


4 SAMPLING 
4.1 Lot 


In any consignment, all the containers/bags holding 
refractory plastic/ramming mass of the same type 
and grade, manufactured by the same manufacturer 
under similar conditions of production shall be 
grouped together to constitute a lot. The maximum 
mass of any lot, however, shall be limited to 
50 tonnes. 


4.2 Sample Size 


For completing all the tests, a minimum quantity of 
about 50 kg is required as sample. As these are 
normally supplied in 50 kg containers/bags, the 
number of containers/bags shall be selected at 
random as has been defined in Table 1. 


Table 1 Numbers of Bags/Containers to be 
Selected for Different Lots 


(Clauses 4.2 and 7.3) 


SI No. Lot Weight No. of 50 Kg 
Containers/Bags 
to be Selected as 

Samples 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 10 tonnes 1 
il) 10 tonnes to 25 2 
tonnes 
iii) Over 25 tonnes up 4 


to 50 tonnes 


4.3 The collected samples shall be used for various 
physical tests given below and chemical analysis: 


a) Pyrometric cone equivalent (PCE); 
b) Apparent porosity; 

c) Bulk density (BD); 

d) Permanent linear change (PLC); 

e) Cold crushing strength (CCS); 

f) Thermal conductivity; and 

g) Hot modulus of rupture (HMOR). 


IS 10047 : 2023 


NOTE — The same test sample may be used for more than 
one test, if permitted by respective test methods. For 
example, bulk density, permanent linear change, cold 
crushing strength and chemical analysis can be measured 
using the same test specimen. A part from the 
aforementioned tests, additional tests can be carried out 
using the same test specimens if mutually agreed between 
the purchaser and the supplier. 


5 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 


5.1 Chemical analysis of the ramming specimen 
should be conducted on loss free basis by grinding 
50 mm x 50 mm cylindrical test specimen to 
104 um for gravimetric analysis or 45 um for 
instrumental analysis. The procedure for preparation 
of 50 mm x 50 mm cylindrical test specimen has 
been detailed in 7. It should be ensured that the Bulk 
density (BD) of the selected specimen is within the 
specified ranges mutually agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier. Specimen having bulk 
density in the specified range ensures that ramming 
mass/plastic formulation constituents are present in 
correct proportion. Such sample would be more 
representative in nature than random sample 
collection from various locations. 


5.2 For alumino-silicate ramming mass/plastics, the 
chemical analysis shall be carried out in accordance 
with the procedure specified in IS 1527 and 
IS 12107 (Part 1). For basic material the procedure 
should be as per IS 1760 (Part 2) or IS 12667 
(Part 1) depending on the constituents present in the 
product. For chrome containing products IS 12667 
(Part 1), should be used as agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier, instrumental analysis 
can also be carried out alternatively. However, in 
case of any dispute gravimetric analysis will be the 
referee method. 


6 DETERMINATION OF PYROMETRIC 
CONE EQUIVALENT (PCE) 


6.1 Preparation of Test Cones 


A 50 mm diameter and 50 mm height cylinder 
should be prepared as per 7. It should be ensured that 
the bulk density of the selected specimen is within 
the specified ranges mutually agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier. Such cylinder would be 
treated as test sample. The test specimen (cone) 
preparation should be done as per IS 1528 (Part 1) 
using the aforementioned cylinder as test specimen. 


6.2 Test Method 


Pyrometric cone equivalent (PCE) test should be 
conducted in accordance with IS 1528 (Part 1) using 
the cones prepared as given in 6.1. 


7 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS FOR 
BULK DENSITY, MODULUS OF RUPTURE, 
COLD CRUSHING STRENGTH AND 
PERMANENT LINEAR CHANGE 


Where the ramming mix is supplied in ready for use 


condition, the test specimens are prepared from as 
received material. In case, addition of binder prior to 
installation is recommended by the manufacturer, 
then the proposed binder in the recommended 
proportion should be added for the test sample 
preparation. 


7.1 Apparatus 


The apparatus required for making of test specimens 
are as under: 


a) Sand rammer; 

b) Moulds; 

c) Balance — Laboratory balance, 10 kg 
capacity with + 0.1 g accuracy; 

d) Callipers; 

e) Trowel — Pointing type or stiff-bladed 
spatula with a typical size of 150 mm length 
and 40 mm width; 

f) Drying oven; and 

g) Furnace. 


7.2 Procedure for Dry Ramming Mass 


7.2.1 The selected containers/bags shall be emptied 
on a suitable dry surface and the material should be 
thoroughly mixed. The mixed mass should 
subsequently be reduced to 50 kg by coning and 
quartering. This final sample shall be divided 
equally into five test samples by successive coning 
and quartering. 


7.2.2 Where the ramming mix is supplied dry, mix 
the dry material for 30 s, and add the liquid for 
mixing evenly in the next 20 s. Continue for mixing 
between 2 min and 6 min till the time ramming 
consistency is attained. The amount of liquid to be 
added to dry ramming mixes should be specified by 
the manufacturer, who also may recommend a 
mixing time. If necessary, switch the mixer off after 
1 min mixing time in order to scrape off the adhering 
material at the edges of the mixer. Report the liquid 
addition and mixing time. 


7.3 Procedure for Plastic and Wet Ramming 
Mass 


Selected containers/bags/batches should be 
discharged on dry floor. In case of plastic 
refractories, numbers of bags to be collected, at 
random, should be as per the guideline provided in 
Table 1. For example, for a lot in the range of 10 
metric tonnes to 50 metric tonnes, 2 bags should be 
collected. For wet ramming mass, the selected 
containers/bags should be emptied on a suitable dry 
surface so that it does not get contaminated and 
subsequently the material should be mixed with 
shovel or any other suitable implement. The 
requisite quantity of the material should be collected 
from different locations of the heap, as agreed 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 


7.4 All the test specimens tested for various physical 
and chemical characteristics shall meet the 
corresponding requirements for acceptance of the 
lot. 


7.5 Shaping of Test Specimens Using the Sand 
Rammer and Mould 


Reduce the amount of the material for shaping with 
the riffle (quartering — coning) sampler. The batch 
size depends on the number of test pieces which are 
required to be prepared. 


7.5.1 Description of Sand Rammer and Mould 
7.5.1.1 Sand rammer 


The sand rammer has to be fitted with a 50 mm 
diameter stamp head, a 6.4 kg mobile weight and a 
50 mm weight drop height (see Fig. 1). Before 
preparation, maintain the blocks at a temperature 
between 18 °C and 22 °C for 24h, taking care that 
no loss in moisture occurs during that period. 


In case of plastics delivered ready for use, the 
amount of the material for shaping shall be taken 


Key 


Weight lifting lever 

Sand rammer framework 
Sliding weight (6.4 kg) 

Cam handle 

Steel shaft 

Lubricated mould conditioner 
Mould 


QuUuMoAwS 


IS 10047 : 2023 


from blocks divided manually into pieces having 
maximum dimension of 25 mm. The material should 
be taken out from the interior section of the blocks. 
Compaction for test specimen preparation should be 
carried out immediately after dividing the blocks. 


7.5.1.2 Moulds 


Mould design should be user friendly for the 
preparation of test specimen. Mould should be water 
tight and may be dismountable. A typical design of 
dismountable mould has been illustrated in Fig. 2. 
The illustrated mould design is for guidance only. 
The construction material for the mould should be 
such that it does not react with the material to be 
tested. If the aforementioned criteria are met by any 
other mould, the same should be acceptable. 
Typical dismountable mould components and its 
assembled form are illustrated in Fig. 2A and 
Fig. 2B, respectively. Where the ramming mix is 
supplied in ready for use condition, it is normally 
formed into test pieces as received. But some liquid 
may be added, if necessary. Plastic in any event is in 
ready to use form and thus, the specimens should be 
prepared from as received material. 


Fic. 1 ILLUSTRATION OF SAND RAMMER 


IS 10047 : 2023 


2A MOULD PARTS 
Key 
A Ring of assembly for the two half-shells B and C 
B and C Half-shells 
D Pedestal base 
1 Mould (core box) assembeled 
2 Mould partially open 
3 Test piece 
4 Disc of support 


aJI fa 
DE Cig 
C] Ro 3 


2B ASSEMBLED MOULD PARTS 


FIG. 2 DISMOUNTABLE MOULD 


7.5.2 Procedure for Test Piece Preparation 


7.5.2.1 The mould should be lubricated with grease 
or silicone spray. 


7.5.2.2 The mould should be slowly filled with a 
spoon in order to avoid any segregation of the 
product. 


7.5.2.3 Take a portion of the laboratory sample and 
measure its temperature. Clean and coat the inside 
of the mould with a light oil or similar lubricant for 
ease of de-moulding. Fill the specimen tube with 
sufficient quantity of sample to obtain an initial 
height of 50 mm +2 mm. Use the quantity given in 
the Table 2 as guideline. The exact material 
requirement may differ based on the other 
aspects/characteristics of the material under 
evaluation. Table 2 reports the material requirement 
for the preparation of test specimen of 50 mm x 
50 mm cylinder. 


7.5.2.4 Subject the material in the tube to 10 impacts 
with the rammer by turning the hand crank and 
allowing the weight to rise and fall freely on the 
sample thus compacting it. Turn the tube over, hand 
push the material to the other end and subject it to 
another 10 impacts with the rammer. Remove the 
specimen from the tube with the plunger. Measure 
the specimen height with callipers to ensure it is 
within 50 mm + 2 mm. In case, the specimen 
dimension deviates from the requisite value, 
increase or decrease the material quantity, as the 
situation would demand, and repeat the procedure 
till the specimen dimension is within the specified 


range. Take the test specimen out after 
de-moulding. Fig. 3 illustrates the typical 
appearance of the test specimen and its dimensions. 


7.5.2.5 Table 2 reports the material requirement for 
the preparation of test specimen of 50 mm x 50 mm 
cylinder. The Table 2 is for guidance purpose only. 


8 MEASUREMENT OF WORKABILITY 
INDEX 


8.1 Procedure 


Suspend the weight on hangers. Place the specimen, 
prepared as per 4, with spacer on the base of the sand 
rammer and centre it under the rammer shaft. Lower 
the shaft till the plunger is in contact with the 
specimen. Read the initial height of the specimen 
from the attached scale of the sand rammer. Remove 
the weight from hangers and gently lower it till at 
rest. Do not drop the weight. Subject the specimen 
to 3 impacts with the rammer by turning the hand 
crank. Suspend the weight on hangers again. Read 
the final height of the specimen from the attached 
scale. 


8.2 Calculation 


Calculate the workability index using the below 
formula: 


Workablity Index 


5 (Initial height in mm) — (Final height in mm) 


(Initial height in mm) 
x 100 


9 FIRING OF TEST SPECIMENS 


The test specimens should be fired in electrically 
heated furnace at the requisite test temperatures, 
which is as per the agreement between the 
refractory the purchaser and the supplier. The test 
specimens should be placed in the furnace on their 
circular surface. For carbon containing products the 
specimens should be heat treated in such a way that 
carbonaceous constituents of the product does not 
get oxidised. Usually, such heat treatment is carried 
out in a silicon carbide or mullite box containing 
metallurgical coke approximately 0.2 mm to 1.6 mm 
by leaving a space of 20 mm between the test pieces, 
the lid and the bottom of the box then shut off with 
a lid sealed with a jointing material. Typical heating 
schedule for the heat treatment of the test specimens 
are as under: 


a) Heat the furnace at the rate of 100 °C/h till 
to reach the required test temperature; 


b) Maintain the temperature for a soak period 
of 6 h. Maintain the temperature inside the 
box within + 10 °C around the test 
temperature for the specified period and 


IS 10047 : 2023 


then switch off the furnace and cool 
naturally inside the furnace. From 500 °C, 
the door can be progressively opened in 
order to cool quickly; and 


c) After natural cooling inside the furnace, 
remove the test pieces then clean them of the 
coke fixed on the surface and keep them in a 
desiccator till the characterization. 


10 DETERMINATION OF BULK DENSITY 


10.1 Test Specimen 


Test specimens are cylinders of 50 mm diameter and 
50 mm height, prepared as per the procedure 
described in 7. The test specimen should be dried at 
110 °C for 24 h to ensure that all physically held 
water of the specimen has been driven out. 


10.2 Geometric Measurement 


Determine the mean height of each test piece from 
three measurements with different angles. An 
example of the angles at which the specimen height 
could be measured is illustrated in Fig. 4. 


50+2 


4 REFERENCE POINT 
FOR MEASUREMENT 
ON EACH FACE 


All dimension in millimetres. 


Fic. 3 50 mm x 50 mm CYLINDRICAL TEST SPECIMEN 


Table 2 Material Requirement for Different Densities 


(Clauses 7.5.2.3 and 7.5.2.5) 


SI No. Shape Dimensions Volume | Weight in Grams of the Test Piece According to the Bulk 
Density 
cm? g/cm? 
A 

N 

2.20 2.30 2.40 2.50 2.60 2.70 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
i) Cylinder | 50 mm x 50 mm | 98.175 216 226 236 246 256 265 


IS 10047 : 2023 


a a 


Fic. 4 TEST SPECIMEN HEIGHTS MEASURED AT THREE DIFFERENT ANGLES 


10.3 Test Method 


Plastics and ramming masses do not develop 
adequate strength till they are fired to high 
temperature. Hence, it is recommended that the bulk 
density is measured as per IS 1528 (Part 12), that is 
measurement of test specimen dimensions. 


Bulk density of the test specimens, with adequate 
strength, can be measured as per IS 1528 (Part 15) 
provided the specimens do not disintegrate when in 
contact with water. The volume of the test specimen 
should be calculated based on the measurement of 
the exact dimensions of the test cylinder. The weight 
of the test specimen should be measured with an 
accuracy of 0.1 g. 


10.4 Calculation 


Calculate the bulk density (BD) using the following 
formula: 


BD= 


SIS 


where 


BD = bulk density, in g/cm’; 
W =weight of the cylinder; and 


V = calculated volume of the cylinder, in cm’. 
11 DETERMINATION OF APPARENT 
POROSITY 
11.1 Test Specimen 


Test specimens for the porosity measurement are 
cylinders of 50 mm diameter and 50 mm height 
prepared as per the procedure described in 7. 


11.2 Test Method 


Since the ramming masses, in general, are quite 


friable till they are heated up to form permanent 
chemical or ceramic bond, apparent porosities are 
measurable only for specimens which have 
developed adequate strength and do not disintegrate 
while in contact with water or kerosene. Based on 
the aforementioned facts, the preheat temperatures 
for porosity measurement should be as per the 
agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 
Apparent porosity shall be determined according to 
IS 1528 (Part 15). 


12 DETERMINATION OF COLD CRUSHING 
STRENGTH 


12.1 Test Specimen 


50 mm x 50 mm test cylindrical specimen, prepared 
as per the procedure described in 7 shall be used for 
determining the CCS. Two tungsten carbide or a 
steel plates should be placed on each of the circular 
surface of the test specimen. These plates shall be at 
least 10 mm thick and 52 mm + 2 mm in diameter. 
Their surfaces shall be plane to within 0.02 mm. 
During the test the two test plates are placed in such 
a way that the upper plate is maintained vertically 
above the lower plate with the sample sandwiched 
between the two. 


12.2 Test Method 


Cold crushing strength test shall be determined 
according to IS 1528 (Part 4). The load shall be 
applied uniformly. The individual results of 
minimum four test specimens and their average 
should be reported. The average result should be the 
one used for quality conformity of the product. 


13 DETERMINATION OF PERMANENT 
LINEAR CHANGE (PLC) 


13.1 Test Specimen 


Cylindrical test specimen of 50 mm diameter and 


50 mm height, prepared as per the procedure 
described in 7 is used for PLC measurement. 


13.2 Test Method 


The test specimens are cured and dried at 110 °C. 
Dried test specimen is marked at 4 locations on each 
circular surface. An example of the makings where 
the distances could be measured is illustrated in 
Fig. 4. The minimum distances between the 
markings along the specimen height are measured. 
The specimens are heat treated as per the process 
defined in 9. The specimens are held at the final test 
temperature for the duration agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier or as per the parameters 
defined in the product data sheet. After cooling the 
fired prisms to room temperature, the distance 
between at least 3 markings made prior to the firing 
of specimens, shall be measured. The shrinkage or 
expansion shall be calculated and reported in 
percentage with respect to the original dimensions. 
The individual values of linear change of two test 
specimens for each temperature should be reported 
as per IS 1528 (Part 6). The average of the measured 
values shall be used for conformity to specification. 


14 DETERMINATION OF 
CONDUCTIVITY 


THERMAL 


14.1 Test Specimens 


The specimens prepared for the measurement should 
be pre-fired at 1 000 °C to ensure that the specimen 
is devoid of any chemically bonded or physically 
held water or any other volatile constituents. Test 
specimen should be prepared so that it meets the 
requirement of the thermal conductivity method 
selected for the measurement. The test specimen 
should be prepared by tamping and it should be 
ensured that the bulk density of the specimen 
prepared is within + 2 percent of that obtained as 
per 10. 


IS 10047 : 2023 


14.2 Test Method 


The thermal conductivity test shall be determined as 
per IS 17107. 


15 DETERMINATION OF HOT MODULUS 
OF RUPTURE (HMOR) 


15.1 Test Specimens 


HMOR measurement should be done with a 
specimen (25 + 1) mm x (25 + 1) mm and a length 
of approximately 150 mm. The length of the test 
specimen should be such that it fits in the furnace 
without any hindrance and is appropriately 
supported for 3 point bending measurement. The test 
specimen should be prepared by using the mould 
illustrated in Fig. 5. The test specimen should be 
prepared by tamping of the ramming mass in the 
mould by a suitably designed piece of wood or steel. 
While tamping it should be ensured that the test 
specimen is without any lamination. Lamination can 
be avoided by filling the mould in stages, filled mass 
be tamped and the tamped surface should be 
scratched with a knife. Subsequently further 
material should be added in the mould and the 
process of compaction should be repeated. The 
density of the test specimen should be as per the 
specification provided by the manufacturer and thus, 
the tamping should be done accordingly. 


The test specimen, thus, prepared be cured as per the 
guidelines provided by the ramming mass supplier 
and fired to the 1 400 °C or at a temperature agreed 
between the purchaser and the refractory supplier. 


15.2 Test Method 


The measurement of HMOR should be done, using 
the test specimen prepared as described in 15.1, as 
per the procedure defined in IS 1528 (Part 20). 


FIG. 5 MOULD WITH OVERFILL RING FOR HMOR TEST SPECIMEN PREPARATION 


IS 10047 : 2023 


IS No. 


IS 1527 : 1972 


IS 1528 


(Part 1) : 2010 


(Part 4) : 2012 


(Part 6) : 2010 


(Part 12) : 2007/ 
ISO 5016 : 1997 


(Part 15) 2020/ 
ISO 5017 : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFFERED STANDARDS 


Title 
Methods for chemical 
analysis of high silica 
refractory materials (first 
revision) 


Methods of sampling and 
physical tests for refractory 
materials: 


Determination of pyrometric 
cone equivalent (PCE) or 
softening point (third 
revision) 


Determination of cold 
crushing strength of dense 
shaped refractories products 
(second revision) 


Determination of permanent 
linear change after reheating 
for shaped insulating and 
dense refractories (second 
revision) 


Method for determination of 
bulk density and true 
porosity of shaped insulating 
refractory product (second 
revision) 


Method for determination of 
bulk density, apparent 
porosity and true porosity of 


IS No. 


(Part 20) : 1993/ 
ISO 5013 : 1985 


IS 1760 (Part 2) : 
1991 


IS 4041 2006/ 
ISO 836 : 2001 


IS 12107 (Part 1) : 
1987 


IS 12667 (Part 1) : 
1989 


IS 17107 : 2019 


Title 


dense shaped refractory 
products (second revision) 


Determination of modulus 


of rupture at elevated 
temperature 

Chemical analysis of 
limestone, dolomite and 


allied materials: Part 2 
Determination of silica (first 
revision) 


Terminology of refractories 
(first revision) 


Methods of chemical 
analysis of alumino silicate 
refractory materials: Part 1 
Determination of loss on 
ignition 


Chromite sand for 
foundries — Methods of 
chemical analysis: Part 1 
Determination of silica 


Method for determination of 
thermal conductivity of 
dense as well as insulating 
fired refractories, refractory 
monolithics and precast 
prefired (PCPF) shapes 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


IS 10047 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refractories Sectional Committee, MTD 15 


Organization 
SKG Refractories Ltd, Kolkata 


Calderys India Refractories Limited, Nagpur 


CSIR - Central Glass and Ceramic Research 


Institute, Kolkata 


Dalmia Institute of Science & Industrial Research, 
Sundargarh 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindalco Industries Limited, New Delhi 


IFGL Refractories Limited, Kalunga 


Indian Refractory Makers Association, Kolkata 


Mahakoshal Refractories Private Limited, Katni 


Maithan Ceramic Limited, Chirkunda 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


M N Dastur and Company Private Limited, 


Kolkata 


National Aluminium Company Limited, 
Bhubaneswar 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Faridabad 


OCL India Limited, Rajgangpur 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ARUP KUMAR CHATTOPADHYAY (Chairperson) 


DRI. N. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI SANTANU BASAK (Alternate I) 
DR SAUMEN SINHA (Alternate ID) 


DR H. S. TRIPATHI 


DR PREMA RANJAN RAUTA 
SHRI SUDHIR KUMAR PANDA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRASENJIT SAHA 
SHRI BISWARUP SARKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRASENJIT PAL (Alternate II) 


DR NAGESWAR KAPURI 
SHRI P. SARAVANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. D. MAJUMDAR 
SHRI SAJAHAN MANDAL (Alternate) 


DR ARUP GHOSH 
SHRI ANIRBANDIP DASGUPTA (Alternate) 


DR SUKUMAR ADAK 
SHRI SHYAMALENDU KABIRAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. SU 
SHRI J. N. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI S. BANERJEE 
SHRI B. BERA (Alternate) 


SHRI SAURAV GHOSAL 
SHRI ARINDAM CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI PRANAB KUMAR DAS 
SHRI SATYAKAM NAYAK (Alternate) 


DR S. K. CHATURVEDI 
SHRI GIASUDDIN AHAMED (Alternate) 


DR J. K. SAHU 
DR A. K. PATNAIK (Alternate) 


IS 10047 : 2023 


Organization 


Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited, Visakhapatnam 


SKG Refractories Ltd, Kolkata 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL), Bhilai 
Steel Plant, Bhilai 


Steel Authority of India (SAIL), Centre for 
Engineering and Technology (CET), Ranchi 


Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL), Research 
& Development Centre for Iron & Steel 
(RDCIS), Ranchi 


Tata Steel Limited, Jamshedpur 


TRL Krosaki Refractories Limited, Jharsuguda 


In Personal Capacity (Flat 1 A, Himkunj 
Cooperative Society, Block 1° Number — 167 
B. P. Township, Kolkata) 


In Personal Capacity (Plot No BC 224, Sector-1, 
Salt Lake, Kolkata) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRIS. K. BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI P. S. PAUL (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM CHOWDHURY 
SHRI ABHISHEK SARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP SRIVASTAVA 
Ms D. SATYA DEVI (Alternate) 


SHRI SURENDRA PRASAD 
SHRI AISHWARYA DEWANGAN (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. KUJUR 


SHRIMATI A. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI BAJENDRA 
SHRI GOUTHAM GHOSH (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRASANTA PANIGRAHI (Alternate II) 


SHRI ARUP KUMAR SAMANTA 
SHRI S. K. SUBUDHI (Alternate) 


DR BARUN DEB MUKHERJEE 


SHRI K. K. PAUL 


SHRI SANJIV MAINI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
ENGINEERING) 


AND HEAD (METALLURGICAL 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SAAQIB RAAHI 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 15 (11337). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


