**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 6754 (1972): Aluminium Alloy Ingots for Bearings [MID 7: 
Light Metals and their Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISi 6754 -1972 

( Reaffirmed 1999) 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
ALUMINIUM ALLOY INGOTS FOR BEARINGS 

( First Reprint JANUARY 1988 ) 



UDC 669.715-412:621.822 



© Copyright 1973 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 2 April 1973 



18:6754-1972 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFIGATION FOR 
ALUMINIUM ALLOY INGOTS FOR BEARINGS 

Light Metals and Their Alloys Sectional Committee, SMDG 10 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi B. K. Mubthy Indian Aluminium Go Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 
Shbi V. D. Agarwai* The Aluminium Corporation of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi V, K. Agra*wai* Hindustan Aluminium Corporation Ltd, Renukoot 

( Mirzapur ) 
Shbi Ravi Kant ( AltemtUe ) 
Shbi N. C. Bagchi National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi B, G. Biswas ( AlUmaU ) 
Shbi K. G. Balakrishnan Naib Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 
Shbi B. N. Biswas fiharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Dr V. Chan DBA sekhab Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shbi P. K. Mahapatba ( Alternate) 
Shbi D, D. GHOWDHtJBY Directorate of Technical Development and Produc- 

tion ( Air ), Air Headquarters, New Delhi 
Shbi R. P. Varshney ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. M. Davab Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi A. T. Bobate ( Alternate) 
Deputy Dibectob Reseaboh Ministry of Railways 
(Met)-2, Research, Designs 
and Standards Obganization, 

LUCKNOW 

Depctty Dibectob, Stan- 
DABDs (Caeb )-I, Research, 
Designs and Standabds 
Organization, Lucknow ( Alternate I ) 
Chemist & Mstalluboist, 
North Eastern Railway, 
Gobakhpub ( Alternate II ) 
Shbi P. K. Gangopadhyay' . Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi D. K. Mukhebjee ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. Gopalkbishnan Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi F. A. Jasdanwalla The Indian Standard Metal Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi C. Chattbbjeb ( Alternate ) 

( Continued an page 2 ) 



© Copyright )97S 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to bean infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



ISj 6754 -1972 

{Continued from page \) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. K. Kafoob All India Non-Fcrrous Metal Indiistries Association, 

Bombay 
Shri VV. J, Febnandes ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Om Khosla Electrical Manufacturing Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri O. P, Mathub ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. Y. Moghe Directorate General, Ordnance Factories, Calcutta 

Sbbi B. S. Seth ( Alternate ) 
Shri V, C. Mueherjea India Government Mint (Ministry of Finance ), 

Hyderabad 
Shri Peer Mohammed The Aluminium Industries Ltd, Kundara 

Shbi P. M, Joseph ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. K. Ray Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri J. P. Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shri D, H. Shah Jecwanlal ( 1929 ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. K. Ambanx ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. Shanmugham The Madras Aluminium Co Ltd, Mettur Dam 

Shbi B. P. Sinha Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Dr y. N. Trehan National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR), 

Jamshedpur 
Shbi R. K. Srivastava, . Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Deputy Director { Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. L, Bali 
Deputy Director ( Metals ) ,BIS 



Panel for Aluminium-Based Alloys for Bearings, SMDC 10/P: 13 

Convener 
Shri D. M. Davar Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay 

Members 
Shri P. R. Abhyankar Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd, Poona 

Shri A, R. Habo"likab ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director Reseabch Ministry' of Railways 
(Met)-!!, Research, Designs 
AND Standards Organization, 
Ltjcknow 
Dr R, Dutta Eyre Smelting Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri N- Gopalkrishnan Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Caprihan (Alternate ) 
Shri F. A, Jasdanwalla The Indian Standard Metal Co Ltd, Bombay 

Sn^iC. CuATTBHJ^^ (Alternate) 
Shbi K. Nagesha Rao Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi M. Rangashi ( Alternate ) 



18:6754-1972 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
ALUMINIUM ALLOY INGOTS FOR BEARINGS 

0. F O R E W O R D 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 20 December 1972, after the draft finalized by the Light Metals and 
Their Alloys Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural 
and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 With the development of heavy engineering industry, the amount of 
bearing metal requirements is increasing at a very fast rate. The industry 
consumes large quantities of copper, lead, zinc, tin, and antimony for 
bearings. Since these materials are scarce, need has been felt to substitute 
them with aluminium bearing alloys which have desirable bearing proper- 
ties and have been used in a wide variety of applications for many years, 

0.3 While preparing this standard, the views of producers and consumers 
were taken into account and the standard has been related to the manu- 
facturing and trade practices followed in the country in this field. Also 
assistance has been derived from the following publications: 

Metals Handbook, 8th Edition, Vol 1. Properties and Selection of 
Metals. American Society for Metals. 

1972 SAE Handbook. Society of Automotive Engineers Inc, USA. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated^ express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

X.l This standard specifics the requi'-ements for aluminium alloy ingots 
for bearings. 



*Rulcs for rounding off numerical values ( revised), 

3 



18:6754-1972 



2. SUPPLY OF MATERIAL 

2.1 General requirements relating to the supply of material shall conform 
• to IS: 1387-1967*. 

3. MANUFACTURE 

3.1 Aluminium used for the manufacture of aluminium alloy ingots for 
bearings shall conform to IS : 2590-19641. 

4. CHEMICAL COMPOSITION 

4.1 Chemical composition of aluminium alloy ingots for bearings when 
analysed in accordance with IS : 504-1963J shall be as given in Table 1. 



TABLE 


I CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF ALUMINIUM ALLOY 
INGOTS FOR BEARINGS 


Element 




Cast Alloy 


VVrocgh: 
*83 428 


r Alloy 




*8 482 


*8 328 


*89 200 






percent 


percent 


percent 


percent 


Tin 




6'5-7-5 


5-5 -7-0 


5-5 -7-0 


17-5-22-5 


Copper 




0-7- 1-3 


0-7- 1*3 


0*7- 1-3 


0-7-1-3 


Nickel 




1-5 -1-8 


0-7 -1*3 


0-2-0-7 


— 


Silicon 




0-35 -0-85 


0-7 Max 


1*0 - 2-0 


0*7 Max 


Magnesium 




0-73- 1-25 


0-3 Max 


0-3 Max 


— 


Iron 




0*60 Max 


0-7 Max 


0-7 Max 


0-7 Ate 


Manganese 




_ 


O^XQMax 


^•\0 Max 


0-7 Max 


Titanium 




_ 


0-20 Max 


^'X^Max 


_ 


Others total 




— 


0-30 Max 


0-15 Max 


0-5 Max 


Total of Fe+Si-fMn 


_ 


— 


— 


1-0 Max 


Aluminium 




Remainder 


Remainder 


Remainder 


Remainder 


*These are alloy designations adopted 
designation of aluminium and its alloys. 


in accordance 


with IS: 6051- 


1970 Code for 



5. SHAPE AND SIZE 

5.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser, 
the shape and size of the ingot shall conform to IS : 182u.l963§. 

♦General requirements for the supply of metallurgical materials [first revision ). 

tSpecification for primary aluminium ingots for remching for general engineering 
purposes/ 

JMeihods of chemical analysis of aluminium and its alloys ( revised). 

§Recommended shapes and sizes o^ aluminium notched bars and ingots for remelting 
purposes. 



18:6754-1972 

6. FREEDOM FROM D£F£CTS 

64 The ingots shall be reasonably free from slag or dross. 

7. SELECTION OF SAMPLES FOR CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 

7,1 At least one sample shall be selected at random from every heat of each 
cast. Samples shall be obtained by one of the following methods: 

a) wherever possible, directly from the stream of metals filling the 
moulds midway through the pour; or 

b) by milling, drilling or sawing of the ingot after the skin of the 
ingot has been removed (for details refer to IS : 1817-1961*). 

8* RETEST 

8.1 If a sample selected for testing fails to meet the requirements of the 
specification, two further samples shall be taken from the same lot of 
metal. If either of these samples fail to meet the requirements of the 
specification, the lot represented by the samples shall be rejected. 

9, MARKING 

9.1 All ingots shall be identified by such marking as shall ensure full 
identification of the material. Alternatively, the ingots shall be wired in 
bundles; the necessary marks being stamped on a metal tag securely 
attached to each bundle. The supplier shall furnish a certificate that the 
material supplied complies with the requirements of this specification. 

9.1.1 The ingots may also be marked with the Standard Mark^ 
The supplier's certification ( see 9.1 "i shall be implied, if the material is 
certified under the Standard Mark, 

NOTE — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made there- 
under. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that 
standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard 
marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity io that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for 
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may 
be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards* 



♦Methods oi sampling non-ferrous metals for chemical analysis. 

5 



