IS 12572_( Part 10 ) : 1988

Indiun Standard

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

GUIDEFOREVALUATIONOFMEDICAL DEaVICESFOR BIOLOGICALHAZARDS
PART IO METHODS OF BIOLOGIC AL TESTING AND EVALUATION OF DENTAL MATERIALS mai mm

UDC 615'46*001'4 : 616'314 : 614'87

@I BlS 1990

RAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG MANAK BHAVAN, 9 NEW DELHI 110002 October I990 h-ice Group 5

B U R E A U of;

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Medical Glass Instruments and Appliances Sectional Committee, CPDC 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 10 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 14 September 1988, after the draft finalized by the Medical Glass Instruments and Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. The object of this standard is to provide suitable test methods to enable manufacturers and other interested parties to assess the biological safety of dental materials. The manufacturers of dental materials are required to provide evidence that their materials are biologically safe. It is not intended that the test methods covered in this standard should be used for routine production batch testing. It is anticipated that the test methods will be applied only to new or significantly changed products in those cases where sufficient data is not available. As the interpretation of some of the test methods is reliant upon subjective assessment, it is desirable that the test methods are undertaken only by persons with necessary expertise and experience in the field of biological testing. This standard is concerned primarily with minimising the possibility that biologically unsatisfactory materials may be used in the treatment of patients, although screening of certain hazards such as skin irritation may also be relevant to both clinical and laboratory dental staff. Certain materials which may constitute other biological risks to the dental team, essentially of an environment nature, such as mercury vapour, are not covered in this standard. In order to minimise variation in the interpretation of results, quantitative guidelines are given where possible for the assessment of the degree of reaction. Tests for mutagenicity and carcinogenicity, though important, have not been included in this standard due to lack of sufficient data about these aspects. These shall be covered, therefore, in a subsequent revision, after availability of the necessary data. The inclusion of tests for materials in the mixed, but unset state ( that is, the form in which they are placed in mouth ) has not been considered in this standard. Where `in-use' tests are applicable, these will effectively assess any risks specifically relevant to the material in the unset state. The testing of individual components of materials is not considered relevant to the risks to which the patient may be exposed. This standard is proposed to be published in 12 parts. Part 1 Terminology Part 2 Selection of biological methods of test Part 3 Method of testing by tissue implantation Part 4 Method of test for systemic toxicity : Assessment of acute toxicity of extracts from' medical devices Part 5 Method of test for intracutaneous reactivity of extracts from medical devices Part 6 Method of test for systemic toxicity : Assessment of pyrogenicity in rabbits of extracts from medical devices Part 7 Methods of test for sensitization : Assessment of potential of medical devices to produce delayed contact dermatitis Part 8 Methods of test for skin irritation of extracts from medical devices Part 9 Method of test for skin irritation by solid medical devices Part I I Method of tests for eyes irritation Part 12 Methods of test for toxicity to cells in culture of extracts from medical devices In the preparation of this standard, assisstance has been derived from BS 5828 : 1980 `Methods of biological assessment of dental materials*, issued by the British Standards Institution, UK. Other parts are as follows:

IS 12572 ( Part 10 ) : 1988

Indian Standard

GUIDEFOREVALUATIONOFMEDICAL DEVICESFORBIOLOGICALHAZARDS
PART IO METHODS OF BIOLOGICAL TESTING AND EVALUATION OF DENTAL MATERIALS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This Indran

Standard ( Part IO ) describes biological test methods and methods of assessment for the evaluation of the biological hazards of dental materials. 1.2 Systems of classification for dental materials and dental products are given in Annexes A and B respectively. 2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 2.1 Dental materials may be evaluated against

the appropriate test methods as specified in Table I. Where a particular space in Table 1 is blank, it indicates that the test method is not considered essential for that particular type of material.
2.2 The doze levels used in all tests shall, w&e

not indicated by mass or specimen size, be selected according to the mass or volume of material that would be used in practice. Typical volumes of material are given in Table 2. )
Oral Mucosal Irritation IlPUse Test for Dental Filling Materials In-Use Test for Root Canal Sealing Materials

Table 1 Tests Appropriate to Types of Dental Materials ( Chuse 2.1
T;7 Material / / / / / Tests Acute Systemic Toxicity Test (Oral Route) Skin Senaitization Skin lrfitation

x Baseplateresins and waxes X Ceramics D e n t a l r e s i n s a n d tooth X materials X Endo.dontic materials X Filling materials X Impression materials Metals Plasters, investments and die materials X Prophylactic/preventive materials X Implant materials X Clinical sundries Laboratory sundries NOTE - For a more detailed classification

X X

X X

X X X

~~._

X
X X

X
X X

X X X x

X

X
X X X X

x
X X

X

X X X X X

X X of dental materials. 8~8 Annex A.

Table 2 Typical Volumes of Materials Commonly Used in Dental Treatment ( Clause
Material

2.2 1
Typical ,Vplume 40 ( range 35-45 ) 20 0.10

Impression materials ( average of full upper and lower impreseions ) Denture base resin ( full upper or lowsr denture ) JWng materials: Posterior, one surface ( 0 ) Posterior, two surfaces ( MO or DO ) Posterior, three surfaces ( MOD ) Anterior interstitial ( M or D j Lining J+ase Kocrt filling ( single root anlerior ) Root canal sealer

0'20 0'35 0.05 0.02 0'10 0.15 0'30

D 12572 ( Part 10.) : 1988

2.3 It ip intended that the acute systemic toxicicy test ( oral route ) and skin sensitization test be used as screening tests. Upon completion of the screening tests, the material may then be subjected to remaining tests. 3 ACUTE SYSTEMIC TOXICITY TEST : ORAL ROUTE 3.1 Object This test method is designed to assess the toxicity of the material under test after short-term oral administration. 3.2 Animals
3.2.1 Getwral

3.4.2 Administer the m~lterial under test to one group of twenty rats: the orher group of twenty shall serve as controls. 3.4.3 Administer the test material, prepared as described in 3.3, by stomach tube if in solution or suspension. 3.4.4 The control group shall receive the excipient ( distilled water or suspending agent ) in a volume similar to that used for the test materials, or, in the case of 3.3.3 ( c j, the unmedicated diet. C'heck the solutions and suspensions analyticaily to determine the concentration. 3.5 Duration Administer one dose daily for 28 days and then leave untreated for 7 days. 3.6 Observation Examine the animals daily, record the bodb weight and any clinical signs. 3.7 Necropsy Kill the animals using an appropriate method. Fully examine each animal and record all abnormalities. Take the major organs, specified in Annex C, into fixative and prepare slides fol macroscopic examination. 3.7.1 An extensive list of tissues is spccifiec] for histopathological examination ( .WE Annex C ) as it is not known at present which tissues are most likely to be affected. 3.8 Assessment Assess the test results in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and stated usage. 4 SKIN SENSITIZATION TEST 4.1 Three lest methods are described, although it is considered necessary to evaluate the material only against one of the methods. The method selected should be that most suited to the expertise and facilities available. A l ! three: methods are known to have deficiencies in detecting reactions caused by certain materials. The object of all three Izsts is to assess the degree of zkin sensitization by the material under
test.

Use forty rats, twenty of each sex. The animals shall be in the age range 8 weeks to 12 weeks. A random method of allocation of animals shall be used to remove any bias. 3.2.2 Husbandry House five animals of the same sex per cage. The recommended approximate cage size is 330 mm long x 280 mm wide x 160 mm high. House a\\ nnimalq in cages of a similar size. The normal laboratory diet and water shall be available ad-libitum throughout the test period, 3.3 Preparation of Test Material 3.3.1 If the material is solid ( solid may include elastomeric materials and other materials of similar consistency. At the temperatures at which the freezer mill operates, such materials may be expected to be sufficiently brittle to be ground effectively ) reduce it to a powder of not more than 200 pm particle size.
NOTE-The use of diamond abrasives and/or l o w temperatures is recommended in order to mioimise the amount of debris from grinding media.

3.3.2 If the material is a liquid, administer it as presented.
ryOTE - The dose levels should be calculated proporaccount an appropriate safety factor.

tionately to the nvewge mass or volume of the material used in clinical practice ( see Table 2 ), taking into

3.3.3 Administer rhe material either powdered solid or liquid, in one of the following forms: a) If soluble, prepare a solution in distilled water; b) If insoluble, pscpare a suspension in a non-toxic vehicle. c) If it is not possible to make either a solution or a suspension of the material, incorporate it into the diet. Check the diet for palatability and ensure the even distribution and concentration of the test material within the diet. 3.4 Test Procedure 3.4.1 Divide: the rats into two y~~oups C:ICII OI` tcrr nialc and ten female rats.

4,2 Method I
4.2.1 Anittrrrls

Use ten guinea pigs. Normal laboratory husbandry should be used. 4.2.2 Test Prcm'durc 4.2.2.1 Prepare a IO0 gjl solution of the test materiLl in drethyl formamid.: o r o t h e r n o n irritant solvent. 4.2.2.2 II' it is no1 .possiblc to prepare ;t solution, ISI eparc ~111 extract in 3 s1 ilndnrd extracting medium such as cthvl :~lcohol 01' sahne solution. :1t (I trlll[`urature UF 32' C :IIII.I 1'0~ ;I duration 01' 7 day", rlnd~ r sterile v~~nditions.

. IS 12572 ( Part 10 ) : 1988

4.2.2.3 The specimen size for extraction should
be disc of I mm to 2 mm thickness and having a total surface area of approximately 10 mm2 for every 1 ml of extracting medium. ( This is based on the specimen size for the water leachable test for capsulated cements, which use a disc of IO mm diameter, I mm thickr.ess and 20 ml of water. ). 4.2.2.4 Apply 0'01 ml of the solution or extract to one outer ear of each of 5 animals and repeat the application after I day and 2 days. After 6 days applv 0'0.5 ml of the solution or extract of the test material IO the clipped flanks of all ten animals. After a total of 7 days examine the treated skin. 4.2.2.5 Prepare a solution of zinc oxide - eugeno1 in a manner similar to that for the material, for use as a control material to be applied to the other ear of the guinea pig\.

irritant concentration on the filter paper to the same clipped 20 mm x 44 mm shoulder area and cover with an impermeable adhesive bandage for 48 hours. 4.3.3.3 Fourteen days after the topical application, apply the test material ( approximately 0'1 ml ) at a non-irritant concentration on filter paper ( 20 mm x 20 mm ) to an area of skin on the flank, clipped free of hair. Cover the site with an impermeable adhesive bandage for 24 hours. 4.3.4 /I ssessmeiI t

A s s e s s the treated skin of the flank for the presence of erythema and oedema according to the following five-point scales:
a) Erythema 0 - no change, I - slight erythema,

4.2.3 As.wssmr~rlr
Assess the treated skin for presence of erythema, according to the five-point scale, which follows: 0 - 110 change, I - slight erythema, 2 - well-defined er) thema, 3- moderate to severe erythema, and 4 -- severe erythema. Assess the degree of sensitization comparing the reaction of the animals to which the test material has been applied against the animals to which the control material has been applied.

2 - well-defined erythema, 3 - moderate erythema, and 4 - severe erythema ( beet redness ) to slight eschar formation ( injuries in depth >. b) Oedema 0 - no change, I - slight oedema, i. - well-defined oedema ( area welldefined by definite raising 1, 3- moderate oedema ( raised approximately 1 mm >,
4 - severe oedema ( raised more than 1 mm and extending beyond the area of exposure ).

4.3 Method II
4.3.1 Animals Use sixteen albino guinea pigs. No~m,al laboratory husbandry should be used.

4.3.4.1 Note the frequency of sensitization.
4.4 Method III Use fourteen albino guinea pigs. Normal laboratory husbandry should be used.

4.3.2 Preliminury hvestigutio~~s
Assess in six guinea pigs the concentrations of the test material in suitable non-irritant vehicles that may be tolerated with only minimal irritation following intradermal injection ( in two guinta pigs ) and with minimal irritation and without irritation following topical application ( in four guinea pigs >. 4.3.3 Test Procedurc~ 4.3.3.1 Make six intradermal injtlctions each of 0'05 ml in two rows of three within a clipped area 20 mm X 40 mm in the shoulder region of ten guinea pigs. One pair of injections in each animal is of Freulld's complete adjuvant, one is of the test material a t a m i n i m a l l y i r r i t a n t concentration and one is 01` the illir~imally irritant c o n c e n t r a t i o n of the teht ma:eri:ll cmulsificd in the adjutant in equal proporlions.

4.4.2 Preliminary Illvestigatiolls Assess in four guinea pigs the maximum concentration of the test material, in suitable nonirritant vehicles, that may be tolerated without irritation following a single topical application.

4.4.3 Td Proccdurc
4.4.3.1 Use a preparation of the test material in 3 suitable non-irritant vehicle at a maximum nonirritant concentration.

4.4.3.2 Apply approximately 0'2 ml 01` 1.1~ prepared tebt material to a IO mm* patch of surgical gauze over the clipped shoulder region of each of the ten animals. Cover with an impermeable udnesivc bandage for 24 hours,
3

IS 12572 ( Part 10 ) : 1988 4.4.3.3 Repeat this dosing procedure three times each week for three consecutive weeks. 4.4.3.4

Fourteen days following the ninth application, re-apply the test material at a non-irritant concentration on a 10 mm2 gauze patch on the clipped flank of each animal. Cover with an impermeable adhesive bandage for 24 hours. 4.4.4 Assessment
4.4.4.1 Znductior2

Assess the treated skin in the shoulder region after e,:ch application for the presence of erythema and oedema according to the scales described in 4.3.4. If moderate to severe reaction develops, the concentration of the test material can be reduced for the remainder of the induction procedure. 4.4.4.2 Cl~~lk~rrgc~ Assess the tre itcd skin of the shoulder and flank sites at 0, 24,48 and 72 hours after removal O f Note the presence of erythema and the patches. oedema according to scales described in 4.3~4. Compare dermal reactions observed during induction period with those seen at the challenge. 4.4.4.3 Note the frequency of sensitization. 5 SKIN IRRITATION TEST
5.1 Object

2- well-defined erythcma, 3 - moderate to severe erythema, and 4 - severe erythema. bi Oedema 0 - none, I - slight, 2 - slight with raised edges, 3 - moderate ( raised area not greater than I mm across ), and 4 -- severe ( raised area greater than 1 mm across ). 5.5.2 Summate the mean valursfor erythema and oedcma for abraded and intact skin after 24 and 72 hours. The total value shall then be evaluated against a primary irritation index as follows: II&X 0 to 0 5 0'6 to 3'0 3'1 to 5 0 -5.1 to 8'0 non-irritant slight irritant moderate irritant severe irritant

This test is designed to assess the irritation to the skin caused by the material under test. 5.2 Animals Use three albino rabits. Clip the test sites and surrounding areas free of hair. Normal laboratory husbandry should be used. 5.3 Test Procedure
Use two sites approximately 25 mm' of skin on the back of the rabbit. Leave one site intact. Abrade the other site by making small incisions on the stratum corneum which do not produce haemorrhage or disturb the dermis. Apply the test material to each site, cover with a patch of surgical gauze and seal with adhesive tape.
5.4 Duration

6 ORAL MUCOSAL IRRITATION TEST 6.1 Object This test is designed to assess the degree ilf irritation of the oral mucosal caused by the material under test. 6.2 Animals Use five hamsters. Normal laboratory husbandry should be used. 6.3 Test Procedure Prepare specimens of tive ellipsoids of the test material of approximately 15 mm diameter, with the surface as smooth as possible. Insert the specimen into one cheek pouch of each animal by stitching or by placing a strip of soft leathel 3 to 4 mm wide, cut to fit the individual animal, around the neck so that it allows normal feeding and respiration whilst not allowing the specimen to come out of the pouch.
6.4 Duration
Leave

the niarerial in contact for seven days.

6.5 Necropsy

After 24 hours remove the gauze patches and examine the skin. Replace the patches. After a total of 72 hours examine the skin again. 5.5 Assessment
5.5.1

Kill the animals by using an appropriate method and examine the pouches grossly and histologically. 6.6 Assessment Assess the test results for :my higus of irritation. 7 IN-USE TEST FOH DENTAL MATERIALS
FILLING

Assess any change in the skin surface for the Presence of erythema and oedema on the five_ point scales given below: ni IZrythema 0 -- no change, I - slidit erythema,

IS I2572 ( Part 10 ) : 1988
7.2 Animals 7.2.1 General
Use non-rodent mammals t, preferably monkeys, dogs, cats or ferrets ) of such an age that their dentLtion contains recently erupted permanent teeth. In the case of monkeys, dogs and cats this is likely to be when all the permanent teeth other than M3 have erupted; in the case of ferrets this will be after the four permanent canines have erupted since these teeth only are suitable. Evaluate the test material in a minimum of four monkeys, dogs or cats, or twelve ferrets.

I -~~ reduction of less than I O percent in population, 7-- reduction of between 10 percent to SO percent in population, and 3 -~ reduction 01` more than 50 percent in population.
the dcminal tubules:
I -Diqducemenr o f odontob1oJt.s r7ucfrJi it770

O- no displacement,

7.2.2 Hu.vbat7dq3

House the animals to be assessed at each time iilterval in similar circunlstanccs. 7.3 Test Procedure

less than 10 percent of tubules containing nuclei, 2 - bet ween IO percent and 50 percent of tubules containing nuclei, and 3 - more than 50 percent of tubules containing nuclei.
Presorcr o f iq4ammatory c e l l . 5 it7 7f7ce odonlobiast l a y e r per I m m hgtlt o/` cavity floor: O- four or fewer cells,

Proportion, mix and use the material under test according to the manufacturer's instructions. ( Where a range of ratios is given, tests should be carried out at the extremes ). 7.3.2 Prepare the appropriate number of class V buccal cavities in suitable teeth using a tungsten carbide bur cooled with water spray and connected to a slow running ( that is, slower than 15 000 rev/min ) handpiece and dry with cotton wool. Cavities should pass into the pulpal onethird of the dentine without exposure of !hc pulp. The complete operation should be carried out using an appropriate aseptic technique. 7.3.3 Submit data from eight cavities after 7 days, 28 days and 6 months. ( For monkeys the observation period should be atleast 3 months. ) In each animal, at each time interval, fill a cavity with quick-set zinc oxide - eugenol ( Kalzinol is known to be suitable for this purpose ) cement as a control material. 7.4 Necropsy Kill the animals using an appropriate method. Cut out the teeth with surrounding bone, demineralize and prepare serial sections through the cavity in the longitudinal axis of the tooth. Stain the sections with haematoxylin and eosin and a suilable bacterial stain. 7.5 Parameters for Assessment 7.5.1 For each tooth section, record a full description of all the histological features. 7.5.2 From the serial sections, select five which are equally spaced through the cavity ( for e x a m p l e , from a total ol` 30 scrctions, select
n u m b e r s , 5, 10, 15, 20 ad 25
!&lies 1'0; cclCII ) ad scoff on the

7.3.1

1 - 5 to 25 cells, 2 - 26 to 100 cells, 3 -- more thaa 100 cells, and 4 - abcess formation.
P r e s e n c e o f iltjlammatory cell3 in tf7e remainder of the pulp per I mm length of cavftyJ?oor: 0 - four or fewer cells, 1 - 5 to 25 cells,

2 - 26 to 100 cells, 3 - more than 100 cells, and 4 - abcess formation. Prr>.sen(.y of secondary derrtinc:
o- no secondary dentine, 1 - a layer of secondary dentine equal to

less than the thickness 01 the adjacent predentine, 2 - a layer of sccondar-y dentmc betwtaen one to two limes of thickness of the adjacent predentine, and 3 - a layer of secondary dentine two times or greater than twice the thickness PI` adjacent predentinc. 7.5.3 Score the sections blindly. In each section examined, the minimum thickness of residual dentinc should be recorded by measuring along the dentinal tubules. 7.5.4 Calculate the in&u ol' rcsponsc I`or ca~ll p a r a m e t e r for each lime intelval and for eacll material, by summating the individual indicca of response and dividing by the total number 01. observations. In addition, record the m e a n residual dentine thickness at WCII time intet-\.;I/.
5

of the followillg paranlctcrs given

below:

IS 12572 ( part 10 ) : 1988
7.6 Recommendations for Material Under Test 7.6.1 Contrail .kfutc,rial

8.3.4 On completion of instrumentation, wash the canal with 0'9 percent saline solution a n d dry with sterile paper points. 8.3.5 Fill the prepared canal with the material

The maximum limit is that the index of response for the parameters given in 7.5.2 (a ), ( b ), ( c ) and C d ) doec not exceed 1 for any time interval a n d t h a t i t drcrcases with time. The mean residual dentine thickness for each group should be less than one.third of the overall dentine thicknc>ss. 7.6.2 Test Matcriul Materials with indices of response for the parameters giLen in 7.5.2 ( c) and ( d ) of g r e a t e r than 2 after 7 days, greater than 1 after 28 daqs and greater than 0'5 after six months are not suitable for applications which will bring them into direct c o n t a c t w i t h dentine M a t e r i a l s giving an index of response of 4 for any category are not suitable for use as restorative materials. The mean residual dentine thickness for each group should be ICSS than one-third of the overall dentine thickness. 8 IN-USE TEST FOR ROOT C A N A L
SEALING MATERIALS 8.1 Object
T h i s test is designed to assess the biological safety of root canal sealing materials in contact with the root canal.

under test. 8.3.6 A gutta percha or silver point may be used
to condense the sealing material, if recommended by the manufacturer. 8.3.7 The control material shall be zinc oxide and eugenol with a gutta percha point. Remove excess material from the pulp chamber in both the control and experiment teeth and fill with quick-setting zinc-oxide - eugenol cement and

an amalgam filling placed in the coronal cavity, 8.3.8 Materials should be tested for 7 days, 28 days and 6 months and data from at least 10 roots should be submitted at each time interval. The obssrvation period for monkeys should be at least three months. Materials should be tested in a minimum of four monkeys, dogs or cats or twelve ferrets. 8.3.9 In each animal at each time interval, a canal should be filled with a quick-set zinc oxide - eugenol cement as a control material. 8.4 Necropsy
Kill the animals using an appropriate method.

8.2 Animals
8.2.1 (irneral

Use non-rodent mammals ( preferably monkeys, dogs,. cats or ferrets ) of such an age that their dcntltlon contains recently erupted permanent teeth. In case of monkeys, dogs and cats this is likely to be when all the permanent teeth other than M3 have erupted; in case of ferrets this will be after thr four permanent canines have erupted since these teeth only are suitable. 8.2.2 HuJbrmiry House the animals to be assessed at each interval in similar circumstances. 8.3 Test Procedures 8.3.1 Anaeathetize the animal. Isolate, clean, dry and swab the tooth with 0'5 percent chlorhexidine in 70 percent alcohol. Access to the pulp chamber should be made under aseptic conditions and the exposed pulp should be washed with 0'9 percent saline solution. 8.3.2 Pass a new sterile root canal reamer into the canal until it is about 1 mm from the apical foramen, the position being checked with radiograph. 8.3.3 Enlarge the root canal with reamers and filrs inserted through the measured length. Enlarge the 1oat canal unlil clean drntine is: removed flom the length of Ihe canal.. During preparation, irrigate the canal frequently with 0 9 percent siiline solution.

Remove the jaws, fix, demineralize and cut serial sections preferably in the mesiodistal direction through the long axis of the roots and tooth to show the apical tissues. Stain the sections with haematoxylin and eosin and a suitable bacterial stain. 8.5 Parameters of Assessment
8.5.1 Select a section representative of the reac-

tion in the peri-apical tissues adjacent to a root

canal foramen. 8.5.2 Record a full description of the histological features and score on the scales below for each of the following parameters: a ) Presence qf ir~~unumtory
pcriapical tissues: cells i/r t h e

0 - none, 1 - mild - an infiltrate extending less

than 0.5 mm from the apical foramen, 2 - moderate - an infiltrate extending 0'5 mm to 1'0 mm from the apic:ll foramen, 3 - severe - an infiltrate extending more than I.0 mm from the apical foramen, and 4 -~ abscess formation.
measurement sl~ould be made 81 right angles to a line joining the most apical parts of the root at each side of the apical foramen.

NOTE: .--. The

'6

IS

12572 ( Part 10 ) : log!!

b) Resorption o f dmtine: O- none,

apical cmen trrnr

md

I -. mild - r.sorption ( Howship's lacunae ) of the superficial layers of the

cementuni, 2 -- moderate - resorption of the deeper layers of the cementum, and 2 - severe -- resorption of the full thickness of cementum with involvement of the underlying dentine. c) Resorption of alveolar boue:
o - occasional Howships's lacunae present

2 - moderate - resorption ( Howship's lacunae ) present with an increase in the periodontal lipamcnt space 0.5 mm to I'0 mm; 3 - - severe-resorption ( I lowship's lacunae ) present with an increase in the periodontal ligament space greater than 1 0 mm. 8.5.3 Score the sections blindly. Calculate the index of response for each parameter for each time interval for each material. The index of response is calculated by adding the scores and dividing by the number of otservations. 8.6 Recommendations for Materials Ucder
Test 8.6.1 Control Material

and periodontal ligament space of normal width,

I- mild - resorption (Howship's lacunae) present with an increase in the periodontal ligament srace of less
than O'S mm,

The maximum limit is that the index of response for the parameters given in 8.5.2 (a), cb) and (c) does not exceed 1 at any time interval and that it decreases with time. 8.6.2 Test Material Materials with indices of response for the parameters given in 8.5.2 (al, (b) and (c) of grcater than 2 after 7 days, and O'S or more after G months are not suitable for filling root canals.

ANNEX A ( Cluuses 1.2 and B-l. 1)
CLASSIFICATION OF DENTAL MATERIALS
Moteriol

a) Wax ( including synthetic resins ) Shellac b) a`) Dental porcelain powders for crown, bridge Ceramics and inlay construction Dental porcelain powders for tooth manub) facture Dental resins and tooth materials ( including a) Thermoplastic repair materials and excluding metals 1 b, Heat cured plastics C) Cold cured plastics d) Soft liners e) Resin teeth a) Root canal medicaments Endo-dontic materials h) Root canal irrigants 4 Devitalizing agents d) Root canal filling and sealing materials a) I,uting/lining, temporary filling materials Filling materials b) Non-metallic filling materials cl Metallic filling materials ;I ) Thermoplastic Impression and dul~licnting materials Base plate materials and waxes
II, Water based

c) Elastomeric tl) Zinc oxide - cugenol c) I'lastei

IS 12572 ( Part-10 ) : 1988
Material Meta@ ( excluding amalgam alloys 1 Sub-cla.Fsifcorion.,

Plasters, investment and die materials

Prophylactic/preventive materials

a) Base metals and alloys b) Precious metals and alloys c) Solders al Model plasters b) Casting investments CJ Die materials a) Disclosing materials b) Fluorides for topical application Cl Pit and fissure sealants d) Polishing pastes Ceramics bl Metal C) Vitreous carbon a) Varnishes b) Haemostatics c) Wound dressings d) Desensitizing agents e) Topical soft tissue medicamenls f) Topical hard tissue medicaments g) Decalcifying agents h) Disinfectants a) Laboratory adhesives b) Mould separators c) Fluxes
ii)

Implant materials

Clinical sundries

Labaratory sundries

ANNEX B ( Clause 1.2 )
CLASSIFICATION OF DENTAL PRODUCTS B-O Dental products, defined as products specially manufactured, prepared and/or presented for use in dentistry, may be classified into three groups: a) Dental material ( B-l ), bj Dental equipment ( B-2 ), and c> Dental devices ( B-3 ). The definition and further classification of the above three groups are as follows. B-1 DENTAL MATERIAL B-l.1 A substance or combination of substances specifically prepared and/or presented for use in dentistry. Dental materials may be classified as shown in Annex A. B-Z DENTAL EQUIPMENT B-2. I Furniture, apparatus, machines and the accessories thereof. specifically prepared and/or presented for use in dentistry. This group include equipment designed for dental radiological, diagnostic, therapeutic, surgical a n d anaesthetic, sterilization and technical purposes. Dental equipment may be classiticd into following groups: . a) Electrical - normally in contact with patient, b') Electrical - not in contact with patient, Non.electrical - in contact with 4 patient, and d) Non.elcctrical - not in contact with patient. B-3 DENTAL DEVICES B-3.1 Instruments, appliances, and other fabricated articles, excluding those made specially for individual patients, specifically manufactured and/or presented for use in dentistry. Dental devices may be classified as follows: a) Those intended to I-cmain pel-nlanently 01 for limited periods in rhc mouth: b) Tlmc in contact with the patient oni) during treatment: c) Those with no contact \\rth the patlcnl.
8

the the the the the

IS 12572 ( Part 10 ) : 1988

ANNEX C ( czauses 3.7 and 3.7.1 )
NECROPSY TISSUES

The following tissues shall be taken for histopathological examinations: i) Adernals, ii) Bladder ( urinary ), iii) Bone marrow ( sternum ), iv) Brain, v) Eyes, vi) Gonads, vii) Accessory sex organs ( epididymis, seminal vesicle, prostate, uterus ), viii) Harderian glands, ix) Heart, x) Intestine ( duodenum, ileum, colon ), xi) Kidneys, xii) Liver,

xiii) Lung ( whole ), xiv) Lymph nodes ! mesenetric ), xv) Muscle (quadriceps ), xvi) Nerve ( sciatic ), xvii) Pancreas, xviii) Pituitary, xix) Salivary glands ( sub-lingual, submaxillary, parotid ), xx) Skin, xxi) Spleen, xxii) Stomach, xxiii) Thymus, xxiv) Thyroid on trachea, and xxv) All abnormal tissues.

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureuu c!f' Indiun Standurds Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BE and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards

BlS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification o f goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relatin r to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to ~1s giving the following reference: Dot : No. CPDC 12 ( 2044 )

arly ,

-___.

-__.-

Amendments Issued Since Publication -. -

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text AEected

------BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 lic~ional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah &far Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I, T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Koad, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northerr\ : SC0 445-446. Sector 35-C, CHANDIGAKH 160036 Southern : C. I.-T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
Western

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all 0th~~) Telephone { 331 331 01 13 31 75 37 86 62 2 1843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol. Andhori (East) BOMBAY 400093

I~ranches : AHMADABAD. BANGALOKE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. -i..-l_ _ _ _ _ _ _ ~._...".
Printed at Saini Printers, Delhi, India

