IS 9435:2004

(

Wz77

!JJ?m )
A

Indian Standard TERMS AND DEFINITIONS RELATING TO DIMENSIONS OF ROAD VEHICLES OTHER THAN 2 AND 3 WHEELERS (First Revision)

ICS 01 .020;43.020

0 BIS 2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

A U~USt

2004

Price Group

7

AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2011 TO IS 9435 : 2004 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS RELATING TO DIMENSIONS OF ROAD VEHICLES OTHER THAN 2 AND 3 WHEELERS
(First Revision) (Page 3, clause 5.1.1) -- Add following new definitions after 5.1.1: Clause 5.1.2 Term Trailer Length Definition The lengths with and without drawgear, defined as in 5.1.1, the second value being placed in parentheses: Example : 5500 (3700)
NOTE -- To determine the length with drawgear, the drawbar is assumed to be located so that the axis of the drawbar eye or coupling head is vertical and lies within the foremost vertical plane.

Drawing

5.1.3

SemiTrailer Length

The length of the semi-trailer, defined as in 5.1.1, and the distance between kingpin axis and rear end of semi-trailer, the second value being placed in parentheses: Example: 10800 (7800)

(Page 4, clause 5.4.1) -- Add following new definitions after 5.4.1:

1

Amend No. 1 IS 9435 : 2004 Clause 5.4.2 Term SemiTrailer Wheel Base Definition The distance from the axis of the fifth wheel kingpin in a vertical position to the vertical plane through the axis of the semi-trailer's first axle.
NOTE -- In the case of a semi-trailer with two or more axles, the same rule should be applied as for vehicles with three or more axles.

Drawing

(Page 6, clause 5.12) -- Substitute the following for the existing definitions and drawing: Clause 5.12 Term Height of Chassis Above Ground (Commercial Vehicles) Definition The distance from the ground to the horizontal line perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) and touching the upper surface of the chassis measured at the axle centre line.
NOTES 1 in the case of vehicles with more than two axles, the distance is measured at the outermost axles (excluding lifting axles). 2 The height of the chassis above the supporting surface should be determined not only with the vehicle loaded to its maximum authorized gross vehicle weight (GVW) but also with the vehicle unladen.

Drawing

(TED 4)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

2

Automotive Basic Standards Sectional Committee, TED 1

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive Basic Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1980. In this revision standard terms and definitions related to dimensions of road vehicles have been updated based on present usage. Definitions pertaining to weights have not been included since. 1S9211 :2003 `Terms and definitions of weights of road vehicles other than 2 and 3 wheelers', already exits on the subject. In order to achieve harmony with the international practices, this standard is based on 1S0612 : 1978(E) `Road vehicles -- Dimensions of motor vehicles and towed vehicles -- Terms and definitions', issued by the International Organization for Standardization. The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A.

AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2011 TO IS 9435 : 2004 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS RELATING TO DIMENSIONS OF ROAD VEHICLES OTHER THAN 2 AND 3 WHEELERS
(First Revision) (Page 3, clause 5.1.1) -- Add following new definitions after 5.1.1: Clause 5.1.2 Term Trailer Length Definition The lengths with and without drawgear, defined as in 5.1.1, the second value being placed in parentheses: Example : 5500 (3700)
NOTE -- To determine the length with drawgear, the drawbar is assumed to be located so that the axis of the drawbar eye or coupling head is vertical and lies within the foremost vertical plane.

Drawing

5.1.3

SemiTrailer Length

The length of the semi-trailer, defined as in 5.1.1, and the distance between kingpin axis and rear end of semi-trailer, the second value being placed in parentheses: Example: 10800 (7800)

(Page 4, clause 5.4.1) -- Add following new definitions after 5.4.1:

1

Amend No. 1 IS 9435 : 2004 Clause 5.4.2 Term SemiTrailer Wheel Base Definition The distance from the axis of the fifth wheel kingpin in a vertical position to the vertical plane through the axis of the semi-trailer's first axle.
NOTE -- In the case of a semi-trailer with two or more axles, the same rule should be applied as for vehicles with three or more axles.

Drawing

(Page 6, clause 5.12) -- Substitute the following for the existing definitions and drawing: Clause 5.12 Term Height of Chassis Above Ground (Commercial Vehicles) Definition The distance from the ground to the horizontal line perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) and touching the upper surface of the chassis measured at the axle centre line.
NOTES 1 in the case of vehicles with more than two axles, the distance is measured at the outermost axles (excluding lifting axles). 2 The height of the chassis above the supporting surface should be determined not only with the vehicle loaded to its maximum authorized gross vehicle weight (GVW) but also with the vehicle unladen.

Drawing

(TED 4)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

2

IS 9435:2004

Indian Standard TERMS AND DEFINITIONS RELATING TO DIMENSIONS OF ROAD VEHICLES OTHER THAN 2 AND 3 WHEELERS (First Revision)
1 SCOPE

This standard defines the terms relating to dimensions of road vehicles.
1.1 It does not deal with methods of measurement, the units used in reporting the results, or the accuracy required or the order of magnitude of the dimensions defined.

b) The total weight of the vehicle is the maximum authorised gross vehicle weight (GVW), the load being distributed according to the manufacturer's instructions as per IS 92"1 1; c) The tyres are inflated to the pressure corresponding to the maximum authorized gross vehicle weight (GVW) of the vehicle; d) The vehicle is stationary, its doors and windows are closed and its wheels and articulated elements are in positions corresponding tomovements in a straight line; e) All wheels of the vehicle are resting on the ground; and f) The expression `mid-plane & the wheel' that occurs in a number of definitions, designates the plane equidistant from the inner edges of the rim.
4 DEFINITION OF THE LONGITUDINAL MEDIAN PLANE (OF THE VEHICLE) (see Fig. 1)

1.2 Provisions of this standard apply to four wheeler motor vehicles as defined in IS 14272 (Part 1).
1.3 This standard does not cover road vehicles, such as, motor cycles, mopeds or other vehicles, such as, agricultural tractors, which are only incidentally used for the carriage of persons or goods by road or for towing on the road vehicles used for the carriage of persons of goods.

2-REFERENCES 2."1The following standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 9211:2003
Title

The vertical plane Y passing through the mid-points of AB for front and rear axles, perpendicular to AB. A and B being defined as follows: a) for each wheel, the vertical plane passing through its axis cuts the mid-plane of the wheel [see 3 (f)] following a straight line A which meets the supporting surface of the vehicle at one point; and b) A and B are two points thus defined which correspond to two wheels, both of which are either steering or powered wheels, situated respectively at two ends of the same rear or imaginary axle.
NOTES 1 The Longitudinal.medianplane (of the vehicle) is also called `the longitudinal plane of symmetry' or Zero Y plane (see [S0 4130-1978 `Three dimensional reference system and fiducial marks -- Definitions'). 2 In the case of dual wheels, the mid-plane of the dual wheels is equidistant from the inner edge of one wheel and the outer edge of the other. The straight line A is, in this particular case, the intersection of the mid-plane of the dual wheels and the vertical plane passing through the axis of the axle pin.

Terms and definitions of weights of road vehicles other than 2 and 3 wheelers (second revision) Automotive vehicles -- Types -- Terminology: Part 1 Three and four wheelers

14272 (Part]) : 1995 3 GENERAL

3. I Unless otherwise stated with regard to one or more of the items mentioned below, it should be understood that: a) The supporting surface is horizontal; lengths and widths are measured on the horizontal plane and heights in the vertical plane;

1

lS 9435-:2004
(Y) (A) [A)

I

A

1

FIG.

1 LONGITUDINAL MEDIAN PLANE

5 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Clause 5.1 Term lehicle .ength Motor chicle wgth See 5.1.1.

OF MOTOR VEHICLE
Definition Drawing

5.1.1

The distance between two vertical planes perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) and touching the front and rear of the vehicle respectively. When measuring the vehicle length, following devices must not be taken into account: a) Wiper and washer devices; b) Front or rear marking plates; c) Customs sealing devices and -their protection; d) Devices for securing the tarpaulin and their protection; e) Lighting equipment; f) Rear view mirrors;

g) Rear space watching aids; h) Air-intake pipes; j) Length stops for remountable bodies;

k) Access steps; m) Ram rubber; n) Lifting platforms, access ramps and similar equipments in running order, not exceeding 200 mm provided thal the loading capacity of the vehicle i: not increased;

2

IS 9435:2004
Clause Term Definition Drawing

P) Coupling devices formotor vehicles; @ Rear view fixtures; r) mirror--attachment

Bumper guard or bull bar not exceeding 200 mm;

s) Wind spoiler; and t) Exhaust pipe.

5.2

iehicle Width

The distance between two planes parallel to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) and touching the vehicle on either side of the said plane. When measuring the vehicle width, following devices must not be taken into account: a) Customs sealing devices and their protection; b) Devices for securing the tarpaulin and their protection; c) Tyre failure tell-tale devices; d) For vehicles of categories M2 and M3, access ramps in running order, lifting platforms and similar equipment in running order provided that they do not exceed 10 mm from the side of the vehicle and the corners of the ramps facing forwards or rearwards are rounded to a radius of not less than 5 mm; the edges must be rounded to the radius of not less than 2.5 mm; e) Rear view mirrors; f) Tyre pressure indicator;

R

g) Retractable steps; h) The deflected part of the tyre walls immediately above the point of contact with the ground; j) Side marker lamps;

k) Direction indicator lamps; m) Position lights; n) Flexible mudguards; and p) Snow chains.
NOTE -- All parts -- other than above -- of the vehicle, including and lateral projections of fixed parts (wheel hubs, door-handles, fenders, etc) are contained between these two planes.

3

IS 9435:2004
Clause

Term
chicle Ieight Jnladen)

Definition

Drawing

5.3

he distance between the supporting ~rface and of a horizontal plane touching Ie top most part of a vehicle.
NOTES 1 Fixed parts of the vehicle are contained between these two planes except the following: a) Aerials; b) Pantograph in their elevated position; c) Roof luggage carrier; d) Special purpose lamps; and e) Spoiler. For vehicles with an axle-lift device, the effect of this device must be taken into account. 2 The vehicle is in operating order and unladen.

5.4

Vheel lase

See 5.4.1

5.4.1

4otor `chicle or "railer Vheel ~ase

`he distance between the perpendicular ines constructed to the longitudinal nedian plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) rom the previously defined points A or B corresponding to two consecutive wheels ituated on the same side of the vehicle.
NOTE -- For vehicles with three or more axles, the wheel bases between consecutive wheels are indicated, going from the foremost to the rearmost wheel; the total wheel bases for right or for left is the sum of these distances.

I

I

1

I 1--1

I

-i

t-----+----+--4

4

IS 9435:2004

Clause

Term rack

Definition

Drawing

5.5

`he track corresponding to a real or maginary axle-is the sum of the two istance AH and f?H in relation to the NO wheels connected to this axle. AH nd BH being the distances from points I and B defined in 4 to the Longitudinal ~edian plane (of the vehicle).
IOTE -- In case of dual wheels, see Note 2 of 4.

5.6

`rent her Iang

Fhe distance between the vertical plane }assing through the certtres of the front tvheels and the foremost point of the ~ehicle, taking into consideration lashing looks, registration number piate etc. and my parts rigidly attached to the vehicle.

J +
@

no

5.7

Lear )ver gang

I'he distance between the vertical plane passing through the centres of the rearmost wheels and the rearmost point of the vehicle, taking into consideration towing attachment, registration number plate, etc and any parts rigidiy attached to the vehicie.

w
,8 b
*

5.8

klinimum Zround Hearanct

The distance between the ground and the lowest point of the centre part of the vehicle. The centre part is that part contained between two planes parallel to and equidismnt from the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) and separated by a distance which is 80 percent of the least distance between points on the inner edges of the wheels on any one axle.
NOTE -- This measurement has to be done or authorize fully laden vehicle to the maximum

u

b

(NW.

5

IS 9435:2004
Clause Term Definition Drawing

5.9

amp

ngle

`he minimum acute angle measured etween two planes, perpendicular J the longitudinal median plane of the chicle, tangential, respectively, to the p-es of the front and the rear wheels, tatic loaded, and intersecting at a line Dttching the rigid lower part of the chicle, outside these wheels. This angle .efines the largest ramp over which the chicle can move. When measuring the amp angle, no account is taken of mder-run protective devices.

5.10

pproach ngle

me greatest angle between the horizontal krte and planes tangential to the static oaded front wheel tyres, such that no Joint of the vehicle ahead of the front lxle lies below these planes and that no )art rigidly attached to the vehicle with he exception of any steps, lies below hese planes. When measuring the ~pproach angle, no account is taken of mder-run protective devices.

&

LID `o

5.11

leparturc mgle

rhe greatest angle between the horizontal >lane and planes tangential to the static loaded rear wheel tyres, such that no ~oint of the vehicle behind the axle lies ~elow these planes and that no part rigidly attached to the vehicle, lies below these planes. When measuring the departure angle, no account is taken of under-run protective devices.

w
I

5.12

+eight of :hassis Above lround Commer :ial ~ehicles)

The distance from the ground to the horizontal line perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) and touching the upper surface of the chassis measured at the middle of the wheel base in unladen condition.
NOTES 1 in the case of vehicles with more thar two axles, the distance is measured at tht outermost axles (excluding lifting axles). 2 The height of the chassis above tht supporting surface should be determine not only with the vehicle loaded to it! maximum authorized gross vehicle weigh (GVW) but also with the vehicle unladen.

6

LS 9435:2004

Clause

Term [aximum sable ength of hassis ehind ab lehic[e it h ab)

Definition

Drawing

5.13

`he distance between two vertical lanes C and D perpendicular to the ongitudinal median plane (of the chicle) (see 4): a) Plane C is the foremost plane which can be used for the body work, and b) Plane D touches the rear end of the chassis.

k G
D

I

� II

u

5.14

ody
{ork ength

rhe distance between two planes E and ~ perpendicular to the longitudinal nedian plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) lefined as in 5.14.1 to 5.14.3. When neasuring the body work length, ollowing devices must not be taken nto account: a) The loading area forward of the rearrnost point of the cabin, b) Wiper and washer devices, c) Front or rear marking plates, d) Customs sealing their protection, devices and

for securing the e) Devices tarpaulin and their protection, f) Lighting equipment, ?3) Rear view mirrors, h) Rear space watching aids, j) Air-intake pipes, k) Length stops for remountable bodies, m) Access steps, n) Ram rubber, P) Lifting platform, access ramps in and similar equipment running order, not exceeding 200 mm, provided that the loading capacity of the vehicle is not increased, 0 r) Coupling vehicles, devices for motor

Protruding cooling units and situated auxiliaries other forward of the loading area.

NOTE -- The body work length does noi include lashing hooks, towing attachment: of trailers, rear registration number plates bumpers, etc. unless these are an integra part of the body.

7

IS 9435:2004

Claus( 5.14.1

Term
`assenger ;ar and ;hassis Vithout ?ab and Vithout [ny

Definition

Drawing

a) Plane E passes foremost part of the b) Plane F passes rearmost part of the

through the body, and through the body.

h-rc[osure
br the krgine or >ther lomponent~ vhich are `ntended o Form m External `art of the Yehic[e

a-!!!!l qo;------
a) Plane E touches the back oi the foremost predominating surface of the dash panel ir the area directly ahead of tht driving position of the vehicle flanges anc disregarding localized depressions; and b) Plane F is defined as in 5.14.1.

5.14.2

?hassis Vithout Zab hut ~ith an !Wclosure `or the Engine [ntended f~ Form m Exterval Part of the Vehicle

E

F

5.14.:

Chassis Supplied Complete with Driver's Cab

a) Plane E passes through thl foremost part of the body whicl is behind the driver's cab; b) P1ane F is defined as in 5.14.1.

5.15

Maximum Internal Dimension of the Bod (Commerc ial Vehicle

rhe interior length, width and heigh ~f the body without taking into accoun internal projections (wheel boxes, rib: hooks, etc).
NOTES 1 However, the presence projections should be noted. of interrsi

2 If the walls or roof are curved, eac dimension is measured between the plant (vertical or horizontal, depending on the cas tangential to the apices of the curved surfac{ concerned, the dimensions being measurt inside the body.

8

IS 9435:2004

clause

Term

Definition

Drawing

5.16

rawgear ength

?he distance between axis of the Irawbar eye (in a vertical position) Indthe vertical plane passing through the ~xes of the front wheels of the trailer.

-

"F
I

5.17

rawbar ength

rhe distance between the draw bar eye in a vertical position) and the vertical )lane passing through the axis of the )in fixing the drawbar to the trailer plane perpendicular to the longitudinal nedian plane (see 4) of the trailer].

,

m

I

--

5.18

osition f Towing kttach-

nent

rhis attachment assumes as its plane )f symmetry the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4). Its position is defined by the dimensions defined in 5.18.1 to 5.18.3.

5.18.1

)verhang fAttachvent

The distance from the attachment to the vertical plane perpendicular to longitudinal median plane (see 4) and passing through the axis of the rearmost axle (plane V), that is the distance to plane K a) For a ball, from the centre of the ball; b) For a jaw, from the vertical plane passing through the axis of the pin and parallel to plane V, and c) For a hook, from the centre of the meridian section of the corresponding toroidal ring, the axis of the section being vertical.

v

I
(

I

i---l

9

IS 9435:2004

Clause

rerm

Definition

Drawing

5.18.2

?ight of iachment

`he distance from the attachment to he supporting plane that is the istance fi-omthe supporting plane: a) For a ball, to the centre of the ball; b) For a jaw, to the horizontal plane equidistant from the two inner faces of the shackle with the pin vertical; and c) For a hook, to the centre of the meridian section of the corresponding toroidal ring, the axis of this section being vertical.

k

5.18.3

istance > wing `tachmen, Front `Rear of ?hicle

rhe distance from the attachment iefined in 5.1 S.I(a), (b) or (c) to /ertical plane W perpendicular to ongitudinal median plane (see 4) ]assing through the rear of the body.

as the the and

NOTE -- In determining the position 01 plane W, minor projections, such as, tail-gat{ hinges, latches etc are dkregarded.

--1

I

5.19

ifth Vheel ,ea d

See 5.19.1 to 5.19.2.
NOTE -- For towing vehicles with two o more rear axles, the distance is measured t( the vertical plane passing through th centre line of the rearmost wheel.

5.19.1

`[fth Vheel tead for :alculatic fLength

The distance from the vertical axi passing through the centre of the seatin{ on the towing vehicle for the fiftl wheel kingpin to the vertical plan passing through the axis of the rea vehicle wheel towing of the perpendicular to the longitudinal media plane (of the vehicle) (see 4).

I

I

-l--i-

1!39435:2004
Clause I Term I Definition

I

Drawing

5.19.2

Ffth Wheel Leadfor Calculation of Load Distribution

The distance from the horizontal axis of the pivot of the fifth wheel on the towing vehicle to the vertical plane passing through the axis of the rear wheel of the towing vehicle, perpendicular to the longitudinal} median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4).

I

--

I

5.20

Height of Coupling Face

The maximum distance from the centre of the seating of the fifth wheel kingpin to the bearing plane. This point is situated in the horizontal plane touching the upper part of the seat. -

5.21

Distance Between Towing Device and F-rent End of Towing Vehicle

See 5.21.1 and 5.21.2.

5.21.1

Distance Between Jaw and Fron~ End of Towing Vehicle

The distance from the axis of the pin in the jaw or centre of the ball or, for a hook, from the centre of the meridian section of the corresponding toroidal ring, to a vertical plane, perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) and touching the front part of the towing vehicle.

5.21.2

Distance Between Kingpin and Front End of Towing Vehicle

The distance from tlw vertical axis passing through the centre of the kingpin seating on the towing vehicle to the vertical plane, perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) and touching the front end of the towing vehicle.

11

IS 9435:2004
Clause Term Definition -Drawing

5.22

Rear tlactor :Iearance Radius of Semitrailer

r'he distance from the axis of the cingpin to the surface of the cylindrical part of the gooseneck of other downward projection.

M
rhe distance from the axis of the kingpin :0 the farthest point of the front part ~fthe semi-trailer from this axis.

5.23

Front Fitting Radius of Semitrailer

5.24

Camber Angle

rhe acute angle formed by a vertical line md the midplane of the wheel. The angle is positive when the wheel leans out at the top.
NOrE -- This angle is measured in the unladen condition of the vehicle.

A

5.25

Cingpin nclination

The projection on to a plane perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) of the acute angle, formed by the vertical and the real or imaginary swiveling axis of the stub axle.
NOTE -- This angle is measured in the unladen condition of the vehicle.

5.26

<ingpin lffset

The distance from the extension of the swiveling axis of the stub axle onto the supporting surface to the extension onto the same plane of the mid-plane of the wheel. The kingpin offset shown on the drawing is positive.

`IS 9435 :2oo4
Clause Term Definition Drawing

5.27

Toe-in

See 5.27.1 and 5.27.2.

5.27.1

Toe-in Length

The length defined as follows: The ends of the horizontal diameters of the interior contours of the rims corresponding to the same axle are the apices of an isosceles trapezium. The difference between the length of the rear base and that of the forward base of the trapezium is the toe-in, the difference being positive when the wheels are closer together in front than behind, and negative in the contrary case.

!

5.27.2

Toe-in Angle

The angle formed by the horizontal diameter of the wheel and the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) or the acute angle formed by the vertical plane G passing through the axis of the axle-pin and a vertical plane .H perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle).

I q ~ --- 4-- - .-

5.28

c aster

The distance between two points p and q :

~

this distance is the projection on to a plane parallel to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 4) of the acute angle formed by the vertical and the real or the imaginary swiveling axis of the stub axle. It is positive when p is ahead of q in the direction of normal travel.
P --

5.29

v ertical c1 earance
(B uffer c1 earance)

The vertical displacement of a wheel in r elation to the suspended part of the vchicle from the position @responding o f the maximum authorized GVW load to

/ ---

`\

\

\

the position from which any additional vertical -travel is impossible.
[*

I \ \\ \ -i \ ` /' -M / / / /'

I

~---~

13

IS 9435:2004

Clause

Term

Definition

Drawing

5.30

,ift

rhe height to which a wheel may be lifted without any other wheels leaving their supporting surface.
I * I

5.31

`urning ;ircles

The diameters of the circles circumscribing the extensions on the supporting plane of mid planes of the steered wheels (the steering wheel being turned to the full lock).
NOTES 1 The smaller circumscribing supporting plane inner non-steered interest, diameter of the circle the extension on the of the mid-plane of an wheel is also of practical

2 Each vehicle has left-hand and right-hand turning circles.

P+ \ \ ---_ ./$/
-.1. ./-

5.32

Ilrning Nearance Dircles

The turning clearance circles (the steering wheel being turned to full lock) are: a) The diameter of the smallest circle enclosing the projections onto the supporting plane oi all points of the vehicle. b) The diameter of the largesl circle beyond which art located the projections ontc the supporting plane of al' the points of the vehicle.
NOTE -- Each vehicle has right-hand and Ief hand turning clearance circles.

14

IS 9435:2004

ANNEX

A

(Foreword)
COMMITTEE Automotive
Orgunizalion

COMPOSITION

Basic Standards Sectional "Committee, TED 1
Representative(s)

Aatomntivc Research Association of India, Pune

Ashok Lcyland Ltd, Chennai Association of State Road Transport Undertakkrgs, New Delhl Automotive Component Manufacturers Association of India, Ncw Delhi Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune Bajaj Tempo Ltd, Pune Ccntrd Institute of Road Transport, Pune Cotrtrollcrate of QuaIity Assurance (ICV ), Medak District Dacwoo Mntors India Ltd, Surajpur Daimlcr Chrysler India, Pune ];ichcr Motnr Ltd, lndore IIindustm Motors Ltd, Distt Hooghly I IMT I.td, l'injore ]ndian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun Kinetic Engineering Ltd, Pune 1.ML Ltd. Kanpur Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Nashik Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon Ministry of 1[eavy Industries& Public Enterprises, New Delhi Ministry of Road Transport& Highways, New Delhi ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata Prcrnicr Automobiles Ltd, Mumbai S,)cicty d' InJlan Automobile Manufacturers, New Delhi Swaraj Mazda Ltd, Chandigarh `Iata Ikginccring and Locomotive Co Ltd, Pune "I"oyota Kirloskar Motor Pvt Ltd, Bangalore (Rural) Distt Transport Commissioner's Oftlce, Mumbai

SmwB. BHANOT (Chairman) SHRIMATJ RASHMI URDHWARESHE (A//ernafe 1) SHRI S. S. SANOHU (Alternate 11) SHRI U. A. KUKLARNI (Aherrra/e111) SHRJ M. SUBRAMANJAN (Alternate) DRM. KOTEESWARAN (Alternate) SHRI A. S. LAKRA MATHOK SHKJVISHNU (A/ternale) SHRI K. M. D. NAMBOODRIPAD Smu T. M. BALARAMAN (Alternate) SHRI V. M. MANEL SHRJ VIVEK ADYANTHAYA (Alternate) SHRJ A. S. YEWALE SHRJ N. R. KACHARE (Ahernde) SHRJ P. S. MUNOLI D. CHAKRAM SHRJ (A1/ernate) SHRI N. M. KAN~ASWAMV SHKJR. GOVJNDAPPA (Ahernak$ SHRI A. BATRA SHRJ SANJEEV MANDPE (Alternate) SHRI MUKESH BHAT SAXENA SHRJSHARAD (Alternate) SNRJ CHARANJIV SINGH Mu U.K. KJM SHRID. B. RAY(Alternate) NIGAM SHRJALOK (Alternate) SHRIP, K, AOOARWAL Stw.rA. K, JAIN (Ahernate) SHRI A. K. AJGAL R.V. GOVIND SHP.J SHP.J P. S. ASHOJ( (Alternate) SHRI DINESH KUMAR SrnuH. N, SUBBARAO (Alternate) SHRI RAGHLJNATH SHENDE

SHRJI. V.RAO
SHRI P. PURSHOTJ~AM (A1/ernate) SHRJ V. C. MATHOR SHRIS. K BHARJJ (Ahernate) DIRECTOR St[at M. L, SUD SHRI Y. SOMRA (jhewrate) SHRJ G. Y. BHATT (A1/ernafe) SHRIS. N. SRINJVASAN Stmr RAIAT NANJX (Alternate) SHRISOMIT SHARMA SHKJ A. K. JINDAL SHruS. P. MOOKHERJEE (Alternate) SHRI V. R. PALUSKAR SHKJ K. E. TAKAVALE (Aherrrate) SHRIS, SAKTHVELAN MU S. B. SAHASRAaUDHE (Ahertra/e) SHRIS, N. SASANE

15

IS 9435:2004
Organization Representative(k)

`1'VS Suzulti Ltd, Hosur
Volvo India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore

StwuM. N. MURALIKIUSHNA SHUI S. RAMIAH (Alternate)
Stca ANTON FREIESLEBEN SHRI S. V. SUOERSON (Alternate) RAM SkauR. RAJA SHRI K. SENTHJLKUMAR (A hernute) SIIRI

Vchiclc Research & Development Establishment, Ahmednagar
Yamaha

Motor Pvt Ltd, Faridabad

S. C.

YONEJAWA

SHRI B. SAR~AR (Alternate)

111S Directorate General

SHraK. K. VASHJSTHA,Director& Head (IED) [Representing Director Gemeral (Ik-oficio)]
Member Secretaty
SHRI V. ARUMUGAM

Joint Director (TED), BIS

16

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright B1S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `131SCataiogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'.

This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot:

No.

TED 1 (309).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131,23233375,2323 9402 website: www.bis.org.in Regional Offices: Telephones

Central `Eastern Northern Southern Western
Branches

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBA1 400093

23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FAR[DABAD.

GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simeo Printing Press, Delhi

