IS : 822 - 1970

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

CODE OF PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION OF WELDS ( Third Reprint NOVEMBER 1996 )

UDC 621.791.053 : 620.1

BUREAU,
MANAK

OF

Q Copyright 1971 IND'IAN STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC3

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr8

September 1971

Pc622-1970

Indian Standard
CODE OF PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION OF WELDS
Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDC 14 cbuimm
ku
R. Gaora lwmbwr S~BX J. K. ARLUWALIA Saar M. M. Gaoeti ( Ati ti F. V. BADIXI SEE+IN. C. B~ucssx SEBI D. P. CEIATTBBJEE SQx B. N. DM SEU S. P. DAE~UPTA ) Stewarts k Lloydr of India Ltd, Calcutta Dinctorate General bf Technical Development National Test Hour, Calcutta Directorate General of Supplies and Dir( 1m. pection Wing) National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Januhedpur Central Mechanical Engineering Research Iu&ute ( CSIR ), Dugapur

R~pUdll#
Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta

SHBI B. SEX ( Altame& ) Rxwwzxv~ Erre~twsn ( Dstaxor-I), Public Workm Department, Government of Haryana B & R B~AXCE, CIUIVDIQABH &EOVT~VE &WINEEB (ELEC- Cmtral Public WorL Department,New Delhi TWJAL), ELm~srou. DIVISION No. 1,Nmw D~LIII ExrovTwrEN01rmm(ELIccTBICAL~.hXTRALE~BIihV1SlON No. 1, OAL CALCv'lTA(&~~) Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu EUOW'IVEENO~NXER, PWD GIH~BAL SUPRRRZTMDENT, PWLlOWORKSWOBIBEOPS A#DSTOBSS(hntat8) Bharat Heavy Plate & Vewla Ltd, Vinklupatnam SmuN. GHOI)E Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Hdquuten Sapr C. P. GHOSH Ministry of Defence ( DC1 Szau M. M. Grrrrr Mahk Electric Worka, Born b, y Sgar S. K. H~nx _ . SEEIA.P.A~~AL(AII~~&) 1 JOIUT DIBSCZOB R~SEABOE MinistryofRaihvayr ( Mm1 ) , RDSO, C~TTABA~~JA~~ CRLYIST ANDM~ALLUBOUT, IHTEOBAL COACH FAOPORY, Ptlr~xBv~(Alf~~kI) PIUUWOTION ENQIXEIIU -(Sam~.),lammrmLCor~ FAC&HY,PBBAUBVB(A~~&II) (-dmhW43

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI

18:822-1970

MQnbm
SHIU M. V. D. KAXATH SEBI B. V. S-a ( Alternate ) SBBI T. V. Mzrnrw SH~XD.R. MEIITA (Atem&) SEBI 5. V. NADKABNI Sasr V. G. G. NAYAR Smu S. K. PATHAK
SERI A. M. LOTEE ( &#malr ) SHBI S. BALASUBRAHMANYAM

Rcpresrnting Indian Engineering Association, Hiadurtan Steel Ltd, Ranchi

CUcutta

Advani-Oerlikon ( Private ) Ltd, Bombay Power Cablea Pvt Ltd. Bombay Braithwaite
( Alhmtr)

& Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta

Durgapur Steel Plant ( HSL), Durgapur Directorate General of Employment & Training Cot S. G. Pmaa Bharat Heavy Electric& Ltd. Tiruchirapalli SEW H. L. PEUBHAKAR Srrax V. G. JAOANNATA ( Altrrnutr ) Association of Principals of Technical Institutiotu S-1 G. RANABAO ( India ). New Delhi Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamahedpur SH~I K. G. IC. RAO Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, SHBX K. MADKAVA RAO Durgapur S-IN. K~ISHNAMUBTAY (Altermak) Central Boilers Board, New Delhi sarrrS. CLROY Bharat Heavy Electricala Ltd, Hardwar SEBX N. K. SETHI Larsen k Toubro Limited, Bombay Sm A. N. S~BBABIUANYAM Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta SHSUV.R. SUBRAMANIAN SERI J. C. ACEABYA ( Al&mate) Hinduatan Aeronauticr Limited, Bangalore SBBI M. K. THOMAS Sara K. TROMAS( Al&mot8 ) Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Vtikhapatnam Smu T. N: Vuv Director General, IS1 ( Er-o&a M& ) S-R. K. SRIVA~TA~A, Deputy Director ( Strut & Met )
SEBI K. P. PATNAIX

SIRIlo~ SEBI M. S. NADARAJ Auirtant Panel Director ( Strut & Met ), IS1

for Inspection of Welds, SMDC 14 : P 24
Braithwaite & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta Dispomb Inrtitute

cbwaur
Saul S. K. PATRAK
Maabrr3 Directorate General of Supplies & ( Inspection Wing ) Central Mechanical Engineering Research SEEI S. P. DABC+VPTA Durgapur R~~AROE Ministry of Railways DIBSOTO~ JOINT ( h&c-I ), RDSO, CHITTABANJAN Hindurtan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SBlH T.N. VELV
SHBI D.P.

CRATTERJEE

2

Indian Standard
CODE OF .PROCEDlJRE FOR INSPECTION OF WELDS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 22 December 1970,after the draft finalized by the Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the StructuraI and Metals Division Council. 0.2 Thii standard has been prepared to serve as a guide to inspection of welds. It covers the various stages of inspection and the methods which may be adopted. 0.5 During inspection of welds reference may have to be made to other Indian Standards. A list of such standards is given in Appendii A. 0.4 This standard keeps in view the practice being followed in the country in this field. Assistance has also been derived from the following: Weld quality control and inspection. Canadian Welding Toronto. Bureau,

Welding inspection, 1968. American Welding Society, New York. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance The number of significant places retained in the with IS : 2-MO? rounded off value should be the same as that of the ape&fled value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1This standard covers the recommended procedures for the inspection
of welds.

1.1.1 This code is not limited to `any specific process, method of manufacture or type of fabrication, but is intended to be a general guide, fioan where the provisions should be selected for individual applications.
*Rulesfor re&m&lg off numerial
vdues (

raivr ) .

3

uI:322.1970 1.2 This standard does not stipulate shall be subject to mutual agreement and end use of the weldment. 2 TERMINOLOGY 3.1UF~pp~e . 2.2 Terms relating to methods aa defined in IS : 5869-1969t. 3. SYMBOLS 3.1 Symbols for welding used as working drawings shall be as given in If other symbols are used, a complete explanation of IS : 8134956:. their meaning shall be given. 4 STAGES OF INSPECTION for welding stage shall be carried in three stages : by of mechanical testing of metals shall be purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 812-1957* any acceptance standards. These and would depend upon the nature

4.1 Inspection

a) Preliminary

c

b) In process stage ) Final stage BEFORE

Before commencing fabrication welding During fabrication by welding After welding COMMENCING FABRICATION BY

5. INSPECTION WELDING

3.0 Inspection before the commencement of the job should cover alI aspects of the job with a view to eliminating all potential sources of defects. ,5.1 Dr8*g mssd SPecifications the

5.1.1 The contract specifications should Ix studied to ascertain standard of quality required, and the end use of the products.

5.1.2 The standard specifications prescribed for the contract, and thq general standard specifications applicable to the class of work should be `examined carefully. 3.1.3 All the relevant drawings should be studied in, respect of weld details, dimensional tolerances, process specifications, and any special requirements specified.
+Gloasary of terms .reIating to welding and rutting of metals. tGlouary of icrms relating to methods nf ~nrchnrp -1 testing of metals. $Scheme of symbols fopvelding. ( Since revised ). 4

1s: a22 - 1970
51.4 Where the contract specification does not indicate all the standard specifications applicable, or where it has been left partly or wholly to the discretion of the inspector, the standard specifications to be a plied on the job shall be decided in consultation with the customer. &e fabricator should be informed about such decisions and the standards of inspection and acceptance should be clearly laid down at the preliminary stage. 5.2 (klection of Welding Process 5.2.1 The process of welding proposed to be adopted by the fabricator shall be in accordance with the job specification and, where necessary, should be proved capable of producing welds of the required quality. 53 Material Speei6eations 5.3.1 The materials to be used shall be in accordance with the job specification or approved drawings and any deviation shall be duly approved. 5.3.2 Only tested materials shall in general be used for welded work. Where the job permits the use of untested material, separate tests should be carried out to ensure that satisfactory welds can be produced consis_ tently with the material used. 5.4 Inspection of Material

54.1 The material shall be examined and compared with the manufacturer's test certificates, in respect of cast numbers, ISI Certification Marks, where applicable, inspection stamps, etc. 5.42 The material shall be examined for surface defects, rust and corrosion products, presence of contaminants, and any other factor which. may hamper the production of a satisfactory weld; 5.4.3 Since lambrations are deleterious in welding, it is essential that the cut edges and weld preparations be examined for their presence. It is an advantage to use some non-destructive method such as liduld penetrant or magnetic particle flaw detection on the edges or to subject to ultrasonic flaw detection. 5.5 &kction of Consumables !i.!i.l The welding electrodes, welding wire, flux, gases, or other consumables proposed to be used for the job shall conform to the requirements of the relevant Indian Standard specifications or to the job specifications. 5.52 Conformity with the standard may not however be adequate, since a wide range of products may be covered by a standard. It is, 5

Isr82!2-1970
therefore, necessary to ensure that the specific selection made gives welds of the necessary quality. In particular this applies to jobs where the welds are completely or partially free from inclusions and porosity (commonly known as radiographic quality welds) are demanded, since only some types of electrodes covered by the standard may give the required quality. 5.6 Iaepection

of Consumablea

5.6.1 The consumables to be used on the job shall be examined to ensure that they have not deteriorated, and are stored as recommended by the manufacturer with a view to preclude potential damage. 5.6.2 Manticturer's labels should be examined to ensure that the consumablea conform to the latest specifications. 5.6.5 For important jobs it is advisable to get a test certificate for each batch of consumables supplied to the user; and to verify that these teats show confbrmity with the required standards. 57 Weldiag Procedum 5.72 Complete welding procedure should be laid down by the Uricator unless the procedure to be adopted correspondsto the relevant Indian Standard code of procedure. 5.7.2 The procedure selected by the tabricator shall conform to all the relevant drawings and specifications and it shall be capable of producing welds of the required quality consistently under actual working conditiona. The procedure shall lay down only such preparations and tolerances that may be achieved during production work. 5.7.5 Welding procedures which are specially laid down should be qualified (that is, proved acceptable ) by a qualiication test carried out by operators of requisite skill using the approved consumables and materials under conditions closely approxsmating to those during fabrication. These test pieces shall be subjected to all the tests which will a ly to the actual weld and to any other tests which may be requireT to demonstrate the quality of fhe weld. 57.4 Procedures conforming to the relevant Indian Standards do not normally require procedure qualification tests. But these may be carried out,. if desired by the inspector,, especially when the standard providea n wide latitude of choice.

5.6.1 The. welding equipment to be used on the job shall be in atstirfactory operating conditiou and appropriate for the job in question, 6

xs : 822* 1970 5.92 It is advisable to ensure that all welding equipment and accessorier used by hrr fabricator conform to the relevant Indian Standard specificati ne functioning of the welding plant shall be examined, and 5.8 wher, necessary, tests shall be carried out to ensure that the plant is capable of consistently producing welds of the required quality. 5.9 Welders and Operator8 5.9.1 Welders -All welders employed shall be trained, tested and certified according to the appropriate Indian Standards applicable for thepb. 5~9.2 Operators- Operators employed for mechanized trained and tested to execute the required job. 5.9.3 Such qualifying tests shall be made using equipment approved for the job under conditions to those during production. welding shall be

the consumables and closely approximating shall for a

5.9.3.1 The validity of the certificate of welder-or operator lapse if for any reason he has not worked as a welder or operator period of six months.

59.4 A record shall be maintained of the welders and operators who are qualified by certificates or tests for the respective categories of work ,n the job. This record shall be made available to all concerned so that it can be ensured that all welding is done by duly qualified welders. 5.10 Testing Facilities

5.10.1 The fabricator should have facilities for performing all the tests required on the job, or shall be able to call upon the facilities of an outside agency or testing establishment. 510.2 Testing equipment should calibrated and certified as required. be in good condition and shall be tiith and

5.10.3 The testing equipment shall be operated by staff conversant the testing techniques and able to operate the equipment properly reliably. 5.11 AnciUary Eqmipment and FaciIWea

511.1 The fabricator should have adequate and suitable equipment for cutting, straightening, rolling, planing and other methods of preparation'required for different classes of welded fabrication. 5.11.2 The fabricator should possess jigs, Axtures, clamping m&p&ton, handling equipment, etc,`to suit the class of work. 7 device+

Is t 822 - 1970 5.113 There consumables. 5.11.4 There consumables. should should bc adequate. be adequate facilities facilities for storage of materials for drying the and

welding the for

5.11.5 Where preheating or other heat fabricator shall possess adequate equipment indicating and controlling the temperature. 6. INSPECTION 6.0 Inspection Points of view: DURING FABRICATION by welding

treatment is required, for the operations and BY WELDING is done

during

fabrication

from the following

a) Ensuring that the procedures, consumables, operators, etc, on the job have been previously approved. b) Examining assemblies, weld preparations, etc, prior to welding tq ensure that they are in conformity with the approved procedum and conducive to good welding. c) Visual inspection during welding to ensure that the tiork b process produces a good finished weld, and that defects in iniw stages are removed prior to further work. d ) Testing of welds which may become inaccessible or more difficult to inspect at a later stage. e) Permitting modifications, additions or permissible alternatives to procedures, consumables and welders previously approved. ,6.1 hspection of Prepared Materials

6.1.1 The materials previously inspected and approved should be re-examined just before welding is commenced with special emphasis on the weld zone. The weld and the adjacent area shall be free of dirt, rust, oil or other foreign material which may affect the quality of the welding. 6.1.2 The edge preparation for the weld and the weld zone should be checked for conformity with the requirements of the approved welding procedure, and shall be within acceptable tolerances. 6.1.3 The cut faces shall be examined for nick marks, cracks, SC&, burrs, etc, and these shall be rectified prior to welding. Where the material is gas cut and by virtue of its thickness and composition; is susceptible te cracking during cutting, particular attention should be paid to crack detection on the cut surface, preferably using some-method of This would apply even if subsequent machining non-destructive testing. has been carried out, since cracks may not have been removed completely bv machining. 3

6.2.1 The method and sequence of assembly shall correspond to those previously approved, according to the approved procedure. 6.2.2 The fit-up, gaps, orientation and welding pond to thoseon the approved welding procedure.

and the jigs and fixtures and shall permit welding position should corres-

6.2.3 Due precautions to minimise distortion and ensure dimensional accuracy of the finished fabrication shall have been taken without imposing undue stresses on the welds. 6.2.4 Tack welds shall be ofadequate sire, `en th and pitch and carried the correct welding procedures and. %y qualified welders (see ysin IS1 I-Ian fibook on Manual Metal Arc Welding for Welders).
out

6.2.5 Temporary fittings, clamps, fixta `es, stiffeners, etc, where used, shall not interfere with the welding, and shall conform to accepted practices for the particular class of work.
6.3 Welding Consumables

6.3.1 Electrodes and other welding consumables shall be of types In particular it previously approved, and shall be in good condition. shall be ensured that these are clean, and have been dried according to the manufacturers ' recommendations.

63.2 If during fabrication it is found necessary or aesirable to alter, amend or make additions to the list of consumables previously approved, the new consumables proposed shall be duly approved. Whereas strict equivalents or identical types of alternative brands may be approved ype or category of consumable will in without further tests, change of : general require fu--ther tests to zn;ure that these will produce acceptable results when used wish the approved procedures. 6.3.3 If during fabrication there is an incidence of defects which may be attributed to the consumables, the defective consumables should be replaced by another batch of consumables or by another brand of identical type, subject to the approval of the inspector. 6.4 Operators
and Welders

6.4.1 All operators have been previously tests.

and welders usrd on the job shall be persons who approved by virtue of certificates or qualification

X6:622-1970 6.4.2 If &y addition to the list of approved operators and welders for various categories is to be made, such additions shall be approved on the same basis as for initial approval. This will apply to inclusion of more o rators and welders for a given class of work, to transfers from one to another and to the approval of welders for class in addition to C iz3s those for which they have been previously approved.
6.43 If at any time during the job there is any reason to question the capability of an operator or welder, for example, due to the incidence of defects in welds made by him, the inspector may, at his discretion, withdraw approval previously granted to him and demand tests for re-approval. Such operators shall not be used on the job until they are requalified. 6.5 weldin Procedure

65.1 The welding procedures followed shall conform to these laid down and duly approved in respect of all the relevant details.
6.53 Where it becomes desirable or necessary to amend, alter or deviate from the approved procedures, the revised procedures shall be fully laid down and approved on the same basis as for initial approval. Where the changes are of such a nature that they are not likely to affect the quality adversely, the tests for qualification may be waived provided that it is demonstrated that welds of satisfactory quality can be produced after incorporating the changes. 6.53 If it is found that despite conformity to approved welding procedures, welds of acceptable quality are not produced, such approval may be withdrawn. The same procedure may be submitted for reapproval, however, if it could be demonstrated that the procedure was not responsible for the defective weld. 6.5.4 Particular attention shall be paid to the observance of special requirements such as sequence of welding, preheating, peening, heat treatment, etc. 6.55 It shall be ensured that test coupons, extension pieces, etc, are provided as required by the job or as s ecified in the relevant Indian Standard. Additional test coupons shall Ee provided if demanded by the inspector. 6.6 Inspection

during Wcldiiq

6.6.1 Besides ensuring that the approved welding procedures are being followed, it should be seen that the techniques conform to good welding practice. For example, the thorough removal of slag from an arc weld, or the dressing of spot welding electrodes, although implied in the procedure will fall in the category of good practice. 10

18 : 822 - 1970 66.`2 Welds which would become inaccessible Impact at a later stage shall be inspected completely or more difficult at this stage. to

6.6.3 For important welds, inspection during the welding process; and in between runs, is essential. With careful inspection during welding it is possible to identify potential sources of defects and eliminate them at the early stage. 6.7 Deviationm 6.7.1 If any deviations from approved procedures or from approved lists of consumable,s, processes or operators are detected, the welding shall be stopped pending an appraisal of the consequences of such deviations. 6.7.2 It is essential that the fabricator be made to understand importance of approvals and the dangers of unauthorised deviation. the

6.7.3 If such deviations are detected after completion of a part or the whole of a job, suitable rectifications should be made or remedial measures are taken at the discretion of the inspector. 6.7.4 Where such deviations have produced welds of doubtful quality, the fabrication would not be deemed as acceptable unless adequate tests show that the quality achieved is satisfactory, or unless necessary rectifications are carried out subsequently to achieve this quality. 7. INSPECTION AFTER WELDING

7.0 Inspection after welding is done with a view to assessing: a) the quality of the weld by tests on extension pieces or the actual fabricated component ; and b) the correctness of the whole weldment (that is, the fabricated component) by visual and dimensional inspection, by leak and load tests on the actual fabricated component. 7.1 Visual Inmpection

7.1.1 The completed weld and the welded fabrication as a whole should be examined visually, preferably with the assistance of a magnifying lens or a magnifying torch. 7.1.2 Visual inspection and the weldment. should cover all the visible aspects of the weld

7.1.3 .The following types of weld defects may be detected during visual examinations: a) Weld defects occurring at the surface such 8s blowholes, pipes, exposed porosity, exposed inclusions, unfilled crate, unfused welds, etc; 11

IS : 42 ; 1970

b) Surface to it;
C)

cracks In the weld metal or in the parent metal such as undercut,

metal

adjacent

Damages to the parent heating, etc;

burning,

over-

d) Profile defects such as excessive convexity or concavity, overlap, unequal leg lengths, excessive reinforcement, incompletely filled excessive penetration bead, root grooves, shrinkage :=::I etc; and e) Incorrect finish, for example ripple marks, weaving faults, chip ping and peening marks, spatter, under-flushing (excessive grinding ), excessive indentation of spot welds, uneven welds etc. 7.1.4 The following types of faults detected by visual examination:
a) Distortion

on

the

weldment

may

also be

twisting,

due to welding, that is, local shrinkage, rotation, buckling, waviness, etc;

camber, bowing, of parts;

b) Linear, eccentric, angular and rotational c) Incorrect location of components; and d ) Visible dimensional errors. 7.2
1n~pccti0n

misalignment

of Weld Dimensions

7.2.1 Inspection for the correct dimensions shall be carried out in the case of fillet welds, spot welds, seam welds, etc, where the size is specified. They shall be inspected using suitable gauges and taking into consideration the permissible tolerances.

7.2.2 Dimensional inspection of the completed weldment shall be carried out using tools and measuring instruments appropriate to the type of fabrication and the dirnensional accuracy required. 7.3 Mbaical their applic&on
Tmting

7.3.9 Mechanical

tests (often described as destructive tests because will destroy the weldment ) can be performed on:

a ) prototype or sample welds, and b) extension pieces or test coupons.
7.3.0.1

Mechanical

tests

may

comprise

of all

or

some

of

the

following: a ) Tests for determining strength and ductility -Tensile test, bend test, impact test, load test, etc; b) Tests for determining continuity, fusion and soundness-Bend test, slug test for spot welds, etc ; 12

IS:822-1970

c) Tests fordeterminingpenetration
Macrosect;on, etching,

and internal

weld configuration-

etc; and

4

Tests for determining metallurgical properties and local variations in the weld and the heat affected zoneMicroscopic examination, hardness surveys, chemical analysis of borings from the cross sections, etc.

7.3.1 Prolotypes 7.3.1.1 For small weldments a prototype is welded and tested to destruction. This test may comprise an overload of the type of load to which the weldment is subjected in service or some form of fatigue test. 7.3.1.2 For larger weldments and sectioned at various places, required mechanical tests. 7.3.2 Somplc Welds 7.3.2.1 Sample welds are normally required only for establishing the correct welding procedure and would be part of the inspection before fabrication. 7.3.2.2 In certain types of welds additional sample welds are nlade on test pieces using the same machine settings, operiltors and other condiThese test pieces are subjected to tions that would be obtained on the job. various tests, and may be deemed to he equivalent to testing the actual weldment. 7.3.3 Extension Piects and Test CW/IONS
7.3.3.1 Many specifications specify extension pieces or test coupes which would be welded as part of the main weld and subsequently detached for testing. In fusion welds such extension pieces would serve the additional function of run-on and run-off pieces required to ensure the soundness of the full length of the weld.

in repetitive work a prototype is welded Such sections would be subjected to the

7.3.3.2 Extension pieces and coupons should be of the same composition and with the same weld preparation as the parent material of the main It would be ideal if they are off-cuts from the parent material and weld. attached so that the direction of rolling is the same as that on the parent material. 7.3.3.3 Extension pieces are subjected to mechanical tests and the results of such tests shall be deemed to indicate the properties of the main weld. 13

ISi922.1970 7.3.4 Tests for Defermining Slrcngth and Duclilip 7.3.4J Tensile fesfs : tensile test, section

a) Transverse

b) Reduced section transverse tensile test (with a reduced at the weld to cause tensile failure in the weld ), c) Longitudinal tensile test, d) All weld metal tensile test, e) Tensile (shear) test for spot welds, f) Cruciform tensile test for fillet welds, and g) Tensile tests on lap welds (shear on longitudinal fillet welds). 7.3.4.2 Bend tests: a) Free transverse bend test, b) Guided transverse bend teat, c) Longitudinal bend test, d) Side bend test, and e) Fillet weld bend test. 7.3.4.3 lm#act tests: a) Charpy V-notch impact test, and b) Explosive impact test.

and transverse

7.3.4.4 Load f&s---bada may be applied on the weldment by jacks? weights, pulley blocks, or universal testing machines until failure taker place. 7.3.3 Tests for Detekning 7.3.3.1 a) b) c) d) l ) Bend fests Confinti& Fusion and Soundnessof Weti

Free transverse bend test, Guided transverse bend test, Longitudinal bend test, Side bend test, and Fillet weld bend test.

7.3.3.2 Nick break tests for butt and fillet welds. 7.3.3.3 Slug tests for spot welds. 14

73.6

Tests for Determining P~netrrliw and Inhmal Wtld Co&w& Macro-examination. Etching of macrosection with proper etching solution.

7.36.1 73.g.2 h

7.g.7 T&r for Determining Me&ll~~gic~l Ropcrrics aad Local Vu&ions in u&d and Heat Affectrd&ru 737.1 Microsco~k cxaminrtion: a ) Examination of microstructure, b ) Number and size of inclusions, and c) Grain size measurements. 7.3.7.2 HadncJs survgs: 8) Hardness survey of weld and heat affected xone on ~tion, and b) Measurement of micro-hardness. 73.73 ch0mical ana!ysiis. or the

a) Chehcal analysis of borings taken from the macrosection surf&e of the weld, and b) Ghemical analysis by spectrographic method. 7.4 N-e Teaiing

7.4.1 General-Non-destructive testing covers the examination of welds by all the processts which do not require destruction of weldmeut by sectioning or cause damage to it or render it unusable. While this includes methods such as visual and dimetiional inspection non&stru&ve testing will normally cover the use of the following metbodsz a ) Lliographic b) c) d) e) examination, Ultrasonic testing, Magnetic particle flaw detection, `Liquid penetrant flaw detection, and Eddy current testing. methodr, their advantage8 testing, and it is

The general application of the limitationa are given in Table 1.

7.4.1.1 Before aelecting the method of non-destructive neceuary to consider the following 6ctor~ : a) Portions of the weldment to be inspected; 15

18:822*1970
b) End use of the weldment and the functional significance discontinuities or flaws in the weld; c) Material, thickness, shape and surface condition of the weld; d) possible or expected defects, their type, size and location; and e) Acceptable standards. 7.4.1.2 All the methods of non-destructive examination are comparatively expensive and would increase the cost of inspection. Their use should, therefore, be limited to the extent actually required in order to assess with reasonable confidence the absence of unacceptable flaws. 7.4.13 Used judiciously, non-destructive methods given in 7.4.1 are the most significant and useful among the various methods of inspection available. 7.4.2 Radiographic Inspection-In radiography the ability of short wavelength radiitions, such as X-rays and gamma rays, to penetrate objects opaque to ordinary light is utihsed to produce a shadow of any internal defect on the image. The defects are recorded on a film sensitive to the radiation or may be viewed on a fluorescent screen. 7.4.2.1 Radiography may be performed using X-rays generated from X-ray tubes, gamma rays emitted by radioactive isotopes or electron beams emitted by betatrons and linear accelerltors. 7.1.2.2 Radiography may be employed for the inspection of welds of all types and thickness ranging from minute welds in electronic components to welds upto half metre thick employed in heavy $abrications. The maximum thickness of material (in terms of steel thickness) which an be inspected with various industrial X-ray generators are giveh in Table 2. In Table 3 are given the optimum range of thickness which may be tested with commonly used radioactive isotopes. 7.62.3 For material other than steel, the limits of thickness may be obained by dividing thovc shown in Tables 2 and 3 by the radiographic equivalent factors given in Table 4. 7.4.2.4 Thickness above the range given in Tables 2 and 3 may be penetrated by electron beams emitted by betatron ( 25 Mev ) upto 500 mm and by the electron beams emitted by Linear accelerator ( 12 Mev ) upto 650 mm. 7.4.3 Selection of Sowce - Selectim of source for radiography depends upon : 4 availability of sources, b> thickness range to be examined, 4 shape of weldment and its accessibility, 4 availability of power supply, and 4 use of panoramic exposures. of

1s:s22-1970
TAw 1 WIDELINES FOR USE 01 DII'FRRRNT MRTHO]wI OF NON-DRSTRUCI'IVR IIXAMINA'I'IOH
(Chuw 7.4.1) OP WELD$I

SL No. i)

kkl!IiOD

APPLICATIONR

TYPU

or FAULTS

INDICATED

ADVANTAOM

( I

LIHlTA~IOiW

Radiography a) X-rays Aircraft structures, structural steel work. ship building, pressure vead~ ad boilers, penstockr, clactronic parts, etc AU typ d internal tivn such as cracks, piping, porosity, inciusio~, _ fusion, inoompleta pclvtratton d) Adjustable energy lev sensitivity, and e) Fluoroscopy techniques a b) Gamma rays Piro;z;k, penstocks. pressure vecaels and rteelwork, ship rtructural buildin)g, etc AM t+s of internal &ws Such u a&, `pipittg, porosity, ioeluriOt& Iack of fusion, incomplete penetration
a)

a) b) c) d) `lable.

Trained technicians needed, Radiation hazards, High cost of equipment, and Power source needed.

Provides permanent reco d on film, , a) Trained technicians needed, b) Techniques szzed b) Radiation hazards, c) Reference dr defects c) Fixed energy levelr per source, available, d) Source loses strength continuously, d) Low initial cost, t and e) Portable and independe t of power e) Generally lower sensitivity and rupply ( for site work ), d defintion than X-rays. f) Makes panoramic expo i urer [ideal for jobslike p&work-). 1 .

ii)

Ultrasonics

All types of welded work in metallic and non-metallic materials

Internal defecta such as cracks? porosity, inclusions, lack of fusion, mcomplete penetration

a) Safe to use. No radiatio haxards, a) Entirely dependent on the interpretation skill of operator who requires b) Fast, results available im ediately, Sensitive, much experience and training, :`, Indicates presence of la ationa and b) Unsuited to the examination of weldother planner defects . missed by ments of complex shape or configurradiography, and ation ( e.g. backing ringr ), C) Requires surface contact or immersion, a) Indicates depth of flaw albo. and d) Surface must be ground smooth and clean. a Simple to use and inter b Relatively inexpensive, t) Portable. a) Simple to use and inter&et, b) Relatively inexpensive, c) Portable, and requires no elaborate equipment, and d) Will work on all materi `Is. "t a) zacEot require COht# with the Material must be ferromagnetic, Demagnetisation may be needed, and c) Power source required. a) Will only detect surface defects on the accessible surface, b) Surfaces must be clean and dry, and c) Rust or paint will mask defects. a) Difficult to set and interpret, and b) Limited to materials with & electrical conductivity.

iii)

Magnetic-particle

Welds (particularly fillet weldr) ferro-magnetic materials Ail

in all

Cracks, porosity, inchuions and diiorttinuities 8t or close to the surface Surface' `defects only, cracks and blowholes such as surface

iv)

Liquid-nenetrant

welds in ferrous and non-ferrous materials and in non-metallic materials

VI Eddy-current

Welds in materials with good electrical conductivity.

Defects at i very &se to the surface such as cracks, linear discontinuities.

I

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

s8t822-i97e
TABLE 2 TYPE `OF CONVENTIONAL INDUEh'IUU AND TXiEIR APPLICATIONS ( Claw 7.4.3.2 ) 3SAK
~OLTAQB (1) (21 TYPE OF SoBme bf~X !#sA JM

XlRAY GENERATORS

THUJK~~EEI~ Or
iNSPEOTED

&fATBltIAL (

~XL'Z ab

&PBOX

)

(3)
mm Micro radiography, wand and plutia

kV (Peak) 50

loo
150 200 250 300 400 1000 2ooo None or lead foil Fluorescent Lead foil Fluorescent Lead foil Fluorescent Lead foil Fluoracent Lead foil Fluorescent Lead foil Fluorescent Lead foil

50 ( aluminium

), 75 ( magncslum ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) )

25 ( steel or equivalent 40 ( steel or equivalent 40 ( rteel or equivalent $0 ( rteel or equivalent 50 ( rteel ur equivalent 75 ( steel or equivalent 65 ( rteel or equivalent 90 ( steel or quivalent 75 ( Heel or equivalent 100 (steel or quivalent 125 ( rteel or quivalent 175 ( steel or equivalent 225 ( steel or equivalent

TABLE J APPLICATION
IaOToma

OF ARTIFICXAL GAMMA MY ( Clovsr7.4.2.2 !
HAxr-Lxru
EmmaY MAIN OP

SOuRCBi

ELEMZNT it.

GAMMA TEX(6,
mm 5-1s 5-20 20-60, So-150 3(Ll!lO

01)

RAYLINE ii> (2) (3

(4)
130 daya 75 days 33. yean 5.3 yearr 144 140 daya

(5)
MeV W34.0052 O-31, o-47,030 o-66 i-33, l-17 l-3

i) Zll iii) iv) v)

Thalium Iridium
Cheaiu~

`I`m 170 Ir
cs

192 137

Cobalt Cerium

co60 ce

19

x9:822-1970
TABLE 4 APPROXIMATE RADIOGRAPHIC EQUIVAIZNCE FACTORS OF SEVERAL METALS (Cfuure 7.4.2.3 )

SL

MXZAL oa ALLOY K?P iE
(4) 0.13 @IS 1.0 Steel 1.0 1.5 I.4 1.4. 14.0 0.14 1.0 I.0 1.4 1.3 1.3, 12.0 these factors.

loo0
kVP (5)

No.

GAYYA RAYS

(1)

(2)

(3) 0.12

(6)
-

i) Aluminium ii) Magnaium iii) 24 ST Alloy
iv) v) vi) vii) viii) ix) qin Steel 18-8 Stainless Copper zinc Braas* Lead

1.0

1.2* 5.0 1.1. 2.3

or lead in the brass will increase

7.4.3.1 In general, X-ray sources wi!l give more sensitive radiographs of &gher` contrast and better definition in a shorter time. Isotopes ( gamma ray sources) are more advantageous for work at site, for pipework and where heavy thicknesses are to be inspected. Their initial cost is also lower.
7.4.3.2 The source selected for the radiography of a particular weld on the basis of the factors mentioned above shall be able to produce radiog&u of the requisite quality ( density and sensitivity ). 7.4.4 Indication of Dcfccts on the radiographs depends upon the beam of radiation. Table and their radiographic images
a Radiograph -

The indication of defects on their nature and orientation with respect to 5 showsAe types of faults in fusion welds (see Part VI of IS : 512-1957* ).

7.4.5 Interpretation of Radiographs and Assessment of Defects - Radiographs should ix interpreted by viewing with adequate illumination in a darkened room. Before interpretation it should be ensured that the radiograph has adequate density and sensitivity as indicated by a suitable image quality indicator. -l Glossnry of terms relating to welding and cutting (#I' ~lrc-I&. 20

IS:822.1970
TABLE 5 RADIOGRAPHIC IMAGES OF DEFECTS IN FUSION WELDS 7.53) ( (law
DESCRIPTION Gas pockets or voids IMAGE Round ed shadows of various sizes and densities, occurring singlv, in clusters or scat. tered Elongated or shaped shadows A dark elongated shadow irregularly usual] y

DEFECT Porosity

Slag inclusions Lack of fusion Incomplete penetration

Slag entrapped

during welding

Lack of side fusion, root-fusion or inter-run fusion Unpenetrated cavities at the root or between runs Narrow discontinuity produced by tearing of the metal when in a plastic or cold condition

A linear indication straight, dark and usuaily at the centre of the weld Fine dark line, wandering straight or

Cracks

Capillary

pipe

A fine pipe at the fusion face usually caused due to lamitbe parent nations in material Elongated pocket or tubular gas

A

straight dark diffuse shadow

but

rather

Pipe ( wormhole )

Elongated or very dark round .,, . .. snadow ( depending upon the orientation of the pipe )

7.4.5.1 Correct interpretation of radiographs requires experience and should be done only by those inspectors who are properly trained and who possess adequate experience.
7.4.5.2 In the interpretation of radiograph and deciding the degree of faults, guidance may be derived from the reference radiographs published But these radiographs should not by International Institute of Welding. be used as acceptance standards. 7.4.6 Ultrasonic Testing � In ultrasonic testing a high frequency sQund wave is propagated into the metal under test. Any discontintilty in the metal will result in the reflection of the wave thus indicating the presence of faults. The initial signal and the reflected signals are usually indicated on a cathode-ray tube and appear as vertical indications ( commonly called `pips' ). The equipment uses an electronic pulse generator to generate an electrical wave which is converted into a sound wave by using piezoelectric crystals mounted in the `probes' , which also pick up the reflected ~ound waves and convert it into electrical waves to be fed back into the cathgde-ray tube. 21

IS : 022- 1970 Ultrasonic testing may be done with straight probes which generate a longitudinal wave perpendicular to the surface of contact, an le probes which give out shear waves at the specified angle or special IJ ace wave probes. Testing may be done using a single probe as transmitter and receiver or by a double-probe method with one probe functioning as the tranrmitter and the other receiving the echoes. The method can be used successfully on welds in steel from about 10 mm in thickness to over 5 metres. 7.4.6.1 Saliant features of ultrasonic testing : Zndications- In most of the equipment now in use, the wavy line on the screen has to be interpreted for the presence of echoes indicating d&continuities. It is necessary to scan the weld in different directions before the size and the location can be interpreted. Although new types of equipment are being developed to indicate the size of flaws, such refinements are in the development stage and at present the operator has to assess the indications in the form of `pips' to determine.the fault. Sensitivity - Minute faults if oriented normal to the ultrasonic beam will give distinct `pips' which could be mistaken for echoes from gross faults. Even a slight increase in the cross-section of the part under examination will register on the screen. Normal d&continuities such as grain boundaries or microporosity may generate such a degree of background `noise' that a signal from a flaw is indistinct. Thii extreme sensitivity of the ultrasonic method to variations in the acoustic impedance is the chief cause of misinterpretation of readings. Operators - In view of the difficulties in interpreting the indications on the screen and identifying the type and size of discontinuity, ultrasonic testing can only be done by experienced and highly skilled operators. The success of the method depends almost entirely upon the skill of the operator in making the correct settings, eliminating sources of spurious indications and in correctly interpreting the indications. Recording - Usual types of ultrasonic testers do not have any methodb of recording the results of the tests apart from phe graphing the screen, but such photographs only indicate the screen image at a particular setting but not the results of scanning. Other types of recording equipment are being developed, but moat of these can only be used on fully automatic set-ups.

IS : 822 - 1970 e) Slhrrfoys Indications - These may arise out of variations in acoustic im@ance, g&n boundaries, couplant, surface condition or electrouic fults in the equipment. Use of test blocks can identify some of them, but it is dependent on the skill of the operator to detect and eliminate spurious indications. 7.4.6.2 Interpretation and awssmant - In view of the features of the prm enumerated in 7.4.6.1, the interpretation and assessment of type, Gae of flaw and location should be left to the operator. The Inspector will only be expected to assess the functional acceptability of the weldment ba+d on the flaw detection report of the ultrasonic operator. In case the indications of discontinuity by the ultrasonic testing method are doubted, it is preferable to corroborate&is by using radiography. Where such an alternative is not possible, the area which is suspected to contain the defect should be again scanned at other positions and with other probes to cea&m the presence of the defect. 7.4.7 Mega& Particle Fhw htection - Magnetic particle flaw detection is baaed on the principle that if a ferre-magnetic object is magnet&d, the discontinuitiea in the material such aa cracks and inclusions, lying at an angle to the magnetic lines of ferce. cawe an abrupt change in the path of the magnetic flux gowin through the object. Thii results in local flux leakage at the surface over t`6 t discontinuity. If at this stage, fine particles of f-magnetic material, either dry or suspended in a liquid, are a lied ticler will be attracted towarda the Ppeakover the surface some of these age field and pile up and bri Jar ge the discontinuity setting up a magnetic pattern outlining the discontinuity. 7.6.7.1 M&A-The 8vailable: following methods of magnetization are

4

Magnetic flow method - The job (part to be tested ) is placed bc tween the poles of a permanent magnet or an electromagnet. J%W method - Longitudinal etization : Where .the passage of electric current throu h a' ma?n coi of reveral turns around the part to be tested produces a f ongitudinal magnetic field within it.

b) Cutr~t

cl

Current Jaw method-circular magnetization- Wwre the passage of electric current through the part or through a straight conductor enclosed by the rt creates a circular magnetic field around it. through the part by placing it between the Current is pas J machine contact plates of a current flow ty testing machine, or by using prod type contacts to produce Ye ocal circular magnetization. 23

IS,: 322 - 1970 7.4.7.2 The magnetic particles may be! applied while the current is flowing (continuous method j or after the current has ceased to flow (residual method). The use of the latter depends upnc the strength of the magnetising force and the capacity of the material to retain the magnetiaation. The magnetic particles may either be applied in the form of dry powder ( dry method ) or as a suspension in a suitable liquid medium ( wet method ). The magnetic particles may be red or black to provide adequate contrast and should be visible under normal white light. For increased visibility when working with the wet method, the magnetic particles which are coated with a fluorescent dye are rendered visible by `black light' ( near ultraviolet light ). 7.4.7.3 The following are the salient features of magnetic particle flaw detection: a) Indications - Discontinuities are indicated by the pattern in which the magnetic powder is collected around the leakage fields. Fine elongated discontinuities which are parallel to the field are not indicated, and should be detected by using a field at right angles Deep discontinuities are indicated by the `piling up' of to them. the magnetic powder at the lines of the flaws. Subsurface discontinuities show fuzzy or indistinct patterns which may easily remain undetected. Change of magnetic permeability, abrupt change of section and over magnetized welds may lead to false indications. method may be applied only if both the weld b) &&cation -The metal and the parent metal are ferromagnetic. For satisfactory results, the surface should be clean, dry and reasonably smooth.

c) Dcmugnetization - For some applicaticns it is necessary to demagnetize the weldment before the test. This may be done either by mrne form of heat treatment or by using an alternating current reducing the magnitude of the current gradually to zero. d) Ruording of indications Defects may either be recorded by photo. graphy or by lifting off the pattern with transparent adhesive tape or a piece of adhesive coated tracing cloth.

7.4.7.4 Inkrjmtation and assessmeq - Defects in the i'usion welds generally indicated by magdetic parricle flaw detection Cmefhod, and the powder patterns formed are as follows:

Defects
Surface cracks

Powder Pattern Stirp piled-un patterns Diffused powder patterns 24

Subsurface cracks

IS : 922 - 1970 Incomplete penetration Subsurface porosity and slag inclusions Incomplete fusion Diffused indication similar to that for subsurface cracks Diffused indications Pronounced accumulation of powder along the edges of the weld

7.4.8 Liquid Pcnctrant Flaw Detection - In this method of testing a suitable liquid penetrant is applied to the surface of the portion under examination and remains there for a sufIicitnt time to allow the liquid to penetrate into any defects open at the surface. ARtr the penttrant time, the txctsa pane&ant which remains on the surface is removed. Then a light coloured powder absorbent called the developer is applied to the surface. This developer acting as a blotter draws out a portion of the penttrant which had previously seeped into the surface openings. As the petrant is drawn out, it diffuses into the coating of the developer, forming indication of the surface discontinuitits of flaws ( su also IS : 3658-1966. ). 7.4.8.1 The following types of penttrants are used: a) Thin oil when chalk powder is used as the developer; b) Dye penttrants which form indications vislblt in the normal light; and c) Fluorescent penetrants which make the defects visible in ultraviolet light. 7.4.8.2 The components under test may be dipped into the penetrant or, where only a local area of a component is to be tested, the penetrant may be applied by brush. It is necessary that the component to be tested is clean, fret from all contaminants and dry. 7.4.0.3 After necessary penetration time, the surface film of the penetrant on the component is removed by appropriate means. Where the ptnetrant contains an emulsifier or where the penttrant is treated wiib an emulsifier after penetration, a water spray is used to remove the txcta penetrant. Great cart should be excercised to ensure that while the surface is cleanj the ptnttrant from the defect is not removed. 7.4.8.4 On applying the developers the defects appear as amber coloured lines when the oil and chalk process is used, and as red ( or the colour of the dye ) when dye penttrant has been used. Where fluorescent penetrant is used the components should be inspected in a dark room under black light. Defects appear as bright green outlines against a dark purple background. *Co& of practice for liquid pcnctrant flaw detection. 25

7.4.8.5 b&rprtfation and asstssmeut -The shape of the discontinuity and its definition size of the defect.

indications generally take the depends upon the depth and

Because of the inherent human factors involved in applying and removing penetrants, faulty indication, and when the cracks are choked with corrosion products, liquid penetrant method of flaw detection should be used with some caution. 7.4.9 Eddy Current TestingThis process depends upon eddy currents ret up in the material under test when a suitable probe is brought close to the material. The process is difficult to use and interpret, and is seldom used for weId testing. It has however the advantage of being able to detect fine cracks without touching the weldment. New types of this equipment are b&g developed to eliminate some of the difficulties in adjusting the equip ment and reducing the spurious indications. certain types of enclosed weldments such as in vessels, tanks, pipe lines, penstocks, etc, it is essential that the weld is leakfree under the working pressure. Leak tests are usually carried out at a pressure higher than the working p&sure using some suitable liquid or gas* 73.1 While selecting the fluid for leak test, the end use of the component and the substance it has to store or carry should be kept in view. For example, use of a highly sensitive liquid of low viscosity may be more stringent than needed for containers of viscous liquids. 7.5.1.1 Water is very commonly used for leak tests because of its cheapners and moderate viscosity. But if the vessel or pipe has to carry a fluid of lower viscosity, the absence of leak at a certain test pressure with water does not indicate the absence of leak at the same pressure with the less viscous fluid. Leak tests with water are therefore normally carried out at pressures higher than the working pressures. 7.5.1.2 The oils which are to be contained in the vessel or pipe may themselves be used at an increased pressure. Leaks may be detected by wing the welds in the suspected zones with chalk or the developer used in liquid pent&ant tests. 7.5.1.3 Liquid penetrants may also be used to detect leaks with or without the application of pressure. The liquid penetrant coated on one side of the weld may be examined for leakage by applying the developer on the other side of the weld. 26

7.5 Leak Temta-For

1S:822.1970 for leak tests.
air or other gases at pressure are sometimes ustd Leakage may be detected by the hissing noise of the ercap. ing air or gas or by the drop in the pressure. Use of air or gas is not recommended since failure of the vessel or pipe may be disastrous. 7.5.1A Compressed

7.5.1.5 Certain gases like ammonia and sulphur hexafluoride (stable gas ) may be used even at normal working pressures since their presence even to the extent of a few parts per million can be detected using concentrated hydrochloric acids which forms white fumes with the gas.

7.5.2 Assessment of Test - In the majority of the cases any leakage would normally be treated as a rejection and would need the rectifidtbn ( JCC 7.5.1). It is advisable to tap with a light hammer approximately 1.5 kg in the vicinity of the weld during leak test, t0 dislodge the particles which may be blocking the path of leakage. 7.5.2.1 Before attempting the repair of a leakage it is necessary to examine the whole region of the leak to determine the cause for the leeage. Serious faults on the inside of welds are often detected by small lea through a crevice of an otherwise sound outside weld. 7.5.2.2 Any weldment which is to be subjected to a leak test and on which a leak has been detected and repaired should al-ways be reterted to ensure that the repair has eliminated the leak and has not initiated Other leakage paths. 7.5.23 Leak tests should always be done after the welding is camp. lete, and should not be followed by other welding or repair work unless this is to be subsequently followed by a similar leak test.
7.6 Load Test,

Proof

Teat and Overload

Teat

7.6.6 In view of the complexity of the stress pattern in welded camp nents especially when residual stresses are locked in these tw give a practical and concrete appraisal of the correctness of design calculations.
bf stress causes local yielding degree of stress relief. to a certain extent and thus results in a

7.6.1 Proof tests, load tests and overload tests are carried out on weldments by applying a 1Oad greater than or equal to the design load, but not great enough to cause damage t0 acceptable products.

Load may be applied by pressure, weights, jacks, ropes, chains, filling with liquids, or in testing machines. During testing, it may be adequate t0 inspect for local damage of the weldment and for permanent set or yielding, or it may be necessary to .use strain gauges. 27

IS:822-1970
7.6.2 The overload and proof tests are usua.lly carried out at 50 percent overload, that is, at pressures or loads 50 percent higher than that encountered in service. Alternatively these are done at 50 percent higher than the design load or minimum allowable pressure. 7.6.3 The following types of overload tests are performed:

a) Pressure tests for vessels, b) Static overload tests for cl 4 4

and components; Impact, knocking and hammer tests for completed weldments such as rolling stock; Proof tests for welded chains, ropes, etc; and Load and overload tests of small weldments on universal tensile testing machines or special purpose machines. load, overload or proof tests some

tanks and pipe lines; welded structural members

7.6.4 Assessmrnt -During and after of the following would be determined: a) b) c) d) e) f)

Strain at important locations; Local deformation or deflection under load; Permanent set, yielding, etc, after the load is released; Cracking or rupture of the welds; Leakage ( if leak tests are combined with these tests ); and Evidence of cold working, hardening or embrittlement of the weld zones.

The nature and permissible limits of the above factors would depend upon the requirements of the specifications applicable to the class of weldment and its end use. 8. EVALUATION OF WELD QUALITY

3.0 The purpose of inspection before, during and after fabricTa2eo;eii welding is to assess the quality and to exercise control over it. and the weldment shall conlbrm to the required standards of quality. The inspector should therefore be able to evaluate the quality of the welding and determine with a reasonable degree of certainty whether the weld or the weldment contains any faults which would render it unacceptable. 8.05 steps: The process of evaluation of weld quality consists of mhe following

the standard of quality, the range of permissibk a) Determining defects, the finish and the dimensional tolerances required in tb weld and the w.eldment. 28

IS:922-1970 b) Laying down specifications, where needed, for the procedures to be adopted to achieve the necessary quality. c) Specifying the methods and the extent of testing required to assess the quality actually achieved in terms of the required quality. d) Ensuring that adequate precautions have been observed in the process and sufficient tests have actually been carried out. e) Interpreting the results of the tests and the inspection carried out and inferring from these results whether the required level of quality has been achieved in the welds and the weldment. a.1 Required QpaIity

8.1.1 The requisite quality standards should be specified in the contract specifications either by reference to the provisions of one or more standard specifications or by mutual agreement between the' purcharer and the supplier. 9.1.2 The requisite quality is dependent upon the end use of the weldment. In assessing the required quality the following factors afl&cting the service condition of the weldment should be taken into accousm _ Maximum 4 stress stress, mature of the stress whether static, dynemic, repeated or alternating. b) Presmre and tem@rahtre in service- High pressure or vacuum, high temperature and creep-resistant applications or low temperature and cryogenic applications, fluctuations in p_ressure and temperature, non-uniformity of temperature distribution, etc. Effect of failure of a weld in service - Risk to human life and property, 4 posribiity of explosive or catastrophic failure, possible lossof prestige and goodwill, probable financial compensation, other hazards such as radioactivity. 4 S'cial PropcrticJ requrred- Ductility, resistance to cOrmsiOn, imprmeability, electrical or magnetic prop&es, etc. 4 Snfdce Jinish and appccuonce- Smoothnts, straightness, coaformity to true geometric shape, significance of deviations from the appearance in terms of function and in relation to aesthetic value+ etc. - Useful life, permanence, obsdlasence, expendf) ~#k&ft;3 1 . Is>Customersatisjlzction - Goodwill, prestige, saleability, dependability, export worthiness, competitiveness, etc. L1.9 The required quality should be realistic in terms of the quality that can be achieved at reasonable expense. The specification of the best possible standard or a `nildefti' standard may be idealistic and commer29

ISr#2-197a &ally impractical for most applications. It may only be justi6able in exceptional applications where it is necessary to achieve defect free welds due to the disproportionate cost of other components whose satisfactory performance may be impaired by the presence of even minor defects in the weldment. 8.2 QpaIity control

6.2.1 In order to ensure that the required quality will be achieved it is necessary to ensure that the welding technique ado ed is capable of achieving the required quality consistently. The fat'F ities, equipment, proc~ses, consumables, operators, welding procedure should all be such that welds of the required quality are produced. 8.2.2 It is equally necessary to ascertain that due care has been tahen during the process to ensure that the techniques and equipment have been used to the best advantage and that the procedures and precautions specified have been followed. No factor which might affect the quality adversely should be ~veAAed. &2.3 Carrying out adequate tests to detect faults after they occur is no substitute for taking steps to prevent faults. With good quality control before and during a process, a lesser, and therefore less expensive, degree of testing is required.

g.3.1 The list of tests normally applicable to the inspection of welds and we&nents is given in 7. For a particular application, the choice of the tertr and the degree of assessment should be ascertained after a realistic apisal of requirement, based on the following factors : a) Required quality ( SMU1 ) and the provisions in regard to testing in the contract specifications or other applicable standard specifications; b) Extent of quality control ( see 6.2 ); c) Types and degrees of defects that can be expected to occur, their probable frquency and location; d) Significance of defects in relation to location and service conditions; e) Facilities available for testing, and the ability of the available methods to detect the significant defects that can occur; Degree of confidence required in the evaluation of the quality f) actually achieved; and s) Cost of snch testing.

IS : 8?l@i 1970 83.2 The methods and extent of testing shall be chosen judiciously, and should normally be laid down clearly prior to the commencement of This has the advantage of exerting a cautionary influence on fabrication. the manufacturer and his operators and will result in better quahty being Excessive testing will however have a negative aimed at and achieved. effect since quality control measures may be neglected owing to the xsis_ #laced confidence that any defects would be detected during subsequent testing and would not pass unnoticed. 8.3.3 Visual inspection being a vital part of the testing,. and should be first to be carried out and the results be given due weightage. 83.4 It shall be ensured that the required tests are being carried out correctly and honestly and that their results are b&g recorded clearly and comprehensively. 8.4 Interpretation of Tests and Evaluation of Weld QIIIuty 8.4.1 Compilationof TCSL Records - The records of the various test results and inspection procedures adopted on the weldment should be collected and arranged so that they may be correlated and related to the specific portions of the weldment. 8.4.2 Interpretation of Test Results - Indications shown by the various test methods should be interpreted in terms of weld defects, their sizes and extents. Due attention should be paid to the particular features of each method of testing, especially in regard to its sensitivity or insensitivity in detecting specific types of defects. 8.4.3 Evaluation of Weld Qualtiy - The evaluation of the quality of the weld depends upon the interpretation of the results of the various tests carried out, and upon the skill of the inspector in assessing the results of the interpretation. 8.4.3.1 Weld quality achieved should always be related to the required uality ( see 8.1) and shall be evahiated as superior' to the requirement if Where defects occur they should be assessed t e weld is to be accepted. Ia either as acceptable or unacceptable. a!! Repair8 8.3.1 Wherever the weld defects are evaluated to be oeyond the acceptability limits for the particular weld, it is necessary either to repair the d&ctive portion or to reject the weld, according to the nature of the defects and the weldment. 0.3.2 Where repairs are to be carried out, the proposed method of rectification shall be abproved prior to commencement of the repair. For critical applications it may be necessary to perform a test on a sqxuate test piece to demonstratmhat the proposed rectification procedure is capable of g.Sng acceptable results. 31

8.3.3 It is essential that the area to be repaired is inspected after the defect has been cut out or otherwise removed. In order to ensure that the defect has been completely removed, and the weld preparation thus formed & conducive to a defect-free repair.

8.5.4 All repairs shall be carried out by qualified welders. They should -10&1y be done by adopting same process and using the same consumrbles as for the original weld. A deviation may be permitted if the adequafe quality is ensured. 8.5.5 `The repaired weld should be subjected to adequate tests to evaluate its quality. The repaired portion should be subjected to as many of the tests made on the original welds as considered reasonable. In general, all the non&structive tests carried out on the original weld should be repeated on the repaired weld. 6.5.6 After evaluation of the quality of the repaired portion, the overall quality of the weldment should be assessed and used as the basis of acceptance of the weldment. 9. ACCEPTANCE 9.1 Acceptance of the finished weldment will be the culmination 01 rne entire process of inspection before, during and after fabrication and of the evaluation of the quality of the weldment in terms of the required quality. 9.2 Such acceptance should be final and unambiguous and should imply that the weldment is of the required quality as far as it was possible to assess on the basis of the inspection carried out. 9.3 Acceptance should in general be documented by the issue of a suitable certificate of acceptance. Where necessary suitable permanent markings such as the inspector's personal hardstamp may be used to indicate acceptance of the specific weldment. Similar steps would be required also in the event of the weldment being totally rejected, where in addition to a document indicating rejection and the reasons for rejection, permanent identification of rejected weldments should be made. 9.4 Whereas the inspection report would contain full details of the inspection carried out, and the findings at each stage of inspection, acceptance certil'icates will generally not contain such details, but will be confined to certifying that after carrying out the inspection in all respects, the weldment has been found to be of acceptable quality,

32

IS t 822 4970

APPENDIX ( czuuse0.3 )
LIST OF INDIAN STANDARD PRACTLCE RELEVANT TO

A
AND CODES OF OF WELDING

SPECIFICATIONS THE INSPECTION

A-L Standards listed below pertain to or may require to be consulted in This list is only indicative and connection with the inspection of welding. does not cover very unusual applications..
a) Materials

1) Rolled Steel

IS : 226-1969
IS :80&1964 ( retist-d) -IS: 961-1962 IS: 1079-1968 revision ) IS: 1173-1967 IS: 1252-1958

Structural Rolled Structural Hot

steel ( standard quality) channel and

(fourth revision) angle sections

steel beam,

steel (high tensile) carbon

(revised) strip (second

rolled

steel sheet and

Hot rolled and slit steel, tee bars (jrsl're~ision) Rolled steel sections bulb angles Dimensions for steel plate, sheet and strip for and general engineering purposes and

IS : 1730-1961
structural

*IS : 1731-1961 Dimensions for steel flats and for structural general engineering purposes *IS ; 1732-1961 Dimension for round and square structural and general engineering purposes IS: 1762-1961 Code for designation and cutting of steel tolerances IS: 1852-1967 Rolling steel products IS: 1863-1961 IS : 1977-1969 IS : 2002-l 962 Structural

steel bars for

for hot-rolled

Dimensions

for rolled steel bulb plates steel (ordinary quality ) of wrought quality )

Steel plates for boilers

IS: 2049-1963 Colour code for the identification steels for general engineering purposes 1 S : 2062-1969 Structural ( jirst revL ion ) !S : 3039-1965 Structural steel steel ( fusion welding

( shipbuilding boilers,

quality) vessels and

IS: 3503-1966 Steel for marine welded machinery structures IS : 3747.1966
`Since

pressure

Steel for flanging and pressing 33

rcvimai.

IS r 022 - 1970 2) Steel Castings IS : 2856-1964 Carbon steel castings suitable temperature service (fusion welding quality) 3) Other Metals IS : 737-19& Wrought aluminium and aluminium alloys, sheet and strip (for general engineering purposes) ( rcviscd) IS : 1550-1967 Copper' sheet and strip for the manufacture utensils and for the general purposes (jrst revision) 4) Tubes IS : 1161-1968 Steel tubes for structural purpose (ssrond r&ion) IS: 1239 (Part I)-1968 Mild steel tubes, tubular5 and other wrought steel fittings: Part 1 Mild steel tubes (second revision ) IS: 1914-1961 Carbon steel boiler tubes and superheater tubes IS :35891966 Electrically welded steel *pipes for water, gas and sewage (200 to 2 000 mm nominal diameters) IS : 3601- 1966 Steel tubes for mechanical and general engineering purposes IS : 4310-1967 Weldable steel pipe fittings for marine purposes IS : 4922-1968 Seamless, steel tubrr (suitable for weldings) for aircraft purposes b)Electrode# of for high

and Conwmablem

1) Wdding Ro& and Electrodes
IS: 814-1970 Covered electrodes for metal arc welding of structural steel (third retiioa) IS :815-1966 Classilication and coding of covered electrodes for metal arc welding of mild steel and low alloy high tensile steel (revised) 18:1278-1967 Filler rods and wires for gas welding (Jut revision ) IS: 1395-1964 Molybdenum and chromium molybdenum low alloy steel electrodes for metal-arc welding (rdDisbd) IS: 2680-1964 Filler rods and wires for inert gas tungsten (UC welding IS : 2879-1967 Mild steel for metal arc welding electrode core wire (j&St revision ) 34

IS : a22 - 1970 IS : 4972-1968 IS : 5206-1969 nickel steel IS: 5511-1969 of cast iron Resistance spot-welding electrodes Corrosion-resisting chromium and chromiumcovered electrodes for manual metal arc welding Covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding

2) Automatic Arc Welding Wiri and Flux IS:36131966 Acceptance submerged arc welding 3) Gas Welding IS : 5760-1969 Compressed argon c) Welding Equipment and Accessories type arc welding transformers tests fat wire flux combination for

1) Arc Welding IS: 1851-1966 Single operator
(jrst rekion )

IS : 26351966 IS:.2641-1964 IS : 45591968

dc electric welding generators ( retised) Electrical welding accessories Single operator rectifier type dc arc welder

2) Resistance Welding IS : 4894 ( Part I)-1968 Resistance welding equipment: Part I Single-phase transformers IS : 4864 ( Part II )-1968 Resistance welding equipment: Part II Single-phase rocker arm spot welding machines welding equipment: IS:4864 (Part III )-I969 Resistance Part III Single-phase spot and projection welding machines d) Terminology and Symbols

1) TefminoloBly IS : 812-1957 Glossary of terms relating to welding and cutting of metals IS: 813-1961 Scheme of symbols for welding ( a&cd)

l )

Training and Testing of Welders 1) IS : 817-1966 Code of practice for training and testing of metal arc welders (rctised) 2) IS: 1181-1967 Qualifying test for metal-arc welders (engaged in welding structures other than pipes ) (.l;rrt retisiot~ ) 35

Is:m-1970 f ) Codes of Procedure
IS:819-1957 Code of practice for resistance light assemblies in mild steel IS: 823-1964 Code of procedure of mild steel IS: 2811-1964 Recommendations arc-welding of stainless steel IS:4944-1968 Code of procedure temperatures g) Mechanical Testing spot welding for

for manual metal arc welding for manual tungsten inert-gas

for welding

at low ambient

1) Tcnsik

Testing
Method for tensile testing of steel wire other

IS: 1521-1960

IS: 16081960 Method for tensile testing of steel products than sheet, strip, wire and tube

IS : 1663 ( Part I )-1960 Method for tensile testing of steel sheet and strip: Part I Steel sheet and strip of thickness 0.5 mm to3mm IS : 1663 (Part II )-1962 Method for tensile testing of steel sheet and strip: Part II Steel sheet and strip of thickness above 3mm Method for tensile testing of steel tubes IS: 1894-1962

2)

Impact Test IS : 1499-1959
steel IS : 1598-1960 Method for izod impact test for steel Method for clarpy impact test ( U-notch) for

3) Bend Test

IS : 1403-1959

Method for reverse bend test for steel sheet and strip less than 3 mm thick other

IS: 1599-1960 Method for bend test for steel products than sheet, strip, wire and tube IS : 23241963 4) Hardness Test *IS : 1500-1959 *IS : 1501-1959 Method Method for Brine11 hardness for Vickers hardness for Rockwell test for steel test for steel test (B Method for bend test on steel tubes

+IS:1586-1960 Methods scales) for steel

hardness

and

*since rcviud.

36

ISr822-1970 1S : 5972-1969 Method for Rockwell (N and T scale) for steel
h) Non-Destructive Testing

superficial

hardness

test

IS : 1182-1967 Recommended practice for radiographic examination of fusion welded butt joints to steel plates (firsl rcsision ) IS : 2478-1963 Glossary of terms relating to industrial radiology IS: 2595-1963Code of practice for radiographic testing IS : 2598-1966 Safety code for industrial radiographic practice IS: 3657-1966 Radiographic image quality indicators 2) Ullrasonics IS: 2417-1963 Glossary of terms relating to ultrasonic testing IS: 3664-1966 Code of practice for ultrasonic testing by pulse echo method ( direct contact ) IS : 42251967 Recommended practice for ultrasonic testing of steel plates IS: 4260-1967 Recommended practice for ultrasonic testing of welds in ferritic steel
3) Moptic Particle Flaw Detection

18:3415-1966 detection IS: 3703-1966 detection IS : 3658-1966 detection
4) Tesling of Welds

Glossary of terms used in magnetic Code Code of of practice practice for magnetic for liquid

particle particle

flaw flaw flaw

penetrant

IS: 3600-1966 `Code of procedure joints and weld metal in steel j) Applications: Use and Design

for testing of fusion

welded

1) Slructurul Steel Work
IS:800-1962

general

Code building

of practice -for use of structural construction (n&d) 37

steel in

ISr.s22-1970 IS : 803-1962 Code of practice for design, fabrication and erection of vertical mild steel cylindrical welded oil storage tanks IS : 805-1968 Code of practice for use of steel in gravity water tanks IS : 1024-1968 Code of practice for use of welding in bridges and structuressubject to dynamic loading Is:2751-1966 Code of practice for welding of mild steel bars used for reinforced concrete construction

38

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 6375,323 0402 Fax : 01 113234062,Sl 113239390 Telegriuns : Manaksanstha (Common to all Dffices) Telephone 0-77 00 32

Central Laboratory

:

Plot No. PO/Q,Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 ReglOMl ouhzes: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastem

323 76 17 337 66 62 603643 23523 15 632 92 95

: l/14 CIT.Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Manildole.,CALCUTTA 700054

Northern : SC0 335336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIOARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 tWestem : Manakalaya, EQ, Behind Marof Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 Branch OtTices:: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 360001 SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560056 Gangotri Complex, 51h Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 6263, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 Kalaikathi Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 5315 Ward No.26 R.G. Barua Road. 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 761033
5-8-56C,L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampaliy Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001

5501346 639 49 55 554021 40 36.27 2101 41 6-26 66 01 6-71 lBQ6
541137

20 10 63 37 29 25 216676

E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 117/416 8, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 206605 Seth Bhawan. 2nd Floor. LUCKNOW 226001 Behind Leela Ciiema, Naval Kishore Road,

236923

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 600013 T.C. No. 14/l 421, University P. 0. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM /nspscUorr Offices (With Sale Point) : Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A, West High Court Road,`Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institutionof Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 695034

26 23 05 621 17 52 51 71 323635

*Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 tSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAl406607 *Sales Dffice is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, BANGALORE 560002 Printed

27 1065 3096526 222 39 71

at Simco Printing Prsas~Delhi India

