**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 762 (1988) : Method for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to hypochlorite bleaching [TXD 5: 
Chemical Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 762 - IMS 

(Reaffirmed 1997) 



METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR 

FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS TO 

HYPOCHLORITE BLEACHING 

( First Revision ) 



First Reprint MARCH 1992 
UDC 677-016-473-4 : 535-684-32 



O Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



Gr 1 December 1988 



IS : 762 -1988 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR 

FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS TO 

HYPOCHLORITE BLEACHING 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
20 May 1988, after the draft finalized by the Che- 
mical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1956 
and has been revised to align it with ISO 105/N- 
1978 Textiles — Tests for colour fastness NOl 
Colour fastness to bleaching : Hypochlorite, 
issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO). Further the sampling 
clause and the assessment of colour fastness has 
been modified similar to other latest Indian 



Standards on colour fastness tests. 

0.3 Colour fastness of textile materiak is of con- 
siderable importance to the consumer. The 
fastness depends not only upon the nature and 
depth of shade of the dyestuif used but also upon 
the natiu-e of the fibre and the method of dyeing 
or printing employed; the same colouring matter, 
when used in dyeing or printing different fibres 
or when applied by different methods upon the 
same fibre, may give vastly different results. 
Formulation of standard methods of test for deter- 
mining colour fastness of textile materials to 
different agencies and processes likely to effect 
change in colour is, therefore, necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for the 
determination of colour fastness of textile materials 
of all kinds and in all forms to the action of blea- 
ching baths containing sodium or calcium hypo- 
chlorite in concentrations normally used in com- 
mercial bleaching. 

1.1.1 The method is applicable principally, 
but not exclusively, to natural and regenerated 
cellulose textile materials. 

2. PRINCIPLES 

2.1 A specimen of the textile is agitated in a solu- 
tion of sodium or calcium hypochlorite, rinsed 
in water, agitated in a hydrogen peroxide solution 
or sodixmi bisulphite solution, rinsed and dried. 
The change in colour is assessed with grey scale. 

3. SAMPLING 

3,1 Sample to determine conformity of a lot of 
coloured textile material to a specification shall 
be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

3JZ Sample drawn in compliance with the relevant 
material specification or as agreed to. between 
the buyer and the seller to evaluate colour fastness 
of the material in the lot shall representative of 
the lot. 



4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Container — made of glass or glazed porce- 
lain with provision for closing. 

4JI Grey Scale — for evaluating change in colour, 

5. REAGENT 

5.0 Quality of Reagents — Unless otherwise 
specified, pure chemicals shall be employed in 
tests and distilled water (see IS : 1070 - 1977* ) 
shall be used where the use of water as a reagent 
is intended. 

Note — Pure chemicals shall mean chemicals that 
do not contain impurities which affect the test results. 

5.1 Sodiam Hypochlorite ( NaOCl ) Solution — 

containing 2 g of available chlorine per litre, 
buffered at pH 11 ± 0-2 with 10 g of anhy- 
drous sodium carbonate (Na^COa) per litre 
at 27 ±2°C. To prepare this reagent, use 
sodium hypochlorite of the following composi- 
tioi) : 



Active chlorine 

Sodium chloride ( NaCl ) 

Sodirnn hydroxide ( NaOH ), 
Max 



140 to 160 g/1 
120 to, 170 g/1 
20 g/1 



♦Specification for water for general laboratory 
(second revision). 



use 



1 



IS : 762 - 1988 



Sodium carbonate ( NajCO, ), 20 g/1 
Max 



Iron ( Fe ), Max 



0^01 g/1 



5J! Hydrogen Peroxide Solution — containing 
2*5 ml of hydrogen peroxide [30 percent {mjm ) 
H2O2 ] per litre or sodium bisulphite (NaHSOg ) 
solution ( 5 g/1 ). 

S3 Soap Solution — containing 5 g of soap per 
litre {see 5.1 of IS : 3361 - 1979*) for wetting 
out water-repellent fabrics. 

6. PREPARATION OF lEST SPECIMENS 

6.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, use a speci- 
men 10 cm X 4 cm. 

6u2 If the textile to be tested is yam, knit or weave 
it into fabric and use a specimen 10 cm x 4 cm, 
or make a wick of parallel lengths 10 cm long 
and about 0*5 cm in diameter tied near both ends. 

63 ff the textile to be tested is loose fibre, comb 
and compress enough of it to form a sheet 
10cmx4cm; inorder to support the fibres, sew 
the sheet on a piece of cloth which will not affect 
the action of the hypochlorite on the specimen. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 If the textile to be tested has a water-repellent 
finish, wet out the specimen thoroughly in the 
soap solution at 25 to SO^'C. Drain the specimen 
of excess liquor so that it retains approximately 
its dry mass of wetting-out solution and imme- 
diately place the specimen in an open form in 
the sodium hypochlorite solution at 27 ± 2*C 
at a liquor ratio of 1 : 50. 



7.2 If the textile to be tested has no water repel- 
lent finish, wet out the specimen, in distilled water 
at room temperature, remove the excess water 
and place the test specimen in an open form in 
the sodium hypochlorite solution at 27 ± 2°C 
at a liquor ratio of 1 : 50. 

7.3 Close the containeV and keep the specimen 
in the solution at 27 ± 2°C for 60 min. Avoid 
exposure to direct sunlight. 

7.4 Rinse the specimen thoroughly in cold run- 
ning tap water and then stir it for 10 min in one 
of the solutions of H2O2 or sodium bisulphite 
at room temperatiu*e. 

7.5 Rinse the specimen thoroughly in cold running 
tap water, remove the excess water and dry the 
specimen by lumging it in air in shade at a tempe- 
rature not exceeding 60°C. 

7.6 Evaluation — Assess the change in colour 
of the specimen with grey scale by the method 
presceribed in 18:768-1982*. 

Note 1 — Treated test specimens and the pieces of 
adjacent farics should have cooled after drying and 
should have regained tiieir normal moisture content before 
evaluation. 

Note 2 — In cases of doubt in the colour fastness 
rating as assessed by an observer, the assessment should 
be done by at least three observers and the overall average 
rating should be reported. 

8. REPORT 

8.1 Report the numerical rating for change in 
colour of each specimen tested. 



*Method for determination of colour fastness of textile 
materkds to washing : Test 2 ( first revision ). 



♦Method for evaluating change in colour ( first revision ). 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



