Ттт яте IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


area a ata — ҒӘ 


APT 2 WHR ARAL 


Concentrated Solar Thermal — 
Specification 


Part 2 Scheffler Concentrator 


ICS 27.160 


© BIS 2017 


ada res = 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM чач, 9 етте WAL Wn ae fereit-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2017 Price Group 5 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 4 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard has five Parts under general title Concentrated solar thermal — Specification. Other parts in this 
series are: 


Part1 Paraboloid dish concentrator 
Part 3 Parabolic trough concentrator 
Part4 Моп imaging concentrator 
Part5 Test methods 
The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 
Pressure 1 Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 
1 kgf/mm? = 9.806 65 MPa 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded offin accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


Indian Standard 


CONCENTRATED SOLAR THERMAL — 
SPECIFICATION 


PART 2 SCHEFFLER CONCENTRATOR 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 2) specifies the requirements 
for scheffler dish and various components, for process 
heating and steam generation, for the temperature range 
between 100°C to 175°C. 


1.2 This standard does not apply to the any other dish 
other than scheffler dish. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreement based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For purpose of this standard, following definitions shall 
apply: 
3.1 Emittance — Ratio of radiant existence of body 


to that of full radiator (black body) at the same 
temperature. 


3.2 Reflectance — Ratio of the radiant flux reflected 
from a surface to that of the incident radiation. 


3.3 Absorptance — Ratio of the radiant flux absorbed 
by an element of a surface to that of the incident 
radiation. 


3.4 Transmittance — Ratio of the radiant flux passing 
through a body to that of the incident radiation. 


3.5 Wind Speed — Air speed measured by anemometer 
at height of 10 m above ground level. 


3.6 Paraboloid Dish Type Solar Concentrator 
System — Point focus collector that focuses solar 
radiation by means ofa spherical, paraboloid or Fresnel 
paraboloid reflector arrangement. 


3.7 Solar Tracker — Power driven controls operated 
movable two axes support which shall be employed to 
keep the paraboloid dish oriented with respect to sun. 


3.8 Receiver — A part of concentrating collector to 


which solar radiation is finally directed comprising of 
absorber and any associated glass cover through which 
radiation is passed. 


3.9 Aperture Area — Maximum projected area 
through which un-concentrated solar radiation enters 
the collector. 


3.10 Time Constant — Time required for an 
exponential process to reach 63.22 percent of his final 
value. 


3.11 Symbols 

О  — rate of energy W 

A, — aperture area т? 

Il, = beam normal solar irradiance W/m? 

a, — temperature dependence first W/m?K 
degree heat loss coefficient 

a, — temperature dependence W/m?K* 
fourth degree heat loss 
coefficient 


— mean temperature at receiver °C 


T, — ambient temperature "C 

N, — optical efficiency Dimensionless 

Н — overall thermal Dimensionless 
efficiency 


4 SCHEFFLER DISH AND COMPONENT 
SPECIFICATION 


4.1 Design 


The scheffler reflector is a small lateral section of a 
much larger paraboloid. The inclined cut produces the 
typical elliptical shape of the scheffler reflector. The 
sunlight that falls onto this section ofthe paraboloid is 
reflected sideways to the focus located at some distance 
of the reflector. 


4.1.1 The axis of daily rotation 1s located exactly in 
North-South direction, parallel to earth axis and runs 
through the center of gravity ofthe reflector (see Fig. 1). 


The collector of scheffler reflector is an assembly of 
flat shaped solar grade glass mirrors arranged on a 
structural steel framework. The mirrors are arranged 
to give a paraboloidal shape and reflect the incident 
solar radiation to a common point, that is the receiver. 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


APERTURE 


Fic. 1 SCHEFFLER DISH: LATERAL SECTION OF A 
PARABOLOID 


4.1.2 By means of a tracking device, which consists of 
mechanical and control devices, the reflector tracks the 
Sun daily, from East to West. The focus is located on 
the axis of rotation to prevent it from moving when the 
reflector rotates. The distance between focus and centre 
of the reflector depends on the selected parabola. 
During the day the concentrated light will only rotate 
around its own centre but not move sideways in any 
direction. That way the focus stays fixed, which is very 
useful. 


4.1.3 In the course of the seasons the incident angle of 


POLAR AXIS 


the solar radiation varies +23.5°C in relation with the 
perpendicular to earth-axis. The paraboloid has to 
perform the same change of inclination in order to stay 
directed at the Sun. Otherwise it’s not possible to obtain 
a sharp focal point. But the centre of the reflector and 
the position of the focus are not allowed to move. 


This is only possible by shaping the reflector after 
another parabola for each seasonal inclination-angle 
of the sun, that is for each day of the year. This means 
the reflector has to change its shape. 


The reflector-frame is build for equinox. By inclining 
and elastically deforming the reflector-frame all other 
parabolas can be achieved with sufficient accuracy (see 
Fig. 2). 


Changing the inclination and deforming the reflector 
are mechanically combined: the two pivots A, at each 
side of the reflector-frame, and pivot B, in the centre 
of the reflector, do not form a line, but B is located 
below. That way inclining the reflector leads to a change 
in its depth, the centre of the reflector is lifted up (big 
radius of cross bars) or pressed down (small radius of 
crossbars) relative to the reflector-frame. It’s enough 
to adjust the upper and lower end of the reflector (C 
and D) to their correct position to obtain a sufficiently 
exact reflector-shape. 


4.2 Component Specification 
4.2.1 Reflector 
4.2.1.1 Aluminium reflector 


Material shall be solar grade anodized aluminium 


Fic. 2 DIFFERENT PARABOLAS OF SCHEFFLER REFLECTOR 


2 


substrate with suitable coating for corrosion protection. 


a) Specular reflectance shall be minimum 88 
percent. 


The specimen of mirror shall be tested as per 
ASTM E 903. Measurement of spectral near 
normal conical, hemispherical transmittance 
(or reflectance) are made over the spectral 
range from approximately 300 to 2 500 nm 
with an integrating sphere spectrophotometer 
having a small conical solid angle of incident 
flux on sample. 
The solar transmittance, reflectance, or 
absorptance is obtained by calculating a 
weighted average over wavelength with a 
standard solar spectral irradiance as the 
weighting function by either the weighted or 
selected ordinate method. 

b) Durability shall be minimum 10 years 
The mirror specimen shall be subjected to the 
neutral salt spray test as per IS 9844 or 
equivalent standards. 
The exposed specimen should not have any 
blisters, degradation of back coating after 
exposure of 250 h. 

c) Thickness shall be 0.3 mm minimum in order 
to get parabolic shape. 


4.2.1.2 Glass reflectors 


Material shall be tempered and toughen solar grade 
glass with silver back reflective coating. The edge 
sealing coat on all sides of mirror shall be done for 
corrosion protection. 


a) Specular reflectance shall be minimum 90 
percent. 


The specimen of mirror shall be tested as per 
ASTM E 903. Measurement of spectral near 
normal conical, hemispherical transmittance 
(or reflectance) are made over the spectral 
range from approximately 300 to 2 500 nm 
with an integrating sphere spectrophotometer 
having a small conical solid angle of incident 
flux on sample. 

The solar reflectance is obtained by 
calculating a weighted average over 
wavelength with a standard solar spectral 
irradiance as the weighting function by either 
the weighted or selected ordinate method. 

b) Durability shall be minimum 10 years 


The mirror specimen shall be subjected to the 
neutral salt spray test as per IS 9844 or 
equivalent standards. 

The exposed specimen shall not have any 
blisters, degradation of back coating after 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


exposure of 250 h. 


c) Thickness shall be 3 mm to 4 mm with 
parabolic shape. 


4.2.1.3 Reflector films 


Material shall be polyester, acrylic, epoxy acrylic 
coated with silver/ aluminium to get reflective coat. 
Silver reflective film shall be backed by aluminium or 
any suitable substrate. Edged should to sealed using 
tape or any suitable material. 


a) Specular reflectance shall be minimum 94 
percent. 
The specimen of mirror shall be tested as per 
ASTM E 903. Measurement of spectral near 
normal conical, hemispherical transmittance 
(or reflectance) are made over the spectral 
range from approximately 300 to 2 500 nm 
with an integrating sphere spectrophotometer 
having a small conical solid angle of incident 
flux on sample. 
The solar transmittance, reflectance, or 
absorptance 1s obtained by calculating a 
weighted average over wavelength with a 
standard solar spectral irradiance as the 
weighting function by either the weighted or 
selected ordinate method. 

b) Durability shall be minimum 10 years 
The mirror specimen shall be subjected to the 
neutral salt spray test as per IS 9844 or 
equivalent standards. 


The exposed specimen should not have any 
blisters, degradation of back coating after 
exposure of 250 h. 

c) Thickness of substrate shall be 0.38 to 0.5 mm 
and thickness of reflective film shall be 0.10- 
0.12 mm. 


4.2.2 Collector and Reflector Support Structure 


Collector and mirror support structure with civil 
foundation — the basic framework the trough support 
shall be steel or aluminium. 


4.2.2.1 The structure shall be designed to withstand 
wind speed of 47 m/s under stow condition and 
10 m/s under operating condition. Design shall be as 
per IS 800/IS 875 (Part 3). 


4.2.2.2 Material of collector structure and support shall 
be as per IS 2062, and shall be protected from corrosion 
with suitable process such galvanization, cathode 
electrode deposition (CED) or any suitable painting 
process. The design shall be suitable for life span 20 
years. 


4.2.2.3 The support structure fabrication for scheffler 
reflector shall be as per IS 800. 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


4.2.2.4 The weather proof coating for support structure 
shall be as per IS 1477 (Part 1). 


a) Dimensional accuracy and tolerances shall be 
defined by manufacturer in order to get the 
required optical efficiency for the specific 
design. 

b) Length and width for square / rectangular dish: 
in mm with +/— tolerance 

с) Or diameter for circular dish : in mm with +/— 
tolerance 

d) Or major and minor diameters for elliptical 
dish : in mm with +/— tolerance 

e) Paraboloid tolerance : tolerance from standard 
parabola in mm. 


f) Axestolerance: tolerance from designed axes 
in mm. 


4.3 Receiver 


The receiver of scheffler reflector shall be in, that it 
may be a dome type, a cavity type or a helical tube 
cavity. Material of construction shall be as per IBR 
(Indian Boiler Regulation) norms. Insulation shall be 
as per IS 14164. Appropriate coating shall be applied 
on the receiver for minimum emissivity. The coating 
should withstand the stagnation temperature of receiver. 


4.3.1 Absorber coating for absorber surface 
temperatures less than 200?C shall be black chrome, 
paint or selective coating [AS (C2-80)]. Absorptivity 
shall be minimum 0.9 in optical range of wavelength 
(300 to 2 500 nm) and emissivity less than 20 percent 
in IR range of wavelength. The durability of absorber 
coating shall be minimum 10 years. The absorber 
material shall be subjected to the neutral salt spray test 
as per IS 9844 or equivalent standards. The exposed 
should not have any blisters, degradation of back 
coating after exposure of 250 h. 


4.3.2 No coating to be applied for absorber surface 
temperatures more than 200?C for cavity type of 
receivers. 


The glass cover shall be optional on the receiver mouth, 
and transmittance of glass shall be minimum 95 percent. 


The absorber shall be made of boiler grade alloy steel 
as per IBR code with thickness suitable to withstand 
the design pressure and temperature. 


4.4 Collector and Support Structure with Civil 
Foundation 


4.4.1 The basic framework of the parabolic dish and 
support shall be standard structural steel or aluminium. 
The collector is made of aluminium or steel structure 
for mounting reflectors. The collector along with mirror 
is put on support structure alongwith tracking 
mechanism. 


4.4.2 The structure shall be designed to withstand wind 
speed of 47 m/s under stow condition and 10 m/s under 
operating condition. Design shall be as per IS 875 
(Part 3). 


4.4.3 Material of collector structure and support shall 
be as per IS 2062, and shall be protected from corrosion 
with suitable process such as galvanization, cathode 
electrode deposition (CED) or any suitable painting 
process. The design shall be suitable for life span 
20 years. 


The receiver support structure shall be designed as per 
IS 800. 


Dimensional accuracy and tolerances shall be defined 
by the manufacturer for his specific design in following 
manner: 


Length and width for square / rectangular parabolic 
dish : in mm with +/— tolerance, or 


Diameter for circular dish : in mm with +/— tolerance, 
or 


Major and minor diameters for elliptical Parabolic 
dish : in mm with +/ tolerance. 


Paraboloid tolerance : tolerance from standard parabola 
in mm. 


Axes tolerance: tolerance from designed axes in mm. 


The tolerance shall be defined by manufacturer in order 
to get the required optical efficiency for the specific 
design. 


4.5 Tracking System 


Tracking system enables reflector to remain focused 
towards the Sun so as to capture maximum possible 
direct radiation during the day. Tracking shall include 
motors, gearbox or rack and pinion and control system 


4.5.1 Accuracy requirement shall be decided for the 
specific manufacturer's design which shall be based 
on concentration ratio. 


4.5.2 Tracking motor shall be Servo/Stepper/Induction 
as per IS 9815 (Part 1), IS 13079, IS 12615 respectively 
suitable for the load for taking in stow position at full 
speed. 


4.5.3 Electrical system such as wiring, connections shall 
be as per IS 732. 


4.5.4 Electronic and control system shall be mounted 
outdoor and shall get exposed all elements. In view of 
the same, the control panel and electronic components 
shall be protected as per IS/IEC 60529. 


5 SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 


The shape and dimensions of the scheffler dish may be 


decided by the manufacturer based on his design. The 
dimensions to be mentioned are given in Fig. 3. 


6 ASSEMBLY AND WORKMANSHIP 


The entire assembly shall be free from surface defects. 
All sharp edges and corners shall be rounded off. The 
exposed surfaces shall be properly made corrosion 
resistant. 


The whole system shall be so assembled, that 
replaceable components are accessible for repair or 
replacement at site in accordance with the manufacturer 
instructions. 


7 COMPONENT SAMPLES FOR TESTS 
7.1 Component Samples 


The assembled reflector alongwith components below 
shall be submitted for testing. 


a) Reflector piece 150 mm x 150 mm. 


b) Manufacturers certificates for all components 
for specifications and properties. 


c) Information regarding maximum operating 
temperature and pressure. 


7.2 Routine Tests 
7.2.1 Outdoor No Flow Optical Test 


This test shall be done to check response of Paraboloid 
dish when there is no flow. In case of Paraboloid dish 
where manufacturer have mentioned that the Paraboloid 
dish is capable of stagnation temperature, the test 


SOLAR COMMUNITY COOKER 


NN SUMMER SUN 


80 Its. аы. 
COOKING РОТ у. 


FIRE PLACE 


оу 
ae ? 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


at 7.2.1.1 shall be performed. In case manufacture 
recommends defocus in case of no flow condition, test 
at 7.2.1.2 shall be performed 


7.2.1.1 Type stagnation temperature test 


Test shall be conducted only when manufacturer 
confirms that the design is suitable for stagnation test. 
In case design has auto safety defocus facility the 
procedure given at 7.2.1.2 shall be followed. 


7.2.1.1.1 Test procedure 


When the solar irradiance, G > 450 W/m’, record the 
solar irradiance, temperature inside the cavity and 
ambient temperature every 5 min. Record the 
temperature of cavity. Stop the test when temperature 
of cavity reaches a quasi steady state. The steady state 
conditions shall be defined as 10 min period when; 


a) variation in solar irradiance is + 20W/m". 


b) variation in ambient temperature is + 0.2°C. 
с) solar irradiance is greater than 450 W/m’. 


Graph will be plotted for average temperatures as 
function of radial distance. 


7.2.1.2 Auto defocus safety feature test 


This test is for safety purpose to check auto defocus of 
Paraboloid dish when operating temperature exceeds 
design temperature. The process given by manufacturer 
in instruction manual shall be followed. 


7.3 Thermal Efficiency Test 
The sheffler dish shall be subjected to thermal efficiency 


SEASONAL 
ADJUSTMENT 


POLAR AXIS 


COMMON POINTS 

TO ALL PARABOLAS 
(ROTATING SUPPORT 
NOT SHOWN 


CROSS BAR 


Fic. 3 SCHEMATIC OF SCHEFFLER DISH 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


test in accordance with IS 16648 (Part 5). 
7.3.1 Acceptance Criteria 


The Paraboloid dish performance is governed by 
equation (1). 


A, ha My x Cos0 x Ku —a, x 


Серед ry 
where 


Cos0 = Cos [43.23° = solar decimation 


2 


Scheffler dish is a fixed point focus, single or dual axes 
tracking system. It tracks the sun from morning to 
evening. For dual axis tracking, the value of cosq as 
well as incidence angle factor, K, equals to unity. 


7.3.2 Minimum Performance Requirements 


Paraboloid dish shall have, 7, = xx (minimum), а; = 
xx W/m?K (maximum) and a, = xx W/m?K? (maximum) 
leading to overall thermal efficiency, у = xx (minimum) 


The manufacturer shall give the performance graph of 
the Paraboloid dish as per format given in Fig. 4. 


7.4 Time Constant 


The solar collector shall be subjected to thermal test 
for determination of effective thermal capacity and time 
constant in accordance with 6.5 of IS 12933 (Part 5). 
The value of time constant shall be reported alongwith 
test condition for guidance. 


The heat transfer fluid is circulated through the receiver 
of the scheffler dish and the inlet temperature is adjusted 
as close to ambient temperature as possible, preferably 
within + 1°C. The steady state and test conditions are 
maintained as specified in IS 16648 (Part 5). The 


incident solar energy shall be then abruptly reduced to 
zero by defocusing the system. The following 
parameters shall be measured during the test: 


a) Collector fluid inlet temperature, 
b) Collector fluid outlet temperature, and 
c) Ambient air temperature. 


The measurements are continued until, 


(Т, Е T WT ат T) < 0.3 
where 
T,,  -temperature of the heat transfer fluid 
leaving receiver at specified time f, 
Т, =temperature of the heat transfer fluid 
entering the receiver, and 
T.i = temperature of the heat transfer fluid 


leaving receiver at the beginning of time 
constant test period,°C at t= 0. 


The value of time constant shall be noted to be the time 
required to achieve (T, ,— Т)/(Т, initia Д) < 0.3. 


8 INSTRUCTION MANUAL 


The manufacturer should provide together with the 
reflector an instruction manual containing schematic 
diagram of reflector, component diagram of the sub- 
system, installation procedure, start-up and shut-down 
procedure. The safety instructions during installation 
and operation shall be included in the manual. The 
process of maintenance and repair, replacement of parts 
such as broken reflectors, receiver, tracking mechanism 
and controls, etc and the prevention method shall be 
mentioned in the instruction manual. The service outlet 
with contact details shall be given in the manual. 


9 MARKING 


9.1 The Paraboloid dish lot shall be affixed with a name 
plate with the following information. 


SCHFFLER DISH EFFICIENCY CURVE 


NET EFFICIENCY % 


CURVE A AT 1000 W/sqm DNI 
CURVE C AT 600 W/sqm DNI 


CURVE B AT 800 W/sqm DNI 
CURVE D AT 400 W/sqm DNI 


Fic. 4 PERFORMANCE GRAPH FORMAT FOR SCHEFFLER DISH 


a) 


b) 
с) 


d) 
е) 


Manufacturer’s name, address and recognized 
trade-mark, if any; 


Serial number; 


Maximum working pressure in kilo-pascal and 
temperature in °C; 


Month and year of manufacture; and 
Country of manufacture. 


9.2 BIS Certification Marking 


Each scheffler concentrator may also be marked with 
the Standard Mark. 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


9.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


10 PACKING AND TRANSPORT 


The packing and transport shall be as agreed to between 
the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


ANNEX А 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS/International Title 
Standard No. 
732 : 1989 Code of practice for electrical wiring 


installations (third revision) 


800 : 2007 General construction in steel — Code 


of practice (third revision) 


875 (Part 3) : Code of practice for design loads 


2015 


(other than earthquake) for buildings 
and structures: Part 3 Wind loads 
(third revision) 


1477 (Part 1): Code of practice for painting of 


1971 


ferrous metals in buildings: Part 1 
Pretreatment (first revision) 


2062 : 2011 Hot rolled medium and high tensile 


structural steel — Specification 
(seventh revision) 


9815 (Part 1): | Servo-motor operated automatic line 


1994 


voltage correctors: Part 1 Correctors 
for single-phase applications — 
Specification (second revision) 


9844 : 1961 Methods of testing corrosion 


resistance of electroplated and 
anodized aluminium coatings by 


IS/International Title 
Standard No. 


neutral salt spray test 
12615 : 2011 Energy efficient induction motors — 
Three phase squirrel cage (second 


revision) 
12933 (Part 5): Solar flat plate collector— 
2003 Specification: Part 5 Test methods 


(second revision) 

13079 : 1991 Stepping motors — Specification 

14164 : 2008 Industrial application and finishing of 
thermal insulation materials at 
temperature above —80?C and up to 
750°C — Code of practice 

16648 (Part 5) : Concentrated solar thermal — 


2017 Specification: Part 5 Test methods 
IS/IEC 60529: Degrees of protection provided by 
2001 enclosures (IP Code) 


ASTM E903-12 Standard test method for solar 
absorptance, reflectance and 
transmittance of materials using 
integrating spheres 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


Organization 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi 
Biogas Forum India, New Delhi 
Bipin Engineers Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Wind Energy Technology, Chennai 


Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur 


Consumer Coordination Council, Noida 


Directorate General of Meteorology, New Delhi 
EMMVEE, Bangalore 
Gujarat Energy Development Agency, Vadodara 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 


Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Ltd, New Delhi 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


Karnataka Solar Manufacturers Association, Bangalore 
Mechanical Engineering IIT BHU, Varanasi 


Maharashtra Solar Manufacturers Association, Pune 


National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai 


Regional Test Centre, Pune 


Regional Test Centre, Indore 


Rajgiri School of Engineering Technology, Kochi 


RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


Sardar Patel Renewable Energy Research Instiuite, Vallabh Vidyanagar 


Solar Energy Centre, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
SHRI SOHAIL AKTHAR (Chairman) 
Dr A. R. SHUKLA 


Suri Н. S. REVANKAR 
Suri A. K. BAIKERIKAR (Alternate) 


Dr ANIL KUMAR SINGH 
Dr PRIYABRATA SANTARA (Alternate) 


Suri CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Sarı D. K. Turanı (Alternate) 


DR S. GOMATHINAYAGAM 
Suri A. SENTHIL Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI BHoPLAB CHOUDHARY 
Suri SIVA PRAKASHRIS (Alternate) 


Suri ARUN KUMAR MISHRA 
Sarı R.K. КАРІЕЅН (Alternate) 


Dr DEVENDRA PRADHAN 
Suri Vay Kumar С. R. 


Suri K.V. Dosui 
Suri S. B. Pari (Alternate) 


Suri J. К. NAYAK 
SHRI SHIREESH Kepans (Alternate) 


Pror S. C. MULLICK 
Dr T. C. Kanppat (Alternate) 


Dr KANCHAN К SINGH 
Dr Anı Kumar Durey (Alternate) 


Suri B. M. CHAUHAN 
Suri Sompa (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. Gupta 
SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN (Alternate) 


Suri A. PALANI 
Suri S. К. SHUKLA 


Suri SUHAS GHOTIKAR 
Suri MANGAL AKOLE (Alternate) 


Dr A. R. KHAN 
Sarı К. ANAND (Alternate) 


Pror (Dr) SANDESH К. JADKAR 
Dr ANAGHA M. РАтнАК (Alternate 1) 
Dr Аріматн FUNDE (Alternate 2) 


Ок S. Р. SINGH 
Pnor К. N. SINGH (Alternate) 


Dn V. PANTHALOOKAN 
Suri JoeL GEORGE (Alternate) 


Suri С. S. SWAROOP 
Suri Rasiv Мар (Alternate) 


Dr Мок. Kumar DUBEY 
Dn Jay PaNDpEv (Alternate) 


Dn B. BANDYOPADHYAY 
Dr S. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


Organization 


Solar Energy Society of India, New Delhi 


Solchrome Systems India Limited, Parwanoo 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


The Maharashtra Energy Development Agency (MEDA), Pune 


In personal capacity (C-103 A, JVTS Garden Chaterpur Extention, 


New Delhi 110074) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


Representative(s) 


SHRI A. Р. SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri RAJINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. SINGLA 


SHRI GIRISHRI GARUD 
DR IsHAN Punonurr (Alternate) 


Suri Manos А. Р1$Е 
Suri Н. MANIK KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI АТАМ KUMAR 


Suri А. RENGA RaJAN Scientist ‘E’ and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
Scientist “С” (MED), BIS 


Solar Thermal Energy Sub-Committee, MED 04:1 


Regional Test Centre, Indore 


Bharat Heavy Electricals, Hyderabad 


Bipin Engineers Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Borosil Glass Works Ltd, Mumbai 


Bosch Limited, Bangalore 


EMMVEE, Bangalore 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Jain Irrigation System Ltd, Jalgaon 


Karnataka Solar Manufacturers Association, Bangalore 
Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Ltd, Bangalore 


Lloyd Insulations (Т) Ltd, New Delhi 


Maharashtra Solar Manufacturers Association, Pune 


Non-Conventional Energy Development Agency (U.P.), Lucknow 


Planters Energy Network-Pen, Tamil Nadu 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 


Punjab Energy Development Agency, Chandigarh 
Racold Thermo Ltd, Pune 


Regional Test Centre, Pune 


Rohitas Electronics, Kanpur 


Dr S. P. SINGH (Convener) 
Pror R. N. Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri M. R. PAWAR 


Suri H. S. REVANKAR 
Suri А. K. BAIKERIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri Das Gupta S. 
SHRI SHREEVAR KHERUKA (Alternate) 


SHRI GANGADHAR N. H. 
SHRI RAMAKRISHNAPPA К. T. (Alternate) 


Suri УпАҮ Kumar С. R. 
Suri J. К. МАҮАК 
Pror S. С. MULLICK 


Suri SANJEEV HANUMANT 
SHRI Y. SHRIKANTH (Alternate) 


Suri A. PALANI 
DIRECTOR 


SHRI K. K. MITRA 
Suri А. K. Rasroat (Alternate) 


SHRI SUHAS GHOTIKAR 
Suri MANGAL AKOLE (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
SHRIMATI МАМВАТА Karra (Alternate) 


Dr C. PALANIAPPAN 


Dr V. P. SETHI 
Suri V. S. Hans (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


SHRI MAHESH BHANGALE 
Ms TRIsHALA CHANGULE (Alternate) 


Pror (Dr) SANDESH R. JADKAR 
Dr ANAGHA М. РАтнАК (Alternate 1) 
Dr Аріматн FUNDE (Alternate 2) 


Suri С. K. ROHATAGI 
SHRIMATI NIHARIKA КонтТАС! (Alternate) 


IS 16648 (Part 2) : 2017 


Organization 


Society for Energy, Environment and Development (SEED), 
Hyderabad 


Solar Energy Society of India, Delhi 


Solar Thermal Federation of India, Pune 
Solchrome Systems India Limited, Parwanoo 
SSVPS BSD College of Engineering, Dhule 


Thermax Limited, Pune 


In personal capacity (C-103 A, JVTS Garden Chaterpur Extention, 


New Delhi 110074) 


Representative(s) 


Suri M. RAMAKRISHNA RAO 
Pnor D. Р. Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Р. SHRIVASTAVA 
Sun RAJINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri RAVINDRA R. KULKARNI 
Suri K. K. SINGLA 
Dr Asay CHANDAK 


SHRI KIRAN DESHPANDE 
SHRI YASHAVANT Josut (Alternate) 


SHRI ATAM KUMAR 


Scheffler Concentrator Panel, MED 04:1/P-2 


WRST, Mount Abu 
SSVPS BSD College of Engineering, Dhule 


Urvish Dave, Renewable Energy Solutions and Consulting, 
Ahmedabad 


10 


Suri В. К. ЈАҮАЅІМНА (Convener) 
Dr Ajay CHANDAK 


SHRI DEEPAK GADHIA 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 04 (11238). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern  : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : СІТ. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


