**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10242-3-5 (1990) : Electrical Installations in Ships, 
Part 3: Equipment, Section 5: Accumulator (Storage) 
Batteries [ETD 20: Electrical Installation] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 10242 (Part 3/8ec 5) : 1990 
HT^^l^ TT'T^ ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

vrm 3 ^«T?^T 

Indian Standard 
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS IN SHIPS 

PART 3 EQUIPMENT 
Section 5 Accumulator ( Storage ) Batteries — Specification 



UDC 62912'066 : 621-316-174 : 621 SSS^ 



® BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

January 1991 Price Group 1 



Electrical Equipment and Installation in Ships Sectional Committee, ETD 26 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 3/Sec 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
19 April 1990^ after the draft finalized by the Electrical Equipment and Installations in Ships 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

This standard ( Part 3/Sec 5 ) is one among the series of Indian Standards for electrical 
installations in sea-going ships, incorporating good practice and co-ordinating as far as possible 
existing rules. These standards form a code of practical interpretation and ^amplification of the 
requirements of the International Convention on Safety of Life at Sea, a guide for future 
regulations which may be prepared and a statem.ent of practice for use by shipowners, 
shipbuilders and appropriate organizations. 

This series of Indian Standards on electrical installations in ships consists of the following 
parts: 

Part I General, 

Part 2 System design. 

Part 3 Equipment, 

Part 4 Installation and test of completed installation, and 

Part 5 Special features. 

In Part 3, different sections have been prepared to deal with individual equipment. Other 
sections under Part 3 dealing with individual equipment are as follows: 

Section 1 Generators and motors. 

Section 2 Switchgear and control gear assemblies. 

Section 3 Transformers for power and lighting, and 

Section 4 Semiconductor converters. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been taken from lEG Pub 92-305 (1980) 
'Electrical installations in ships : Part 305 Accumulator ( storage ) batteries', published by 
International Electrotechnical Commission. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)\ The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



IS 10242 ( Part 3/Sec 5 ) : 1990 

Indian Standard 
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS IN SHIPS 

PART 3 EQUIPMENT 
Section 5 Accumulator ( Storage ) Batteries — Specification 



1 SCOPE 

1,1 This standard ( Part 3/Sec 5 ) is applicable 
io accumulator ( storage ) batteries which are 
installed permanently in position for use in 
ships. 

U.l This standard is not applicable to batteries 
of the portable type. 

2 TYPES OF BATTERY 

2.1 In general, accumulator batteries may be 
of lead-acid or of nickel-alkaline type, or any 
other proved type, due consideration is given 
to suitability for any specific application. 

3 CONSTRUCTION AND ASSEMBLY 

3.1 All plates shall be of rigid construction, and 
shall be designed to reduce to a minimum the 
shedding of active material. 

3.2 The cells shall be so constructed as to 
prevent spilling of electrolyte due to an 
inclination of 45^ in all directions from the 
normal. 

3.3 The filling plugs shall be so constructed as 
to prevent spilling of electrolyte due to ship's 
movements, for example, rolling and pitching. 

4 jcrates and trays 

4.1 The cells shall be grouped in crates or trays 
of rigid construction and suitable material 
equipped with handles to facilitate handling. 
The number of cells in a crate or tray shall 
depend on the weight and on the space available 
for installation. The mass of crates or trays 
should preferably not exceed 100 kg. 

4.1«1 This clause does not apply to cells the 
mass of which is such that grouping in crates or 
trays is impracticable. 

5 NAMEPLATE 

5.1 Each crate or tray shall be provided with a 
durable nameplate securely attached, bearing 
the manufacturer's name and address and type 
designation, bank voltage, the ampere-hour 
rating at a specific rate of discharge ( preferably 
the one corresponding to the duty for the 



specific application ) and the specific gravity of 
the electrolyte (in the case of a lead acid 
battery, the specific gravity when the battery 
is fully charged ). 

6 CHARGING FACILITIES 

6.1 For floating service or for any other 
conditions where the load is connected to the 
battery while it is on charge, the maximum 
battery voltage under any conditions of charge 
shall not exceed the safe value of any connected 
apparatus. The voltage characteristics of the 
generator or generator semiconductor convertor 
or semiconductor convertors, which shall 
operate in parallel with the battery, shall be 
suitable for each individual application. Where 
apparatus capable of operation at the maximum 
charging potential is not available, a voltage 
regulator or other means of voltage control 
shall be provided, 

6.2 When a battery is floated on the line with 
resistor banks in series, ail connected apparatus 
shall be capable of withstanding the line voltage 
to earth or to be disconnected. For systems 
above 55 V, it is recommended that a suitable 
warning plate be fitted stating: 

'DISCONNECT CHARGING SYSTEM 
BEFORE WORKING ON ANY CIRCUIT 
CONNECTED TO THE BATTERY' 

6.3 Where the voltage of an emergency-lighting 
battery is the same as that of the ship's dc 
supply, the battery may be arranged for 
charging in two equal sections, a charging 
resistor provided for each section. 

Alternately, booster generator may provide 
charging voltage. With either method, the 
arrangement of automatic transfer switching 
shall be such that emergency supply is available 
whether the battery is on charge or not. 



a dififeient charging rate is 
is specified for a particular 



6.4 Except when 
necessary and 

application, the charging facilities shall be such 
that the completely discharged battery can be 
recharged to 80 percent capacity within a 
period of 10 h: 

6.5 For batteries which normally stand idle for 
long periods, trickle charging to neutralize 



\ 



IS 10242 ( Part 3/Sec 5 ) : 1990 

internal losses shall be provided where current shall be provided, 
practicable. 

6.7 Protection against over charging shall be 
An indication shall be provided to indicate a provided for such batteries which cannot stand 
charging voltage being present at the charging over-charge. 

unit. 

6.8 Battery status indicator shall preferably be 
6.6 Protection against reversal of the charging provided to know the state. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Inatan Standards Act^ I9S6 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification 
of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed lo the Director ( Publications ), 
BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. ETD 26 ( 2855 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 1331 13 73 

Eastern : 1/14 G.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.l.P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



