Indian Standard GUIDELINES FOR PLANNING AND DESIGN OF RIVER EMBANKMENTS (LEVEES) (First Revision)
ICS 93.160

0 BIS 2000

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

Cktoher

2000

Price Group

3

River Training and Control Works Sectional Committee,

WRD 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standards (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finaiized by the River Training and Control Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. An embankment (levee) is an artificial bank built along banks of a river for the purpose of protecting adja~ent land from inundation by flood. Such type of structure is also called `embankment', `stop-bank', `bund' or `dyke'. Construction of embankment to control flood is an age-old practice and is still being followed due to its proven suitability. This standard was first published in 1987. In this revision technological of experience gained over the last decade, have been incorporated. changes and improvements, as a result

There is no 1S0 standard on the subject. This siandard has been prepared based on indigenous data/practices prevalent in the field in hdia. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 12094:2000

Indian Standard GUIDELINES FOR PLANNING AND DESIGN OF RIVER EMBANKMENTS (LEVEES) ( First Revision) 1 SCOPE
This standard covers planning and design of river embankments (levees) cm dry land. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and par'ties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibilityy of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 7894:
8408:

a) b)

Predominantly

agricultural

areas, and or other

Townships or areas having industrial vital installations. Collection of Data

3.1.2

For preparation of a suitable flood protection scheme, information on topography, characteristics, and hydrology of the river, history of past floods and works is necessary. The basic data required is as follows: a) ` Topography .1) Index plan showing the area affected in the past (including lamls, villages and property) and the area likely to be affected in postproject conditions. 2) Contoured survey plan of the area prone to inundation. 3) Plan showing past river courses. 4) Plan of soil survey of the area where embankments are proposed.

Title Code of practice for stability analysis of earth dams Planning and design of groynes in alluvial river -- Guidelines (first revision) PLanning and design of guide banks for alluvial river -- Guidelines (@w revision) Construction and maintenance of river embankments (levees) -- Guidelines (first revisiotl) Criteria for design embankment dams of small

1975
1994

I075 I : I994

5) Plan and section of the flood protection works already existing or executed. 6) Plan of structures likely to be affected due to construction of embankment as a result of increase in flood level. b) River characteristics and hydrology

.11532:

1995

12169:

1987

3 PLANNING
3.0 General

1) Characteristics of the river whether alluvial, incised, aggrading or degrading; meandering or braided. three 2) Qualitative and quantitative analysis of the silt of river at sites of proposed work or upstream. 3) Nature of the soil of the bank and the bed at site of the proposed work. 4) Gauge and discharge data of the main river and its tributaries, preferably at sites of proposed work or otherwise upstream.

For plmning of embankments the following aspects need to be lookccl into: a) The area to bc protected, b) Degree of protection to be provided, and c) Alignment 3.1 and spacing of embankment.

Area to be Protected

3. L 1 Class

ficutim

II is necessary to know the importance of the area to he protected in order to determine the degree of lirotcction (see 3.2) to be provided. At present, there are two classifications made according to land utilization of the ;u-ca as given below: 1

5) Recorded maximum flood discharge, velocity and level. 6) Safe carrying capacity of the river (where work is prop-osed). 7) Extent of the flood spill and the quantity of the spill to be controlled.

IS 12094:2000 8) Cross-section and L-sections of the river particularly in thewaches where works are proposed. 9) c) Rainfali clatafor the basin forthe past years.
3.3.1.2 The spacing between the embankments in jacketted reach of river should not be less than 3 times Lacey's wetted perimeter for the design flood discharge. In no case should an embankment be placed at a distance less than Lacey's wetted perimeter from the river bank or one and a half times the Lacey's wetted perimeter from the midstream of the river. This should also be ensured in case of embankment on only one bank of the river. Alignment of embankments should also be planned so that land acquisition for embankment construction is feasible and is not prolonged.

History ofpastfloods A brief history ot'the past floods indicating duration of tloods, flood discharges and corresponding water levels, stage of the river at which the damage was most pronounced, extent of damage and their effect on the river regime, measures adopted earlier for the protection against floods and their effect on the river courses, river sections, bed levels, etc, as well as the present condition of the existing flood control works.

3.1.3 After determining the type of the area to be protected and degree of protection to be given, the extent of area to be protected economically should be decided upon. For economic viability, the benefit-cost ratio (B.C. ratio) should be more than unity. 3.2 Degree of Protection The height of the embankment and the corresponding cost and B.C. ratio should be worked out for various flood frequencies taking into account the damage likely to occur. The degree of protection which gives the maximum benefit cost ratio should be adopted. However, till such time as the details of all relevant parameters are available, embankment schemes should be prepared for a flood of 25 years frequency in the case of predominantly agricultural ar~as and for flood of 100 years frequency for works pertaining to protection of town, important industrial and other vital installations. In certain special cases, where damage potential justifies, the maximum observed flood may also be considered. 3.3 Alignment
and Spacing of Embankments

3.3.1.3 In the tidal reach of a river, embankments should be constructed with due regard to their effect on the navigation requirements in the channel as embankments in such cases may substantially reduce the tidal influx causing a reduction in the available navigation depth. As such no recommendation on spacing and alignment of levee can be generalized in view of the fact that each river is unique in its behaviour. Thorough knowledge of the river behaviour and studies of the effects of the embankments along different alignments are prerequisites for taking decision on spacing and alignment. Vulnerability to river attack, rise of high flood level on account of reduction in flow area, increase in discharge due to cut off in valley storage, as well as optimization of benefit, etc, should reflect in the decision making. 3.3.2 Length of the Embankment Length of embankment directly depends upon the alignment. However, it is to be ensured that both ends of the bund are tied up to some high-ground or existing highway or railway or any other embankment nearby conforming to the design height of the embankment. 4 DESIGN OF EMBANKMENT
4.1 Types

Embankments below:

can be classified into two types as given

should be 3.3.1 As far as possible, embankments aligned on the ridge of the natural banks of the river, where land is high and soil suitable for the construction of embankments. The alignment should be determined in such a way that the high velocity flow which can erode the embankment material is sufficiently distant from them. Hydraulic models are useful guides in this regard. 3.3.1.1 Embankments should be aligned so that important towns and properties along the river bank are left outside the embankment. Where it is not possible to set back embankments to avoid the high velocity flow, some form of protection is necessary. Protrusions and sudden changes in the alignments and forming kinks should be avoided as far as possible.

Embankment-- It consists of a) Homogeneous practically uniform material throughout. There is no designed plan of material distribution other than the coarsest or most pervious material being placed at the outer slopes (see Fig. 1). b) Zoned Embankment-- It essentially consists of an inner or impervious section supported by two or more outer sections of relatively pervious materials (see Fig.2).
4.1.1

The essential requirements for design of the embankment are the determination of the design high flood level (HFL), hydraulic gradient, freeboard, side slopes, top width, etc. The stability of the structure should be checked under all stages of construction, condidon of saturation and drawdown. The embankment

2

IS 12094:2000

TOP NOT LONGITUDINAL DRAIN STEEPER 1:2 THAN r OR 1:3

WIDTH -FREE

5.0

TO 5.5 BOARD

m

1.5

m OR Mt m
DESIGN H F L NOT STEEPER 1:2 TO 1:3

MINIMUM COVER 0.6

m

THAN

( COUNTRY

SIDE)

0s3

m (AVERAGE

]

(RIVER

SIDE

)

NOTES 1 2 3 4 Regwding dtermte dimensions shown in the figure, refe.re to the vmious cktuses rekrting to design mpects given in the stmdwd. The depth wrd distmrce of borrow pits shell be m per the requirenrents given in 1S 1153. Spacing of cross-drains me m per 1S 8237 reservoir embmknrents (fir-sr revision)'. `Code of pr~ctice of protection of slope for

Strip level is shown m it is m obvious fe~ture of construction work.

FIG. I TYPICAL CROSS-SWNON OFHOMOGENEOUS EMBANKMENT

EL mox. WS EL -----~------O-33m RIP RAP 15cm GRADED FILTER --.

\MpERw\@ e~ANKET -===

1

5

b lm

67.

CROSS-SECHON OF ZONED EMBANKMEiWS FIG. 2 TYPICAL

should be safe against cracks due to unequal moisture contents in different parts and unequal settlement (see IS 7894 and IS 121 69). 4.2 Design HFL Correct assessment of the HFL is an important item in the destgn of embankment. A general problem encountered in detertnining HFL is non-availability of adequate data. Depending on data, the approach to determine HFL is divided into the following three categories: a) Whet-e Lotlg-fi~rm Di.w%urge and Guuge Data are Available -- Firslly gauge discharge relationship should be established. Then available discharge data should be subjected to b)

frequency analysis for the return period according to land utilization pattern of area (see 3.2) using standard statistical methods. Where Discharge and Gauge Data are Available for a Short Period --A suitable gauge discharge relationship should first be established. Then a relationship between storm, rainfall and peak discharge should he established "based on the data for the period for which discharge data is available. Utilizing all available past rainfall data, a suitable return period value should be chosen for design storm rainfall intensity. Land-use and nature of the area should also be taken into consideration to find out the design peak flood discharge from the rainfall peak discharge

3

1S 12094:2000

relationship. The design flood level is to be obtained from gauge discharge relationship already established. The design flood level so obtained should be verified on the basis of observed cross-sections, slopes and velocities of the river in the recent years. c) Where No Discharge and Gauge Data are Available-- Synthetic unit hydrography approach should be used for estimating the desired return period flood. For this purpose flood estimation reports prepared by Planning and Coordination Committee and published by the Directorate of Hydrology (Small Catchments), Central Water Commission, New Delhi for the country `asa whole under the short-term plan and for each sub-zone under long term plan may be used.

4.4 Top Width For facilitating transport of material during construction and maintenance work, it is desirable to make the top sufficiently wide to accommodate two-lane vehicular traffic and to be used as inspection road. The criteria given below may be considered as general guideline for top width (see IS 11532).
4.4.1 The top width of the embankment should be of 5.0 m. The turning platforms, 15 to 30m long and 3.Om wide with side slope I:3 along the countryside of the embankment should be provided at every kilometre (see Fig. 3).

4.2.1 In the case of embankment on both sides of river, rise in the water level due to jacketing of the river should be kept in view in determining the design HFL.

4.3 Free Board The top of the embankment should be so fixed that there is no danger of over-topping even with intense wave wash or any unexpected rise in the river levels due to sudden change in the river course or shortening of river course due to unforeseeable causes or aggravation of river bed or embankment settlement. The height ot'the wave depends upon the wind velocity and the fetch. There are many formulae for determining the height of the wave; however, the formula proposed by Stevenson, modified by Molitor to include wind vel~ity, should be used as given below: hw = 0.032 (VF)ln + 0.76 � 0.27 (F)i'4 where hw = height of-wave from trough to crest in metres, V F = wind velocity in kilometres per hour, and = fetch or straight length of water subject to wind action in kilometres.

4.4.2 The top width should be adequate for the type of vehicular-traffic designed to use the embankment. Clear berms of 1 m width on either side sloping towards the outer edges of the embankment may be provided for drainage. No water should be allowed to crllect over the embankment at any stage. Suitably designed gutter-drains may be provided on both side klopes at intervals. 4.5 Hydraulic
Gradient

It is always desirable to know, approximately at least, the line of seepage in the cross-section of a proposed embankment. This line should never be allowed to intersect the outside countryside slope of bank above GL and care should be taken so that a cover of 0.6 m is available on HG line.
4.5.1

Hydraulic gradient line should be determined on the basis of the analysis of soils which are to be used in the construction of embankment. However, the following guidelines are recommended: Type of Fill Clayey soil Clayey sand Sandy soil 4.6 Side Slope The side slopes are dependent upon the nature of the material of which the embankment is made, the method of construction, the height of the embankment and the length of time that the embankment is likely to be subjected to the action of flood waters. They shall also be stable against slipping under conditions of saturation and sudden drawdown (see IS 7894). 4.6.1 River Side Slope The river side slope should be flatter than the under water angle of repose of the material used in the till. Up to an embankment height of 4.5 m, the slope should not be steeper than 1 in 2 and in case of higher embankments slope should not be steeper than 1 in 3, Hydraulic lin4 lin5 lin6 Gradient

4.3.1 The height of the wave is measured from trough to crest of the wave but as the waves will travel up the slope of the embankment, hw may be taken as height above the flood level. 4.3.2 As a guideline, minimum free board of 1.5 m over design HFL including the back water effect, if any, should be provided for the river carrying design discharge up to 3000 m~/s. For higher discharges or for aggrading/flashy rivers, the minimum free board should be of 1.8 m. This should be checked also for ensuring a minimum of about 1.0 m of free board over HFL corresponding to 100 years frequency flood (see also 3.2).

4

IS 12094-:2000
3m
WIDE

AND

15m

TO 30m
TOP WIDTH OF EMBANKMENT

LONG TURNING PLATFORM AT EVERY KILO METRE

FREE S LOPE 1:3 MINIMUM COVER

BOARD DESIGN HFL

-----

-.-----------..---------

BORROW PIT `(cOUNTRY SIDE)

`BORROW ( RIVER

PIT

SIDE 1

FIG.3 TYPICAL CROSS-SECTION"SHOWING TURNING PLATFORM

when the soil is good and to be used in the most favorable condition of saturation and drawdown. a) In case of higher embankment protected by riprap, the slope of embankments up to 6 m high may be 1 in 2 or I in 2.5 depending upon the type of slope protection; If the construction material is sandy, the slope should be protected with a cover of 0.6 m thick good soil; and It is usually preferable to have more or less free draining material on (he river side to take care of sudden drawdown. In case of high and important embankment stone rip-rap either dry dumped or hand placed and concrete pavements/concrete blocks with open joints are adopted to protect the embankment against drawdown andlor erosive action of the river (see IS 8408); in less important embankments where rip-rap is costly, willow mattress can be used. Countryside S1O[JC line

c)

For embankments of height more than 6.0 m, detail design should be made.

4.6.2.1 For drainage, longitudinal drains should be provided on the berm and cross drains at suitable places should be provided to drain the water from the longitudinal drains (see IS 1075 I). 4.7 Safety Measures in Design Structure should be stable under all stages of construction and conditions of saturation and drawdown. It is therefore necessary that stability checks for various conditions should be done to ensure safety of the structure. Seismic forces should also be considered for high embankments. The factor of safety should be 1.3 or greater. (see IS 7894). 4.7.1 Safety Against Settlement and Wetting Cracks Due to Unequal

b)

c)

4.6.2

A minimum cover of 0.6 m over the hydraulic should be provided. a)

For embankment up to 4.5 m height, the countryside slope should be 1 in 2 from the top up to the point where the cover over HG line is 0.6 m after which a berm of suitable width, with the countryside slope of I:2 from the end of the berm up to ground level, should be provided; For embankments of height between -4.5 to 6.0 m, the corresponding slopes with respect to 4.6.2 (a) should bc I in 3. Berms should be of width 1.5 m normally;

Unequal settlements can be Iiirgely avoided by preparing the foundations properly and by selecting suitable material for construction. Where the foundation soil is weak, suitable strengthening measures may be taken. Clayey soils containing organic matter or soils containing decaying vegetables matter such as remains of pka$ts and roots should be rejected. Well graded homogeneous materials are most suitable for construction. In case of difficulty in getting full quantities of the same material, zonal sections with impervious core and a pervious casing may"be adopted. In high embankments it is desirable to mechanically compact the earth fill in suitable layers with a view to achieve optimum density with appropriate moisture content. Breaking of big clods specially in clayey soils

b)

5

IS 12094:2000 is to be done and organic/vegetable to safeguard against leakagdpiping. 4.8 Sluices Sluices with regulating arrangement should be provided for countryside drainage. The size of sluices will depend upon the intensity of the rainfall and the catchment area to be drained. 4.9 Treatment An embankment
on Top of Embankments

matter separated

drainage. For soling over filter for proper towns in industrial and embankments protecting places of strategic importance, the necessity of providing all weather road surfaces of 3 to 3.5 m width should be examined to ensure maintenance work for reaches which are not easily accessible. 4.10 In order to provide communication from one side of embankment to the other, ramps at suitable places should be provided as per requirement to obviate subsequent interference.

should

be provided

with suitable

6

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established mder the Bureau oflndian harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

Standards Act, 1986 to promote and quality certification of goods

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodical y; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review ind]cates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. Wm 22 (263).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131, 3233375, 3239402 Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002

{

Eastern

: 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

{

3378499,3378561 3378626,3379120 603843 602025

Northern

{ Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 { Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400093 Marol, Andheri (East) {

2350216,2350442 2351519,2352315 8329295, 8327891, 8327858 8327892

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BH"OPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Primed al Prabhal Offset Press, New Delht-2

