**************** 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  10810-44  (1984):  Methods  of  test  for  cables.  Part  44: 
Spark  test  [ETD  9:  Power  Cables] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


UDC     621 -31 5-221  "8  :  620-1 63-6 


( First  Reprint  August  1 997 ) 


(  Reaffirmed  2001  ) 
lS:1t)8lO(Part44)-lir84 


tndian  Standard 
METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR  CABLES 

PART  44  SPARK  TEST 


£ 
E 
o 
U 

w 

c 
o 

o 

to 

CO 

(3 

a 

I 

o 

0. 


1.  Scope  — Covers  the  metliod  for  ac  spark  testing  of  insulation  and  non-metaHic  sheath  of  electric 
cables. 

2.  Significance  —  It  is  used  for  evaluation  of  insulating  and  sheathing  materials  for  specific  end 
uses  and  as  a  means  for  detecting  defects  in  the  manufacturing  processes. 

3.  Terminology  — 5ee  iS  :  1885  (  Part  32)-1971  *  Eleclrotechnical  vocabulary  :  Part  32  Cables,  con- 
ductors and  accessories  for  electricity  supply  '. 

4.  Apparatus  —  A  suitable  spark  tester  having  the  requirements  as  given  in  Appendix  A. 

5.  Material  —  No  material  oth^er  than  the  specimen  is  required. 

6.  Test  Specimen  —  The  drum  length  of  the  cable  or  insulated  conductor  core  shall  constitute  the 
test  specimen. 

7.  Conditioning  —  No  conditioning  is  required  for  this  test. 

8.  Procedure 

8.1  The  conductor  of  the  core  or  the  conductor,  metallic  sheath  screen  or  the  armour  is  continuously 
earthed  and  the  insulated  conductor  or  cable  is  inserted  into  the  electrode  of  the  spark  tester.  This 
end  is  then  pulled  and  fixed  to  a  winding  drum. 

8.2  The  required  voltage  as  specified  in  the  relevant  cable  specification  is  maintained  between  the 
test  electrode  and  the  conductor  of  the  core  or  cable  under  test. 

8.3  The  cable  or  the  insulated  conductor  is  wound  through  the  electrode  of  the  spark  tester  and  the 
faults,  if  any,  are  recorded, 

9.  Tabulation  of  Observations 


Sample 
No. 


Description  of 
Sample 


Lengtti  of 
Sample 


m 


Thickness  of 

Non'Metallic 

Siieath,  if  any 

mm 


Spark  Test 
Voltage 

kV 


No.  of  Faults 


10.  Calculation  —  No  calculation  is  involved. 


Adopted  14  March  1984 


©September  1985.  BIS 


Gri 


BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,  9    BAHADUR    SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 

NEW  DELHI   110002 


IS  :  10810  (Parf  44) -1984 

11.  Report 

11.1  Reference  Specification  — 


Sam  pie  Description  of  Sparl^  Test  Fa  u  its, 

No .  Sample  Voltage  if  any 


11.2  Conclusion  —  The  specimen  meets/does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  specification. 

APPENDIX      A 

{Clause  4) 

SPARK   TEST  EQUIPMENT 

A-1.  Spark  Tester 

A-1.1  Higti  Voltage  Source  — \t  shall  supply  alternating  current  at  a  nominal  frequency  of  50  Hz. 

The  electrode  to  earth  potential  difference  shall  be  displayed  on  a  meter  either  by  connection 
direct  to  the  output  terminals  of  the  high  voltage  source  or  by  any  suitable  arrangement  giving  an 
accuracy  of  ±5  percent. 

Proper  earthing  shall  be  ensured  durirrg  the  test. 

A-1.2  Electrode  — The  length  of  the  electrode  shall  be  such  that  every  point  of  the  cor^  or  non- 
metaHic  covering  under  test  is  in  the  electrode  for  not  less  than  005  s.  ( This  represents  a  maximum 
throughput  speed  of  1*2  m/min/mm  of  electrode.) 

The  design  of  the  electrode  shall  be  such  that  the  test  specimen  makes  intimate  contact 
throughout  the  electrode  during  Its  passage  through  the  electrode. 

A-1 .3  Fault  Indicator  —  It  shall  be  arranged  to  operate  a  digital  display  counter  such  that  one  count 
per  discrete  fault  is  registered.  The  counter  shall  maintain  indication  until  either  the  next 
succeeding  fault  is  registered  or  until  the  indication  is  manually  cancelled. 

A-2-  Sensitivity  —  The  sensitivity  requirements  of  the  spark  testing  apparatus  shall  be  such  that 
the  detector  shall  operate  when  an  artificial  fault  device  as  described  below  is  connected  between 
the  electrode  and  earth. 

The  electrode  voltage  sAall  be  set  initially  at  3  kV  ( rms  )  and  when  the  artificial  fault  device  is 
connected  to  the  electrode,  with  the  spark  gap  temporarily  short-circuited,  the  steady  state  current 
shall  not  exceed  600^A.  In  order  to  limit  the  current  to  a  suitable  value  an  impedance  may  be 
added  in  series  with  the  artificial  device. 

Forihe  given  electrode  voltage  of  3  kV  ( rms )  the  spark  gap  shall  consist  of  a  metal  plate  and 
a  needle  point,  and  the  distance  between  them  shall  be  maintained  at  0*25  ±  0*05  mm  for  a  period  of 
0'025  s,  once  per  second. 

The  sensitivity  shall  be  deemed  satisfactory  if,  after  a  minimum  of  20  successive  breakdowns 
of  the  spark  gap,  the  fault  Indicator  has  registered  at  the  rate  of  —  neither  more  nor  less  than  one 
count  per  spark.  Each  test  shall  be  carried  out  using  a  new  needle  and  each  needle  shall  be 
discarded  after  a  maximum  of  60  repetitive  sparks. 

A-3.  Precautions 

A-3.1  Access  to  Electrode  System  —  To  avoid  the  risk  of  shock  to  the  operator  when  access  is  desired 
to  the  electrode  system,  it  Is  advisable  to  check  regularly  that  the  automatic  switch-oflf  mechanism 
on  the  shielded  enclosure  for  the  electrodes  are  functioning  correctly. 

A-3. 2  Conductor  Earthing  —  Unless  the  conductor,  metallic  sheath,  screen  or  armour  underlying  the 
non-metallic  covering  under  test  Is  effectively  and  continuously  earthed,  faults  may  not  be  located. 
Continuous  earthing  or  other  suitable  means  should  be  provided  for  the  prevention  of  electrical 
shock. 

A-3.3  Leakage  Currents  —Precautions  are  necessary  to  ensure  the  satisfactory  operation  of  spark 
testing  equipment  by  restricting  leakage  currents  to  a  minimum  level,  for  example,  by  removing 
surface  moisture  from  the  core  or  cable  under  test. 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


