**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12400 (1988) : Code of practice for selection of 
electromagnetic feeders [MED 6: Continuous Bulk Conveying, 
Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621'86067'2-523'2 'S : 12400 - 1988 



Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 1998) 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
SELECTION OF ELECTRO-MAGNETIC FEEDER 



1. Scope— Covers the general code of practice followed for selection of electro-magnetic feeder. 

2. Selection Criterion — Generally, the following influence the selection of a feeder; 

a) Material, its bulk density, largest lump size and moisture content; 

b) Sieve analysis ( approximate value may also be helpful ); 

c) Capacity in tonne per hour; 

d) Angle of repose of material; 

e) Layout of hopper; and 

f) Ambient temperature. 

3. Size of Feeder — Size of feeder depends, mainly, upon the velocity of material on feed pan 
( capacity in tonnes per hour ). The velocity is used to determine the width of the feeder and 
average depth of material on the trough for a given capacity in tonnes per hour of a material of 
given density. 

3.1 An example is given below to determine the effective width inside the skirts of feeder and 
average depth of bed material on the trough for velocity of material on feed pan for a given 
capacity of a material of given density. 

Example', 

Q = 60xWxDxVxp 

where 

Q « capacity in tonnes per hour, 

W = effective width inside the skirts of feeder trough in metres, 

D ^ average depth of material on feeder pan in metres, 

V = velocity of material on feeder pan in metre per minute, and 

9 =^ bulk density of material in tonnes/m^ 

Note 1 — Velocity shall be arrived at considering the inclination of pan, stroke, frequency and moisture 
content. 

Note 2 — Velocity of material on pan is normally 9 m/min at pan inclination of 10^ down-hill. 

3»1.1 Choosing W and D — In 3,1, two unknowns, namely, Wand D are there and for a given 
capacity for a given material, a trial selection of width of feeder ( W ) shall give the average depth 
of materia! { D ), and the width shall be adjusted until both W and D are reasonable. 

3.1.2 Skirt plates may be used, attached to the hopper outlet to contain a depth of material 
greater than the depth of the trough sides. 

3.2 Normally, the width of the feeder is governed by the velocity of material on feed pan 
( capacity in tonnes per hour ) required Sometimes, however, the size of the material in the feed 
influences the width of the feeder. 

3.2.1 No straight formula exists for relating the size of the pieces with the feeder width and to 
arrive at a decision, judgement ( based on experience ) may have to be used. For example, if a 
high proportion of large pieces is to be handled, the feed width shall be about two to three times 
the size of these pieces to avoid jamming of the material in the hopper outlet to the feeder. On 
the other hand, if the large pieces are occasional, the width may be determined by the tonnage to 
be handled provided that the large pieces could be accommodated with reasonable clearance in 
the width. 

3.2.2 It shall be worth consideration that clearance in the hopper outlet to the feeder is 
required and this outlet shall be narrower than the width of the feeder. Generally, a working 



Adopted 20 May 1988 



' December 1988, BIS I Gr 2 



I 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 12400- 1988 

clearance of 30 to 40 mm is required between the vibrating trougii and the hopper outlet; on a 
large feeder, this clearance plus stiffening ribs, etc, on the hopper outlet may reduce the effective 
width ( inside the skirts ) by 150 mm or more below the feeder width. 

3.3 Length of Feeder Trough — The length of a feeder trough is related to several factors which 
are considered while determining this, namely, velocity of material on feed pan (capacity in tonnes 
per hour ) to be handled, size of material in the feed, occasionally by the type of duty required of 
the feeder, and possibly b/ the user's specification to suit the site requirements. 

3,3.1 No straight formula exists to determine the length, of trough and to arrive at a decision 
judgement ( based on experience ) may have to be used and following may be useful for guidance 
to obtain a suitable trough length. 

3.3.1J The depth of the material (D) {see 3.1 ) is the depth at the point towards the 
discharge and just before the material begins to fall away. The depth at the throat of the outlet 
shall be rather more than this to cater for a slight tapering off in depth as the material travels along 
the feeder, and also a greater throat depth shall sometimes be necessary to cater for large pieces 
in the feed. 

3.3.1.2 A schematic diagram shown in Fig. 1 as illustration only may be made to scale 
showing the trough bottom inclined at 10"" ( the normal angle of installation for electro-magnetic 
feeders ) to the horizontal with a line from the point as obtained in 3 3.1.1, representing the top 
of the throat of the outlet inclined at the angle of rest of the material shall be drawn to cut the 
line of the trough bottom. The length of the feeder trough bottom shall be extended beyond the 
angle of rest of material by an amount sufficient to cut off the flow of material. 



THROAT OF \ 

OUTLET 



SLfDE GATE SKIRT PLATE 



30 TO 40 mm 



WSIDE SKIRT 



1 




FLOW LfNE 
OF MATERIAL 



FIG. 1 FLOW LINE DIAGRAM OF MATERIAL 



3.3.2 For a given capacity ( tonnage per hour ), large material obviously requires a longer trough 
to control the cat-off of flow than does small material. 

3.3.3 If the feeder is below a large bunker seldom completely emptied, a shorter feeder may be 
used-than would be advisible with, for example, surge hopper or wagon tippler hopper liable to be 
emptied frequently during wagon marshalling, etc, where the first tip into an empty hopper is 
liable to flush over the feeder; in a case like this, arrangements shall be made to cut-off the feeder 
before the hopper is completely empty. 

ZA Compatibility with Vibrator — WaVxn^ decided upon a suitable width and length of feeder, 
reference shall be made to data sheets, with the consideration of the indicated capacities of the 
respective vibrators. These capacities are fairly near the upper limit for the vibrators and if a long 
feeder is required, or rather difficult material is to be handled at a capacity near that shown, then 
the next larger size vibrator shall be used, and a feeder selected from the next range. An overlap 



IS : 12400- 1988 

occurs in the feeder widths on each range of sizes to enable the most suitable vibrator to be used 
for any given capacity in tonnes per hour and the material. 

3.5 in general, twin and triple vibrator feeders are used for special installations and may be 
disregarded in the ordinary run of work. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This Indian Standard is intended to provide a uniform practice for selection of electro- 
magnetic feeder. The information given in this standard may be useful to the manufacturers in 
deciding the various parameters of the feeder and to the users in the selection of feeder(s) for 
their specific requirement(s). 

For very sticky material, the use of electro-magnetic feeder is not recommended. 



Printed at Printograph» New Delhi, Indja 



