Wdta Ah IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


semaga Atel cht Tatas — 
tite ifar 
arr 1 art ert ht ffa 
(TECH FATT ) 


Finishing of Automobile Bodies — 
Code of Practice 


Part 1 Finishing of Passenger Cars 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 87.040 


© BIS 2023 


aredta AM Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM HAA, 9 TEL ME HHL AMT, Ay Reet - 110002 
Nee” ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2023 Price Group 8 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Paints, Varnishes, and Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 


The objective in painting is to obtain desired product appearance while maintaining the highest level of durability. 
This objective will be accomplished by properly applying organic fillers, putties, primers and enamels to 
previously cleaned and/or chemically treated surfaces. 


A large number of material specifications on ready mixed paints, enamels, varnishes, lacquers and allied products 
had created a need for codes of practice for finishing of automobiles bodies, machinery, equipment, etc. There are 
two parts to this standard; the other part is: 


Part 2 Refinishing of passenger cars 


This standard was originally published in 1976. Now, this revision has taken to bring out the standard in the latest 
style and format of the Indian Standard. Also, the suitable modifications have been made in accordance with the 
current procedures followed throughout the industry. Additionally, references of Indian Standards have been 
updated wherever required. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of the standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


FINISHING OF AUTOMOBILE BODIES — CODE OF PRACTICE 
PART 1 FINISHING OF PASSENGER CARS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) prescribes the practices to be 
followed in finishing (painting) of new passenger 
cars. It covers surface preparation and finishing of 
cars using stoving enamels and nitrocellulose 
lacquers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this Indian standard are encouraged to investigate 
the possibility of applying the most recent edition of 
these standards: 


IS No. Title 
IS 1153 : 2021 Temporary corrosion 
preventives hard film solvent 
deposited — Specification 


(third revision) 


IS 1303 : 1983 Glossary of terms relating to 


paints (second revision) 


IS 3618 : 1966 Specification for phosphate 
treatment of iron and steel for 


protection against corrosion 


IS 5691 : 1970 Specification for lacquer, 
cellulose nitrate, pigmented, 


finishing, glossy 


IS 6125 : 2017 Enamel, synthetic, stoving, for 
automobiles — Specification 


(first revision) 


IS 7982 : 1992 Automobile polish, liquid — 


Specification (first revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 1303 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Plenum Chamber — The chamber where 
filtered air is received for supply to spray booths and 
other places to make them dust free. 


3.2 Integral Parts — The parts joined to a car body 
by welding, brazing, etc. 


3.3 First Deck — First place in a sequence. 


3.4 Wet Deck — The place where a car body is 
sanded with silicon carbide papers using water as 
medium. 


3.5 First Enamel Booth — The spray booth where 
first of the two enamel coats, wet on wet, is applied. 


3.6 Sand Through — The sanding of the paint film 
when it reaches the base metal. 


4 SURFACE PREPARATION 


4.1 Punching and Drilling of Assembly Holes 
(Body Shop) 


All assembly holes for affixing of mouldings, 
medallions, or any other exterior trim or functional 
items on the exterior and decorative painted surfaces 
of the body shall be drilled or punched prior to entry 
of the body into the paint-shop area. 


4.2 Removal of Residual Soldering Flux 
(Body Shop) 


All liquid and solidified zinc chloride soldering flux 
shall be removed by wet cloth. It is necessary that 
these operations be performed in the body shop area. 


4.3 Removal of Loose Foreign Material 
(Paint Shop) 


Clean the body inside and outside by brushing and 
blowing off with compressed air. All foreign 
material shall be removed from the interior and 
exterior surfaces, joints and crevices. Use wire 
brushes on joints and crevices, if necessary. 


4.4 Preparation of Soldered Areas 


The surface provided by solder metal may possess 
cavities of a re-entrant nature. These cavities may 
have a small opening at the surface but may enlarge 
inwardly from the opening. The surface contains 
pores and to this extent it is porous or pitted. When 
such a surface has a coating of paint applied, gaseous 
or liquid substance or other extraneous material is 
frequently tapped in the cavities. Such materials 
expand under heat and the internal pressure created 
raises and ruptures the overlaying covering of paint 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


causing a defect referred to as a crater or pit. The 
object, therefore, of this operation is to fill the 
cavities with a suitable material thus displacing 
objectionable gaseous, liquid or solid substances 
which could expand and rupture the exterior paint 
coating. 


4.5 Clean-up Prior to Phosphate Coating 
4.5.1 Removal of Rust 


Remove rust, utilizing rust removing chemicals. 
Wipe with a rag or sponge and followed by a water 
rinse. 


4.5.2 Removal of Chalk Marks 


Removal of chalk marks, either mechanically or 
with solvents and body-in-white cleaners, is 
necessary. 


4.5.3 Removal of Welding Primer and Zinc 
Chromate Sealer 


Mineral turpentine solvents may be used prior to the 
clean-up operations to facilitate removal of zinc 
chromate sealer and zinc dust welding primer. It is 
very important that all traces of zinc dust welding 
primer be removed from visible exterior surfaces. 


4.5.4 Wash all exterior surfaces of the body, except 
the previously treated and filled soldered areas, with 
solvents or cleaners to dissolve or loosen sealers, 
drawing compounds, grease, oil and ash which has 
accumulated on the body due to flaming and 
charring of body sealers in the welding operations. 
This is to facilitate removal of surface contaminants 
in the cleaning stage of the phosphating unit gloves. 
The operator shall wear helmet, goggles and gloves. 


NOTE — For all solvent-wipe operations use clean rags or 
sponges. Use of steel wool or wire brushes is permissible 
only in those localized areas where contaminants present 
difficulty in removal. 


4.6 Phosphate Coating 


All bodies shall be phosphate coated to meet the 
requirements. All underbody parts shall be 
previously cleaned and rust-proofed to meet the 
requirements. All doors and tailgates shall be kept 
ajar through the phosphate coating system to allow 
the solutions to wash the door jambs and door faces. 
Hoods and deck lids shall also be opened and so 
positioned, consistent with spray nozzle adjustment, 
that full coverage is obtained on their under surfaces. 
Adequate drain holes on the floor board and luggage 
compartment shall be provided for effective solution 
drainage. 


4.7 Body Blow-off 


Blow-off with compressed fan-propelled air to 
facilitate removal of chemical solutions and water. 
There shall be no areas exhibiting accumulation 


(puddling) or splashing as the body enters the 
dry-off oven. Remove by wiping, as required. 


4.8 Body Dry-off 


Dry-off the body in a convection type oven. 
Recommended schedules are 6 min to 10 min at 
ambient temperature of 150 °C. The interior surfaces 
of the structural members shall be dry before 
proceeding to the dipping operation. The minimum 
metal temperature in the still area shall be 105 °C for 
3 min. Supplementary radiant heating may be 
employed to attain specified temperatures in heavy 
metal areas. 


4.9 Removal of Residual Salts 


Remove concentrated residual salts, resulting from 
accumulation of drippings into the body from the 
overhead body hangers, by wiping with cloth. 


4.10 Primer 


Dip priming of the car bodies is necessary to ensure 
adequate protection of underbody and other recessed 
areas, such as wheel arches and inside of doors 
which are subjected to severe corrosive conditions 
and are not accessible to spray application of primer. 
Following two types of dip primer as specified in 
4.10.1 and 4.10.2 can be used: 


a) Solvent-borne composition; and 


b) Water-borne composition. 


4.10.1 Reducing of Solvent-Borne Dip Primer 


Solvent-bome dip primer shall be reduced with the 
recommended thinner. It is necessary that the 
volumetric reduction be controlled to maintain the 
desired viscosity and physical constants to obtain 
optimum build and flow. 


4.10.2 Reducing of Water-Borne Dip Primer 


Water-borne dip primer shall be reduced with 
demineralized water. It is necessary that the 
reduction is controlled to maintain the desired 
viscosity and physical constants to obtain optimum 
build and flow. 


4.11 Immersion of Body in Dip Primer 


The body shall be properly dipped to a specified 
level to cover all interior surfaces of box sections. 
Minimum dry film thickness of the dip primer shall 
be 15 microns on all box section areas. 


4.12 Dip Primer Removal 
4.12.1 Removal from Exterior Surfaces 


It is necessary that the excess of dip primer on the 
edges of the exterior surfaces is removed by 
squeezing at the exit of the dip tank in all plants. 


4.12.2 Removal from Interior Surfaces (Floor Pans) 


Suitable drain holes should be provided on the floor 
pan and trunk compartment floor to effectively drain 
out excess paint and avoid accumulation. 


4.13 Dip Primer Bake 


4.13.1 Solvent-borne primer is not required to be 
baked separately. It can be flashed for 20 min and 
primer surfacer is applied. Both primer and primer 
surfacer are baked in a single operation. 


4.13.2 Water-borne primer shall be separately baked 
before the application of subsequent coats of primer 
surfacer. The minimum  stoving schedule 
recommended is 30 min at 150 °C. 


4.13.3 Underbody primer where dip priming 
facilities do not exist it is necessary that the 
under-chassis, wheel arches and underbody areas 
shall be primed with a suitable primer by spray. Red 
primer surfacer can also be used for this purpose. 


4.14 Body Clean-up 
4.14.1 Dry Dip Primer 


Remove any dry dip primer which has splashed or 
drained on to the exterior body surfaces. This 
operation shall be accomplished by wiping with a 
2.5 percent aqueous solution of ammonia or the 
recommended solvent blend. 


4.14.2 Cements, Sealers, Oil or Other Contaminants 


Wipe areas contaminated with cements, sealers, oil 
or other surface contaminants with naphtha. 


4.14.3 Tack off 


Tack off all exterior body surfaces which shall be 
subsequently colour coated and the visible after final 
assembly. It is absolutely necessary that no residual 
tack-rag varnish be present on body surfaces. Also, 
tack off decorative integral interior surfaces. 


NOTE — For all manual clean-up operations, production 
personnel shall wear helmet, goggles and clean PVC 
surgical gloves. For all solvent-wipe operations, use dean 
rags or sponges. Use dust resistance mask and vapour 
cartridge mask as per requirements. 


4.15 Filling of Metal Defects (Spray) 


Apply by spray, red high-fill primer, or unreduced 
red primer, to those defective areas which are 
inaccessible to knife glazing and optionally to other 
areas requiring filling. Viscosity and film thickness 
shall be as required to effect complete filling. 


4.16 Application of Primer on Underside of 
Cowl Top Panel Grille and Top Visible Surfaces 


Apply by spray, utilizing an extension spray gun, 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


rust inhibiting primer, to the underside of the cowl 
top panel grille and to the top visible surfaces. Two 
coats shall be applied, wet on wet, by spraying 
during insertion and withdrawal of the extension 
spray gun. Spray gun may be inserted through both 
the left and right side access holes. Minimum dry 
film thickness of primer on these parts, including 
lower edges, shall be 30 microns. This operation 
shall preferably be performed during the primer 
surfacer spray stage. 


4.17 Spray Primer on Underside of Front and 
Rear Fender Assemblies 


4.17.1 Spray red primer or grey primer to all 
uncoated underside surfaces of the front and rear 
fender assemblies and sheet metal exposed to the 
wheelhouse. The minimum dry film thickness of the 
coating shall be 30 microns. 


4.17.2 Spray primer on upper inside surfaces of rear 
quarter panels and on the uncoated panels inside of 
trunk compartments. Spray red primer (grey primer 
or black primer are optional materials) over the 
interior surfaces of the rear quarter panels and on the 
uncoated surfaces on the inside of the trunk 
compartment including deck lid underside. The 
minimum dry film thickness of coating shall be 
30 microns. The areas between the deck lid inner and 
outer panels, which are visible at any angle in 
normal service, shall be adequately coated. For those 
areas which will be subsequently colour-coated, the 
minimum dry film thickness of the primer coating 
shall be 30 microns. For those areas which are not 
subsequently colour coated, two applications of 
primer or primers is necessary. The minimum dry 
film thickness of the primer or primers shall be 
40 microns. Priming is not required over those areas 
in the trunk compartment which have been 
previously sprayed with fluid deadener, unless those 
areas are visible after installation of trunk liners and 
rubber mats or carpets. 


4.18 Spray Primer on the Inside of the Engine 
Compartment Area 


Spray red primer (grey and black primers are 
optional materials) over all surfaces in the engine 
compartment including the underside of the hood. 
The minimum dry film thickness of coating shall be 
30 microns. The areas between the hood inner and 
outer panels, which are visible at any angle in 
normal service, shall be adequately coated. 


4.19 Spray Red Primer on Exterior of the Body 
Apply by spray red primer to all exterior surfaces of 


the body. Minimum dry film thickness of red primer 
shall be 20 microns. 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


4.20 Spray Primer on Interior of Body 
4.20.1 Interior Decorative Integral Parts 


Prime all integral interior parts designated for colour 
coating in the first enamel booth with grey primer. 
Examples of integral interior parts are as follows: 


a) Door garnish mouldings; 

b) Door upper inner frame; 

c) Quarter panel lower and upper inner frame; 
d) Quarter panel garnish moulding; 

e) A and B pillars; 


f) Door and quarter panel trim retainer 
moulding; 


g) Cand D pillars; 

h) Quarter panel; 

j) Quarter panel cover plate; and 
k) Wheelhouse, etc. 


4.20.1.1 Spray a smooth continuous film with 
minimum dry film thickness of 20 microns. 
Dependent on individual plant facilities and 
sequence of primer operations, this grey primer shall 
be applied immediately prior tom that point in the 
primer booth where the integral part or parts are 
subjected to the greatest amount of overspray 
deposition from other priming operations. The 
purpose of this specific location is to absorb 
overspray into the wet primer film. 


4.20.1.2 Sanding of the primer on these integral 
parts is not necessary provided good finished 
appearance is obtained. Good finished appearance, 
therefore, depends on plant facilities and ability to 
maintain dirt-free primer booth operations as well as 
effective location of the priming operations. 


4.20.1.3 Removal of water reducible dip primer or 
solvent-borne dip primer from integral parts is not 
necessary provided good finished appearance can be 
demonstrated and continuously maintained. This 
would be contingent upon complete absence of foam 
and irregular drain patterns and, also, absence of the 
immersion line. On those integral parts, so coated 
with water reducible primer, it still remains 
mandatory to apply grey primer. 


4.20.2 Interior Non-Decorative Areas 
4.20.2.1 Footwells 


Spray the footwells with red primer, so as to obtain 
a minimum dry film thickness of 25 microns. 


4.20.2.2 Surfaces above the immersion line 


Spray the uncoated interior areas of the body above 
the immersion line, including the roof side rails and 
edges of the windshield and backlight openings, 
with red primer (black primer and grey primer are 


optional materials). Roof underside surfaces, not in 
direct contact with decorative soft trim, may be 
excluded. 


4.21 Spray Body Primer on Inside Surface 
on Non-galvanized Steel Sills 


Insert extension nozzle through front or rear opening 
of sill. Immediately trigger the spray gun and apply 
red primer, or optional material, as nozzle is inserted 
and guided to opposite end of sill. Continue to 
trigger the gun as the nozzle is pulled back so that a 
second coat of primer is applied, wet on wet, 


4.22 Filling of Metal Defects (Spray) 


To those defective areas which are inaccessible to 
knife glazing and to other areas (requiring filling) 
which have been previously primed spray with 
unreduced grey primer. Film thickness shall be as 
required to effect complete filling without producing 


sagging. 
4.23 Spray Grey Primer on Exterior of Body 


4.23.1 Spray the entire exterior of the body, edges of 
doors, door jambs, lock and hinge pillars, and front 
fenders to pillar supports with grey primer having 
20 microns minimum dry film thickness. The total 
dry film thickness of both red and grey primers shall 
be 40 microns minimum prior to sanding, 


4.23.2 On door jambs, grey coat alone is permissible 
at a minimum dry film thickness of 20 microns. 
Flash off for 15 min at room temperature. 


4.24 Bake Primer on Body 


The primed body shall be baked at a schedule of 
150 °C minimum metal temperature for 30 min to 
cure the primer surfacer. It shall be ensured that 
temperature much beyond 150 °C is not sustained to 
avoid overbaking. 


CAUTION — Do not exceed metal temperature 
beyond 165 °C in any area. 


4.25 Sound Deadener 


After baking of the primer surfacer, sound deadener 
either solvent-based composition or water-based 
composition (solvent-based is preferred) shall be 
applied on the following areas: 


a) Whole underbody including wheel arches; 
b) Inside floor pan; 

c) Trunk lid and floor; 

d) Bonnet; and 


e) Inside doors. 
4.26 Wet-Sand Body (First Deck) 


4.26.1 Wet-sand those body surfaces which are to be 
subsequently finish painted with 320 grit or finer 


silicone carbide paper or comparable grit disc 
screen. Comparable grade aluminium oxide paper 
may optionally be used. This is to remove all dirt, 
sags, high glazed areas, orange peel and minor 
defects. Then finish wet sand and hand pick-up in 
order to obtain the smooth-guide coat. Machine 
sanding of any type is not permissible over any short 
radius body contour. On horizontal and contoured 
surfaces where in normal sanding operations the 
grey primer is sanded through to the red on a portion 
of the total area, the minimum film thickness shall 
be 18 microns after sanding. On those surfaces, such 
as body side surfaces, which are only lightly sanded 
or surfaces in contact with decorative hardware the 
minimum film thickness shall be 35 microns after 
sanding. This film thickness is necessary in those 
areas to reduce corrosion which is associated with 
body side mouldings and bright hardware. 


4.26.2 Integral Interior Parts 


Decorative integral interior parts, dependent on 
plant conditions, may require sanding in order to 
produce an acceptable surface for colour in the first 
enamel booth. 


4.26.3 Clean-up After Wet-Sanding 


4.26.3.1 On those exterior decorative areas to be 
painted in the first colour booth, and on all 
decorative areas which shall not be re-sanded on the 
second wet-deck, remove all primer sanding residue. 
Loosen and remove by manual wiping, or with 
automatic equipment, prior to entering the rinse 
area. The amount and exactness of clean-up required 
after wet sanding is considerably dependent upon 
the location and effectiveness of the rinse operation. 
The combined clean-up and rinse operations shall 
produce a sanded body that is completely free of all 
residual sanding sludge. 


4.26.3.2 Rinse 


Rinse body with water having a total hardness rating 
less than 110 ppm and a total dissolved solid content 
less than 130 ppm. 


4.26.3.3 Blow-off and dry-off 


It is necessary that all surfaces to be finished, as well 
as surfaces in the proximity of areas to be finished, 
shall be dry before colour application. This shall be 
accomplished by thorough blow-off utilizing 
compressed air or fan propelled air blow-off, either 
manually, automatically or a combination of both, as 
required, followed by drying in a convection oven. 


CAUTION — There shall be no areas exhibiting 
water accumulation (puddling) or splashing as the 
body enters the dry-off oven. Remove by wiping, as 
required. 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


4.26.3.4 A dry-off schedule of 10 min at 150 °C or 
equivalent ambient temperature is recommended. 
However, dependent on the extent and efficiency of 
the blow-off operations, shorter oven times are 
permissible provided the surface is dry. 


4.27 Application of Glaze to Body 


Inspect primed surfaces and apply specific glazing 
putty to visible defects as required. The putty 
application shall be bare minimum. Remove any 
excess glaze. 


4.28 Detail Wet-Sand Defects (Before Enamel) 


Wet spot sand any remaining defects, glazing putty, 
etc, using 360 grit or finer silicone carbide paper. 
Comparable grades of aluminium oxide paper may 
optionally be used. Apply water with sponge. Wipe 
off excess water and sanding sluge with clean 
sponge. Blow-off with air if required. 


4.29 Solvent Wipe 


Wipe all of the previously sanded areas and all areas 
to be coated in first enamel booth with clean rags or 
sponges saturated with an approved solvent. The rag 
shall be dipped in clean solvent and wrung out 
before each body is wiped. It is necessary to remove 
excess sealer, finger prints, residual sanding sludge, 
or any other contaminants. The solvent used for this 
purpose-shall be regularly changed. 


NOTE — For all manual clean-up operations, production 
personnel shall wear clean cotton gloves. 


4.30 Tack off 


Tack off all exterior body surfaces and all 
decorative, integral interior surfaces, designated for 
colour coating in the first enamel booth with tack 
rags to remove all dust and lint from these surfaces. 


4.31 Repairing Sand-Through 


4.31.1 Accidental minor sand-through and out- 
through areas shall be primed with flash primer. In 
order to minimize the dry time, lacquer thinner shall 
be used as the reducing solvent, application shall 
take place within the colour booth and shall be by 
touch-up gun in order to restrict over-spray. Dry 
thickness shall be minimum 15 microns to 
maximum 20 microns. A flash-off time of minimum 
2 min to 3 min is required before colour coat is 
applied over the areas. 


NOTE — The primer may be applied (consistent with 
existing safety requirements) outside of the colour booth 
provided there is a minimum flash-dry time of 5 min before 
application of colour coat. 


4.31.2 To panels which have undergone metal repair 
and/or exhibit extensive sand-through areas, apply 
by spray to a dry film thickness of 40 microns. 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


Baking is mandatory in this application prior to 
sanding (if required) and colour coating. 


4.31.3 For soldered areas which have been sanded- 
through to bare metal or require additional filling, 
apply by spray flash primer (baking required prior to 
colour coating). Dry film thickness of repair primer 
shall be 50 microns after sanding. A light coat of 
colour for identification purposes is permissible over 
repair primer prior to baking. 


4.32 Solvent Reduction of Stoving Enamels 


Only the thinner recommended by the supplier of 
enamel should be used as required to get the 
spraying viscosity. 


4.33 Spray Colour Coat-First Enamel Booth 


4.33.1 In those plants wherein specified body 
enamel thickness on exterior surfaces cannot be 
obtained within existing colour-booth facilities a 
supplementary build-up coat shall be applied at this 
stage. Spray a single coat of specified body colour 
on those areas where it has been demonstrated that 
the specified film thickness cannot be obtained by 
the normal sequence of spray operations in the 
second colour-booth. 


NOTE — Apply build-up coat of exterior body colour on 
exterior surfaces. 


4.33.2 Stray Trunk and Engine Compartments - For 
those plants not doing colour coating the trunk and 
engine compartment in the prime booth, spray 
colour coat over the previously primed surfaces of 
the trunk compartment including the underside of 
the deck lid, the rear seat strainer, top and side of the 
wheelhouse, hinge reinforcements and hood lock 
panel. Spray colour coat over the previously primed 
surfaces of the engine compartment, including the 
underside of the hood. The minimum dry film 
thickness of the colour coat shall be 20 microns. 


NOTE — Both priming and colour coatings are necessary 
in the areas specified above with the following exceptions: 


a) Priming and/or colour coating is not required over 
those areas in the trunk compartment which have 
been previously sprayed with fluid deadener, 
unless those areas are visible after installation of 
trunk liners and rubber mats or carpets. For those 
areas (fluid deadener) which are visible, priming 
(to diminish bleeding) and colour coating is 
required; and 


b) For those areas which are not coated with fluid 
deadener and which are not visible after 
installation of trunk liners and rubber mats or 
carpets, colour coating is not necessary. However, 
if colour coat is not used, then two applications of 
primer(s) are essential. The minimum dry film 
thickness of the primer(s) shall be 40 microns. 


4.33.3 Spray Integral Interior Parts 


On specified integral parts spray specified body 
colours. Spray door jambs, lock and hinge pillars, 
and front fender to pillar supports with specified 
body colour. The minimum dry film thickness of 
colour coat in these areas shall be 40 microns. 


4.33.4 Overspray 


4.33.4.1 Remove all overspray from all exterior 
body surfaces, such as the sweep accent area, 
designated for colour coating in the first enamel 
booth by solvent wiping. 


4.33.4.2 On areas, such as the horizontal surfaces of 
the deck lid, the rear quarter panels, the hood and 
front fenders, where satisfactory removal of 
overspray cannot be accomplished by sanding on the 
second deck, one of the following procedures shall 
be followed: 


a) Remove all overspray by solvent wiping 
with rubber solvent; 


or 


b) Prior to application of colour coat in the 
luggage and engine compartments, spray 
all the affected areas with a light coat of 
lower body colour to absorb any overspray; 
and 


or 


c) For those plants colour coating the luggage 
and engine compartments in the primer 
booth, elimination of upper body colour 
over-spray onto lower body horizontal 
surfaces may be accomplished by utilizing 
non-permanent masks. 


4.33.5 Spray Exterior Body Surfaces 


All exterior body surfaces designated for final 
painting in the first enamel booth shall be sprayed 
with two coats of the specified colour. Allow 5 min 
minimum flash time between coats. The minimum 
dry film thickness shall be 50 microns. 


4.33.6 Bake Colour Enamel on Body 


The colour coat shall be cured in a convection oven. 
Infra-red lamps, gas-fired infra-red burners, calrod 
units and all other devices for radiant heating are 
unacceptable except for preheating prior to entering 
the convection oven. Oven time of 30 min through 
the convection oven is highly recommended. 
Curtailment of oven time may prohibit future use of 
new improved paint materials. 


CAUTION — Do not exceed metal temperature of 
135 °C in any area. In those areas where metal 
temperatures of 145 °C to 150 °C are attained, do not 
sustain for more than 5 min. 


4.33.7 Baking Temperature Control 


4.33.7.1 In order to ensure that proper paint cure 
(both colour coat and primer) is consistently 
obtained, it is mandatory that the baking times and 
temperatures be adequately controlled. To 
accomplish this all baking ovens shall be checked at 
periodic intervals. Therefore, a fully thermo coupled 
body and additionally a recording thermometer 
(smoke chart) shall be run immediately subsequent 
to the following: 


a) At model start-up, as soon as an 
uninterrupted run can be made at full line 
speed; 

b) Complete oven cleaning (occurring 
approximately three times a year); 

c) Major line breakdowns involving damage 
to oven duct work; and 


d) Changes in production schedules. 


4.33.7.2 In addition to the above, weekly checks of 
all baking ovens shall be made with the recording 
thermometer. The smoke chart obtained shall be 
compared to the chart which was produced at the 
time of the latest run of thermocoupled body. 


4.33.7.3 Inspect and route to paint repair line (major 
defects) and repair. 


4.34 Paint Repair Before Trim (High Bake) 


Major defects, such as large dirt particles, orange 
peel overspray, pitting off colour, sand scratches, 
file and disc marks, sags, craters, etc, shall be 
reduced by wet-sanding with 360 grit or finer 
silicone carbide sandpaper. Comparable grades of 
aluminium oxide paper may optionally be used. The 
wet-sanding operation shall be undertaken to avoid 
cutting through the primer. To repair areas sanded 
through to bare metal, isolate repair panel or panels 
by masking off the area with masking paper and 
tape. Solvent wipe. Tack off with clean the repaired 
areas with a suitable solvent to ensure they are free 
from contaminants. Spray the entire panel or panels 
with two coats of the required enamel. Flash off for 
3 min minimum before baking. For installation of 
plant (new) facilities or for modification of existing 
plant facilities, minimum flash time of 5 min is 
recommended, to plant schedule. 


4.35 Paint Repair (Final Low Bake) 


Laminated glass windshields are particularly 
susceptible to damage by excessive heating or 
thermal shock. Windshields of cars passing through 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


paint repair ovens shall be protected by an asbestos 
shield or blanket. The windshields shall be checked 
periodically with a thermocouple to ensure that 
the glass temperature does not exceed 75 °C 
(see Caution). Any laminated side windows should 
be lowered into the body or otherwise protected. 
Bodies glazed with laminated safety glass parts shall 
be removed from paint ovens before stopping the 
line for lunch hours or other shutdowns. 


CAUTION — Protect laminated glass in paint 
repair ovens. 


4.36 Preparation of Priming 


4.36.1 Wet sand with 360 grit or finer silicone 
carbide paper all defective areas in need of repair. 
Comparable grades of aluminium oxide paper may 
optionally be used. Apply water with sponge. Air off 
excess water and sanding sludge with clean sponge. 
Blow-off with air if as required. Wipe all the 
previously sanded areas with clean rags or sponges 
saturated with approved solvent. Use of zinc stearate 
‘no lead’ paper is not permissible. Mask off all 
adjacent panels. 


4.36.2 For Miscellaneous Priming 


Apply by spray, air-dry repair primer, to all 
sand-through and cut-through areas. The primer may 
be built up as required by successive spray 
applications. Air dry 10 min to 15 min or force dry 
with infra-red lamps. If so desired, the primer may 
be baked in the low bake oven. 


4.36.3 For Heavy Repair of Total Priming 


For heavy repair, where high filling is required, 
spray low bake repair primer onto surfaces 
previously sanded. Reduction to spray viscosity, and 
film thickness applied, are to be as required to effect 
complete filling. This primer shall be baked in the 
low bake repair oven, according to the low bake 
enamel schedule, prior to application of repair 
enamel. 


4.37 Preparation for Colour Coating 


4.37.1 Wet sand all primed areas with 360 grit 
silicone carbide paper. Wet sand the entire panel 
preferably with 400 grit sand paper so that the entire 
surface, including all panel edges, has been abraded. 
Comparable grades of aluminium oxide paper may 
optionally be used. Adhesion of the repair enamels 
is dependent on this operation. 


4.37.2 Colour Coating 
The repair enamel shall be either: 


a) Special low-bake enamel, or nitrocellulose 
finish; or 

b) Acid catalyzed low-bake enamel. The 
approved acid catalyst is added to the 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


high-bake super enamel in the ratio as 
recommended by individual suppliers of 
pa.int. However, only a few selected 
colours are satisfactory for acid catalyzed 
touch-up. The use of acid catalyst tends to 
give a wide colour difference of the 
touch-up area. 


4.37.3 Reduce the enamel with an approved solvent 
as required. Spray two single coats of enamel over 
the repair panel to produce a minimum dry film 
thickness (of repair enamel) of 40 microns. Flash dry 
for 5 min before baking. Bake at a minimum 
schedule of 20 min at 80 °C metal temperature. The 
following equivalent schedules are also satisfactory: 


a) 18 min at 88 °C metal temperature; and 


b) 15 min at 93 °C metal temperature. 


Under no conditions shall the baking temperature be 
below 80 °C metal temperature. 


4.38 Final Car Preparation 


Stoving synthetic finishes shall not be burnished. 
Only polishing with a suitable liquid polish using a 
soft mop or cloth pad is recommended. 


5 FINISHING 


Recommended practices for finishing of passenger 
cars using stoving synthetic enamels, stoving primer 
surfacer followed by nitrocellulose lacquers and 
synthetic air drying primer followed by lacquer 
primer surfacer followed by the nitrocellulose 
lacquer are prescribed in Table 1 along with the 
materials being used at present and relevant 
specifications on the subject. 


Table 1 Process of Finishing of Passenger Cars 


(Clause 5) 
SI No. Process Detail Material Specification/Requirement 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Pretreatment 


a)| As soon as sheet metal parts are | Any suitable material having | This should satisfy the 
pressed, a thin coat of rust- | good rust inhibitive properties | requirements of IS 1153. 
preventive oil shall be applied by | and capable of being removed 
brush, swab or dip. This | by mineral 
application depends on whether | be used. 


the parts are used immediately or 
stored as stock. Extra precautions, 
for instance additional preventive 
oil, proper storage, etc, may be 
necessary during monsoon. 


turpentine may 


b)| Rust-preventive oil should be | Any suitable welding sealer | Specification to be drafted. At 
removed thoroughly from the | or welding primer may be used. | present proprietary materials 


areas to be spot welded with the 
help of mineral turpentine using a 
brush or swab. The surface to be 
spot welded shall be thoroughly 
cleaned and a suitable welding 
sealer or primer applied. 


are used. The primer shall 
prevent corrosion starting 
from the welded joints after 
spot welding and also the 
parts shall be capable of being 
spot welded after the 
application of the primer. 


Table 1 (Continued) 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


SI No. Process Detail Material Specification/Requirement 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
c)| After body assembly, apply | Any suitable derusting | Specification for derusting 
mineral turpentine with brush or | composition based on | composition to be drafted. At 
swab to remove greases from both | phosphoric acid may be used. present proprietary materials 
inside and outside of the body and are used. After application 
inspect for presence of rust. land wipe off, the body shall 
Apply a suitable derusting be completely free from rust, 
composition with steel wool and and shall not show any 
remove the rust, if any, from both stickiness. 
inside and outside and wipe with 
cotton rags and blow compressed 
air all over the body, inside and 
outside. 
d)| The body is then submitted to | Suitable phosphating chemicals | The phosphating chemicals 
suitable 6 stage or 7 stage dip or | and passivating chemicals | shall satisfy the requirements 
spray zinc iron phosphate coating | conforming to IS 3618 could be | specified in IS 3618 
system comprising of degreasing, | ysed (Class B or Class C). The | (Class B or Class C). 
hot and cold water rinse, | composition of the materials 
phosphating, cold water rinse and shall be such that it gives a 
passivating,: 10 Bel Oye d coating 1.5 g/m’ to 3.0 g/m? film 
corrosion resistance/paint : 
bondage but where facilities for thickness. 
such a treatment do not exist, the 
body shall be properly degreased 
and subsequently treated with 
brush-cum-wipe off derusting 
chemicals. 
ii) PVC primer 
a)| Apply PVC primer on the rain | A suitable PVC primer may be | Specification to be drafted. At 
water channel for good adhesion | used. present proprietory PVC 
of PVC sealer applied at a later primers are used. 
stage. 
b)| Apply epoxy stopper putty/two | Two component epoxy stopper | Specification to be drafted. 
pack unsaturated polyester putty | putty may be used. This material shall make the 
on brazed joints. brazed joints completely 
water-proof and shall give 
complete protection against 
corrosion. 
iii) | Primer or primer surfacer 
a)| Whenever facilities are available, | Any suitable slipper dip primer | Specification to be drafted. At 


application of slipper dip 
primer is recommended for 
underbody dip application. This 
provides protection to otherwise 
inaccessible areas. When dip 
application is not possible it is 
essential that the underbody, etc, 
is sprayed with a suitable primer 
or red primer surfacer used for 
conventional spray. 


having 
resistance 


excellent corrosion 
and adhesion on the 


metal surface may be used. 
Either solvent-borne primer or 
water-borne primer can be used. 
In the latter case a separate 
baking for 30 min at 150 °C is 


essential. 


present proprietory materials 
are used. The slipper dip 
primer shall be such that it 
provides the surface complete 
protection against corrosion. 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 1 (Continued) 


SI No. 


Process Detail 


Material 


Specification/Requirement 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


b) 


Roof panel, rain water channel 
and seams are then coated with 
PVC sealer. 


Any suitable PVC sealer may be 
used. 


Specification to be drafted. 
Only proprietary materials are 
used at present. 


c) 


The body is then sprayed with one 
coat of stoving red primer 
surfacer both inside and outside 
followed by a second coat of 
stoving grey primer surfacer on 
the outside only. The primer 
surfacer is thinned with the 
thinner recommended by the 
supplier to the recommended 
viscosity as to give a dry film 
thickness of 40 microns to 
50 microns for 2 coats. Use of a 
red and grey combination is a 
convenient guide for the flatting 
operation. The manufacturer may 
use either red or grey only if he is 
able to control the film thickness. 


Suitable stoving primer surfacer 
having good adhesion, 
flexibility, corrosion resistance, 
sandability and lacquer and 
stoving enamel hold-out may 
be used. 


Specification to be drafted. 
Only proprietary materials are 
used at present. 


OR 


d) 


One coat of synthetic air drying 
primer is sprayed over the whole 
body at a viscosity of 30 s in 
IS Cup No. 4 to get a dry film 
thickness of 25 microns. This is 
allowed to airdry overnight and 
then lightly dry sanded. Three 
coats of nitrocellulose surfacer 
are sprayed with 15 min interval 
between coats. The surfacer is 
thinned to 18 s to 20 s in IS Cup 
No. 4 with the recommended 
thinner. The nitrocellulose primer 
surfacer is allowed to air-dry for 
4h. 


Nitrocellulose primer surfacer 


Conforming to IS 6126 


e) 


Two coats of synthetic primer 
surfacer red or grey are sprayed 
over the whole body both inside 
and outside. A flash off time of 
5 min is given between coats. The 
primer surfacer is thinned with 
recommended thinner to a 
viscosity of 20 s in IS Cup No. 4 
to get a film thickness of 45 
microns to 50 microns in two 
coats. After application, two 
primer surfacer may either be air- 
dried for 16 h or baked for 20 min 
at 120 °C. 


Suitable proprietary materials 
are used at present. 


Specification to be drafted 


Table 1 (Continued) 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


SI No. Process Detail Material Specification/Requirement 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
iv) Putty 
a)| After baking the primer surfacer | This may be either air drying or Conforming to IS 7164 
and cooling the body to room | stoving type of putty with good 
temperature, the soldered areas | filling properties and sanding 
are filled with stopper mixed with | properties. This shall not shrink 
suitable thinner and made to a | blister or crack on baking and 
thick paste. shall have good adhesion on the 
primer surfacer. This shall be 
capable of being sanded 
without clogging the paper 
either in 4 h air drying or after 
baking at 130 °C for 30 min. 
Only very light application of 
putty shall be carried out. As 
these would be potential weak 
spot in the painting system. 
OR 
b)| Nitrocellulose putty is lightly | Proprietary materials are used. Specification to be drafted 
applied over nitrocellulose primer 
surfacer/synthetic primer surface 
wherever necessary and allowed 
to airdry for 4 hours. 
v) Sound deadener 
a) | The underbody and the inside of | This may be either applied by | Specification to be drafted. 


the door panels are applied with 
sound deadener. 


brush or by spraying using 
special equipment for the 
purpose, and shall be free from 
excessive flow or sagging 
during application. The material 
shall be such that it provides an 
effective barrier against 
corrosion and seal against the 
ingress of water and dust. 


Proprietary materials 
used at present. 


are 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 1 (Continued) 


SI No. 


Process Detail 


Material 


Specification/Requirement 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


vi) 


Surfacer or putty flatting 


a) 


The primer surfacer is wet-sanded 
by hand or machine and then 
washed with water inside and 
outside and air is blown to remove 
water and dried at elevated 
temperature or with cloth. The 
body is then inspected. Portions 
where bare metal is exposed 
during sanding are touched up 
with nitro synthetic touch-up 
primer, air-dried and dry-scuffed 
with emery paper No. 400. The 
whole body both inside and 
outside is then tack ragged so that 
there is no loose particle of dust 
or dirt on the car. 


This shall be a non-sanding 
fast-drying type of primer 
which when dried forms a 
non-absorbent smooth surface 
with good adhesion on bare 
metal and capable of protecting 
it against corrosion. This shall 
have good holdout for lacquer 
and stoving enamels. 


do 


Vil) 


Application of finish 


a) 


Two coats of synthetic stoving 
enamel are sprayed with 
5 min interval between the coats 
both inside and outside body to 
give a dry film thickness of 
40 microns to 50 microns. After 
the second coat allow the enamel 
an air drying time of 5 min to 
8 min and bake at 130 °C for 
30 min. Allow to cool for 15 min 
to push the car to assembly 
department. 


Enamel, synthetic, stoving 


Conforming to IS 6125 


OR 


b) 


Nitrocellulose lacquer is thinned 
with the recommended thinner to 
a viscosity of 20 s to 21 s in 
IS Cup No. 4. Three coats are 
sprayed both inside and outside 
with an interval of 15 min 
between the coats. After the third 
coat it could be either air-dried for 
6 hours or could be force-dried at 
70 °C for 20 min after a flash off 
time of 20 min. After light 
sanding a final mist coat is 
applied at a viscosity of 
13 s to 14 s in IS Cup No. 4. This 
can be air-dried overnight or 
force-dried at 70 °C for 20 min. 


Lacquer, cellulose, pigmented, 
finishing, glossy 


Conforming to IS 5691 


c) 


The body shall be then burnished 
with cutting compound using 
mechanical buff and subsequently 
with liquid polish. 


Proprietary materials are used 
at present. 


Specification to be drafted 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


SI No. 


Process Detail 


Material 


Specification/Requirement 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


viii) 


Inspection and touch up 


a) 


After assembly, inspect the body 
for defects of the paint job. 
Wherever bare metal is visible, 
the area should be properly 
feather edged and nitrocellulose 
touch-up primer followed by 
nitrocellulose primer  surfacer 
applied. After drying for 4 h, it is 
wet flatted with water and 
waterproof emery paper No. 400 
and wiped dry. 


b) 


Nitrocellulose based touch-up 
finishes are then used for 
touch-up on these areas using the 
appropriate thinner recommended 
by the supplier. Two coats are to 
be sprayed with 5 min interval 
between the coats. After 5 min a 
mist coat of the recommended 
thinner shall be sprayed on the dry 
spray area to ensure proper 
merging of the coats. A flash off 
time of 10 min to 15 min is 
allowed and then the touched 
portions are dried for 15 min to 
20 min with infra-red lamps. 


Proprietary materials are used at 
present. This product shall be 
such that it gives a glossy finish 
after brushing and polishing 
comparable to staving enamel. 


Specification to be drafted 


Touch up of synthetic stoving 
enamel shall be done edge to 
edge, that is, if the damage is on 
the door panel the whole door 
panel shall be sprayed with the 
finish. 


c) 


After cooling, touch-up areas are 
polished with suitable liquid 
polish by mechanical buffing 
with soft mop. This polishing 
operation is to be carried out to 
remove the dry spray and proper 
merging of the touched-up area. 


Automobile, polish, liquid 


Conforming to IS 7982 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Paints, Varnishes and Related Products Sectional Committee, CHD 20 


Organization 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Akzo Nobel India Limited, Gurugram 


Asian Paints Ltd, Mumbai 


Berger Paints India Ltd, Howrah 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Materials), 
Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Kanpur 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Harcourt Butler Technical University, Kanpur 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Paints Association, Kolkata 


Indian Small Scale Paint Association, Mumbai 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


J K Cement Limited, Kanpur 


Kansai Nerolac Paints Ltd, Mumbai 


Meta Chem Paints and Adhesives Private Limited, 
Nashik 


Ministry of Defence, Department of Standardization, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


PROF P. A. MAHANWAR (Chairperson) 


SHRI SANATAN HAJRA 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR GOEL 
SHRI RAJES BARDIA (Alternate) 


SHRI TAPAN KUMAR DHAR 
SHRI SWAGATA CHAKROBORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI V. RAJESHKHARAN (Alternate) 


DR SUKHDEO R. KARADE 
DR P. C. THAPLIYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAR SINGH 
SHRI M. L. PRASAD (Alternate I) 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate II) 


SHRI M. A. U. KHAN 


DR GURBACHAN SINGH 
SHRI A. K. PATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. GHOSHAL 
SHRI A. SATYA SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


PROF P. K. KAMANI 
PROF ARUN MAITHANI (Alternate) 


PROF SMRUTIRANJAN PARIDA 


SHRI SUBROTO BANERJEE 
DR M. B. GUHA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH GOYAL 


SHRI H. SATHYANARAYAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI NIRAV RAVESHIA (Alternate II) 


PROF V. V. SHERTUKADE 


SHRI RANA PRATAP SINGH 
DR PRITI PILLAY (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN NIKAM 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR SOMANI (Alternate) 


SHRI BISWANATH PANJA 
SHRI HEMANT KULKARNI (Alternate) 


LT COL PRAVEEN DEO 
SHRI V. K. CHHABRA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Ministry of Industry, New Delhi 
National Test House (ER), Kolkata 


Naval Materials Research Laboratory (NMRL), Thane 


Office of the Micro Small & Medium Enterprises 
(MSME), New Delhi 


Paint and Coating Technologists Association, Kanpur 


Pidilite Indusries Ltd, Mumbai 


Research Designs & Standards Organization, Lucknow 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


SSPC India Chapter, Kolkata/Mumbai 


The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity (Flat 1303, Blooming Heights, 
Pacific Enclave, Powai, Mumbai - 400076) 


In Personal Capacity (2, Block Mann Street, Kolkata - 
700013) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 8098 (Part 1) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI NAND LAL 


SHRIMATI P. NATARAJAN 
DR A. B. MONDAL (Alternate) 


DR T. K. MAHATO 
DR G. GUNASEKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI M. ANNABACKIAM 
SHRIMATI M. S. RAMMIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI USHENDRA SINGH 
SHRI VIVEK KUMAR SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH KASHYAP 
SHRI SUSHANT PANGAM (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. BALA 
SHRI K. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. MAJUMDAR 


DR BUDDHADEB DUARI 
SHRI ANIL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K. TRIPATHI 
SHRI SUSHIL ORAON (Alternate) 


DR B. P. MALLIK 


DR SUNIL KUMAR SAHA 


A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR AND 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 


HEAD (CHEMICAL) 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI PUSHPENDRA KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 


(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 20 (21405). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


