**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9928 (1981): Clamp, Aortic, DeBakey ' s Pattern (Spoon 
Shaped angled Jaw) [MHD 6: Thoracic and Cardiovascular 
Surgery Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 9924-1 9R1 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CLAMP, AORTIC, DeBAKEY'S PATTERN 

( SPOON SHAPED ANGLED JAW ) 



UDC 61,V472'2 




{§) Copyright 1981 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR. SHAH ZAKAR MARC 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 9928 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

CLAMP, AORTIC, DeBAKEY'S PATTERN 

( SPOON SHAPED ANGLED JAW ) 

Thoracic and Gardio- Vascular Surgery Instruments Sectional 
Committee, CPDC 28 

Chairman Representing 

Dn P. S. Narayanan G. B. Pant Hospital, New Delhi 

Members 
Shri P. N. IUja.t South India Surgical Co, Madras 

Sjuu S, Pariasamy {Alternate) 
Dr J. V. Biiatt Loknayak Tilak Municipal General Hospital, 

Bombay 
Dr AifUN P. ChaUkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Biiupinder Singh Punjab Surgical Instruments, Manufacturer's and 

Suppliers Association, Jullundur 
Suri Ved Prakash M. Chapda Bharat Surgical, Bombay 

Sheimati Moiiini V. Chadda ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Ghai Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Sum J. N. Vishwakarma ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. R. Gikinatit Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways) 

Dr N. Gopinath Directorate General of Health Services, New 

Delhi 
Dn B. L. Gupta Dr Balabhai Nanavati Hospital, Bombav 

Du S. Gupta Department of Health & Family Planning, 

Calcutta 
Shri P. Y. Kalklkak Kalelkar Surgical Industries, Bombay 

Shri Y. P. Kalelka.ii ( Alternate ) 
Du M. S. Kkkrb T. N. Medical College and B.Y.L. Nair Charitable 

Hospital, Bombay 
Hi'iAn Thoracic Sukgeky 
Dkpartmknt (Alternate) 
Sm:i R. S. Khanopur Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New 

Delhi 
Sicri P. S. Malhotiu [Alternate) 
SiiriJ. Mitiia J. Mitra & Bros, New Delhi 

Dr Sandip Mukerji;e In personal capacity (32 Shaheed Bhagat Singh 

Marg, New Delhi) 
Siiui B. L. Pahwa The Surgical Manufacturers & Traders Associa- 

tion, New Delhi 
Shri H. L. Grover ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1981 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9928 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri J, Prabhakar Surgical Instruments Plant, Indian Drugs and 

Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Madras 
Shri B. DhanasekaRan {Alternate ) 
Shri S. Sengupta Baruipur Surgical Instruments Centre, Calcutta 

Shri S. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Col R. N. Tharkja Ministry of Defence ( DGAFMS ), New Delhi 

Lt-Col M. K. Bagcui ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. S. Valjathan Sree Ghitra Tirunal Medical Centre, Trivandrum 

Dr Solomon Victok Health and Family Planning Department, 

Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Dk A. S. Sethi, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Consr Prod & Med 
Instrs) 

Secretary 

S 11 in B. K. Mahata 

Deputy Director ( Consr Prod & Med Instrs ), ISI 



IS : 9928 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

CLAMP, AORTIC, DeBAKEY'S PATTERN 

( SPOON SHAPED ANGLED JAW ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 15 September 1981, after the draft finalized by the Thoracic 
and Cardio- Vascular Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division 
Council. 

0-2 DeBakey Aortic Clamp is generally used for the arota for temporary 
occlusion during performance of resection and graft replacement. 

0.3 The clamp is provided with De-Bakey type atraugrip jaw serrations 
with long blades and long handles both curved outwards. The atraumatic 
grip at the tip is well maintained by using thicker blade while the 
excessive crushing is avoided by using thinner handles near the finger 

loops. 

0.4 The clamp is mainly used for ascending aorta but can also be used 
for descending aorta. The specially angled jaw permits convenient 
application of the clamp in such manner as to maintain the handles of the 
clamps away from the field of operation ( valve-procedure or grafting ). 

0.5 This standard specifies the dimension, material and performance 

requirement of the clamp. 

0.6 IS : 3642-1978* is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
is': 2-1960J'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



♦General requirements for surgical instruments {first revision ) 
f Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 9928 - 1981 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requirements of DeBakey's pattern aortic 
clamp used in cardio-vascular surgery. 

2. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

2.1 The clamp shall be made to shape and dimensions as shown in Fig. 1. 



LEFT 
JAW 





ENLARGED 
SECTION X X 






ENLARGED 
SECTION YY 




ENLARGED 
SECTION Z2 



*See IS : 3042-1978 General requirements for surgical instruments. 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

I 10. 1 Clamp, Aortic, DeBakey"s Pattern 
( Spoon Shaped Angled Jaw ) 



IS : 9928 - 1981 

2.2 A deviation of ^L 2'- r > percent shall he allowed on all dimensions. 
However, the two halves of the instrument shall not differ at any specified 
dimension and shall match with each other perfectly. 

2.3 Joint — The clamp shall have box type joint in accordance with 6.1 
of IS: 3042-1978*. 

2.4 Serrations — The clamp shall have non-cutting longitudinal jaw 
serrations with 60° profile and shall grasp the tissue delicately but firmly. 
Tn other respect the serrations shall be in accordance with Section 1 of 
IS: 3642-1978*. 

2.5 Ratchet — Teeth used in ratchets of the clamp shall conform to 8.1 
of IS : 31)42-1978* with combination of 1 in o. 

2.5.1 The load required to close the clamp on first step of the ratchet 
shall be 2*5 N; for the second step the load shall be 5 N; for the third step 
7 N and so on. 

2.6 Finger Loops — The finger loops of the clamp shall be Size No. 2 in 
accordance with Section 5 of IS : 3642-1978*. 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The clamps shall be manufactured from stainless steel conforming to 
Designation 20 Cr 13 or 30 Gr 13 of IS : u603-I973t. 

4. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

4.1 The surface of the clamp shall be finished smooth and free from burrs, 
pits, cracks, scale and other surface defects. 

4.2 The jaws shall open and close with even and balanced movement. 
The opening and closing movements of the jaws shall be smooth and 
jerk free. 

4.3 All the edges and corners, except serrations and teeth, shall be 
rounded. 

4.4 The clamp shall be passivated and shall have a dull and non-glare 
finish. 

5. HEAT TREATMENT 

5.1 The cliiTe re nt components of the clamp shall be hardened and 
tempered to give a hardness of 400 to ItSO HV. 



*(. General requirements for surgical instruments ■:' first revision ). 
fSpceifieation for stainless steel bars and Hats. 



IS : 9928 - 1981 

6. TESTS 

6*1 Performance of Tips and Jaws — When first step of the ratchet is 
engaged, the teeth shall approximate to a gap of 1 mm and not 
interdigitate; the tip shall bite when the second step of the ratchet 
engages. The jaws shali fully close when the last ratchet engages. The 
teeth shall match perfectly and truly. 

6.1.1 In other respects, the jaws shall engage as stipulated in 3.1 to 3.3 
of IS: 3642-1978*. 

6.2 Flexibility — Each arm of the clamp shall be fixed in a vice so that 
the entire arm projects above the vice. By gradual application of force 
on the finger loop, the arm shall be deflected by 15 mm in the same plane 
as the finger loop. The arm shall not take a permanent set or break. 

6.3 Corrosion Resistance — The clamps shall be tested in accordance 
with IS : 7531-1075f. The clamps shall show no sign of corrosion after 
the test. 

7. MARKING 

7 S 1 The clamp shall be clearly and indelibly marked, preferably by 
etching, with the following: 

a) Manufacturer's name, initials or recognized trade-mark; and 

b) The words ' Stainless steel '. 

7.1.1 The clamp may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Noti<3 — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products an? also continuously checked by 1ST for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution, 

8. PACKING 

8.1 The clamp may be packed as agreed between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 



♦General requirements for surgical instruments (first revision ). 

fMethod for boiling and autoclaving test lor corrosion resistance of stainless steel 
surgical instruments. 

6 



