NAT HIAF IS 15832 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


CPIE PE EIC Gael aarti 
Weelactt GEC] 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Glossary of Technical Terms Related 
to Environmental Impact 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.020.30 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2022 Price Group 10 


Environment Assessment and Management of Water Resources Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 24 


FOREWORD 


The Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Environment Assessment and Management of Water Resources Projects Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


A large number of Indian Standards have already been brought out defining technical terms used in water 
resources projects to avoid ambiguity in their interpretation. Environmental impact and its assessment, has 
assumed major importance in the planning, design and operation of water resource projects. For clarity and 
unambiguity in this area, it is essential that the terms used are standardized so that subjective and qualitative 
communications are clearly understood. To achieve this goal, this standard gives definitions of terms commonly 
used in the area of environmental impact. There could be some other terms which are not mentioned here. 
As such the standard should be used for the purpose of providing general guidance and for broad knowledge 
of the terms. Some of the terms defined here may also have been defined in other Indian Standards, in such cases 
the definition given in this standard should be construed as the one appropriate to the field of environmental 
impact. 

This standard was first published in 2008 however, the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 
decided to revise it based on the experience gained since then as well as incorporating additional terms related to 
environmental impact. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS RELATED 
TO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the definition of terms relating to 
environmental impact in water resources projects. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


A 
2.1 Abatement — A reduction in the degree or intensity. 


2.2 Abioseston — The non-living components of the 
seston. 


2.3 Abiotic — Absence of life. 


2.4 Aboriginal — The original or ‘native’ inhabitants 
of an area. 


2.5 Abrasion — The wearing a way of surfaces by 
some mechanical action. 


2.6 Absorption — The taking in of fluids or other 
substance by cells or tissues. 


2.7 Abstraction — The removal of water from any 
ground water source, either permanently or temporarily. 


2.8 Abundance — The relative representation in a 
particular ecosystem. 


2.9 Acclimatization — The adjustment of an organism 
to a new habitat or environment. 


2.10 Accretion 


a) The process of growth whereby material is added 
to the outside of non-living matter; 


b) The gradual increase in flow of a stream due to 
influent seepage; and 


c) Any process of accumulation by flowing water 
whether of silt, sand, pebbles, etc. 


The difference between accretion and alleviation is 
that the latter is due to retardation of flow whereas the 
former may be due to any cause and in fact induces 
alluviation. 


2.11 Acid — Capable of donating hydrogen ions. 
Solutions of acids have a sour taste, change the colour 
of litmus paper from blue to red, and neutralize bases. 


2.12 Acid Rain — Any type of precipitation with a 
DH below 5.6. 


2.13 Acidity of Water — Acidity of water is its 
quantitative capacity to react with a strong base to a 
designated ph. 


2.14 Adaptation — Adjustment to environmental 
conditions. 


2.15 Adobe — Soil, usually of high clay content, that 
cracks into roughly cubic blocks when dried. 


2.16 Adsorption — Adhesion of molecules to solid 
surfaces. 


2.17 Aedes — A genus of mosquitoes including 
some 600 species many of which are vectors of 
disease. 


2.18 Aerate — To impregnate with gas, usually air. 


2.19 Aeration — The process of adding air to water by 
physical and/or biological means to aid in purification. 


2.20 Aerobe — An organism which requires the 
presence of free oxygen for respiration. 


2.21 Aerobic (Oxybiotic) — Living only in the 
presence of free oxygen. 


2.22 Aerobic Bacteria — Bacteria that require free 
oxygen and are used in certain types of wastewater 
treatment processes. 


2.23 Aerosol — Particulate matter in the form of 
dusts, fumes or mist that can remain suspended in the 
air for long periods of time; usually under 1 micron 
in diameter. 


2.24 Afforestation — Planting of forest cover over 
denuded land which has no forest or other cover or 
protection. 


2.25 Aggradation — Deposition process in which 
material get deposited by a river, stream or current”. 


2.26 Air Pollutant — Any agent, including any 
physical, chemical, biological, radioactive substance 
or matter that is emitted into or otherwise enters the 
ambient air that is harmful to plant or animal life. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.27 Air Pollution — The presence of substances in the 
air in a quantity that adversely affect humans, animals, 
vegetation or materials. 


2.28 Algae — Simple, aquatic plants containing 
chlorophyll. 


2.29 Alkaline Water — Water which is high in sodium 
percent but relatively low in total dissolved salts. 


2.30 Alkalinity of Water — Alkalinity of water is a 
measure of its capacity to neutralize acids. 


2.31 Ambient — The natural conditions 
environment) in a given place and time. 


(or 


2.32 Ambient Standard — Maximum allowable levels 
of specific polluting materials permitted by law. 


2.33 Anaerobe — An organism having ability to grow 
in the absence of free oxygen. 


2.34 Anion — A negatively charged ion. 


2.35 Annual Flood — The highest peak discharge 
during a water year in a stream. 


2.36 Anoxic — Pertaining to conditions of oxygen 
deficiency. 


2.37 Aqua — Water related. 


2.38 Aquaculture — The use of artificial means to 
increase the production of aquatic organisms in fresh 
or salt water. 


2.39 Aquatic — Growing in water, not terrestrial. 


2.40 Aquiclude — A formation which, although porous 
and capable of absorbing water, does not permit its 
movement at rates sufficient to furnish an appreciable 
supply for a well or spring. 


2.41 Aquifer — A formation or a group of formations 
that contains sufficient permeable material and is 
saturated to yield sufficient quantities of water to wells 
and springs. 


2.42 Aquifuge — A geological formation which has no 
interconnected openings and hence cannot absorb or 
transmit water. 


2.43 Arable — Land suitable for cultivation by 
ploughing or tillage which does not require clearing or 
other modification. 


2.44 Area Velocity Method — A method of measuring 
discharge at a section in a stream. Cross-sectional 
area of the stream is measured and velocity of flow 
is calculated at various depths using some type of 
instrument. Multiplication of area and mean velocity 
gives the discharge at that station. 


2.45 Artificial Recharge — Artificial recharge is the 
augmentation of the natural infiltration of precipitation 
of surface water into underground formation by some 
method of construction, spreading of water, or by 
artificially changing natural conditions. 


2.46 Assimilation — The ability of a water body to 
purify itself of pollutants. 


2.47 Assimilative Capacity — The maximum pollution 
load that can be discharged into the environment 
without affecting its designated use. 


2.48 Attenuation — A decrease in the concentration 
or quantity of a chemical or biological material carried, 
resulting from a physical, chemical and/or biological 
reaction occurring in the period considered. 


2.49 Average Annual Flood — A flood equal to the 
average of the annual floods during the period of 
recording. 


2.50 Average Annual Rainfall — Rainfall equal to 
the average of the annual rainfalls during the period of 
record. 


B 


2.51 Background Concentration — The pollutant 
concentration that would remain if all emissions from 
all sources that are quantified for use in the modeling or 
calculation process were fully stopped. 


2.52 Background Level — Pollutant levels that are 
representative of the average conditions in a given area. 


2.53 Bacteria — Single celled micro-organisms that 
lack chlorophyll. 


2.54 Base Flow 


a) The sustained or dry weather flow of streams 
resulting from the outflow of permanent or perched 
groundwater and from the draining of large lakes 
and swamps. 


b) The portion of the stream discharge that is 
sustained between heavy rainfall events due to 
delayed pathways. 


2.55 Baseline Concentration — The ambient 


concentration levels of a pollutant. 


2.56 Basin — Area drained by a river including all its 
tributaries. 


2.57 Beach — Depositional area at the shore of an 
ocean or lake covered by mud, sand, gravel, or larger 
rock fragments and extending into the water for some 
distance. 


2.58 Bed Load — The sediment in almost continuous 
contact with the bed, carried forward by rolling, sliding 


or hopping along the bed of the stream. Bed load can be 
divided into contact load and saltation load. 


2.59 Benthic — The bottom of lakes or oceans. 


2.60 Benthos — Organisms living in or on the bottom 
of a water body. Littoral organisms live between 0 to 
200 m depth, and deep water organisms at more than 
200 m depth. 


2.61 Bio—accumulation — The progressive increase in 
concentration of a chemical in organisms that live in an 
environment contaminated with low concentrations of 
the chemical. 


2.62 Bio—amplification — See Bio-magnification. 


2.63 Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) — The 
amount of oxygen required for the microbial utilization 
of organics. 


2.64 Biocide 


a) A biocide is a chemical substance capable of 
killing different forms of living organisms used 
in water bodies and fields such as agriculture, 
forestry and mosquito control. 


b 


wm 


Chemical dusts and sprays applied to crops and 
to land and water surfaces for the control of 
agricultural blights, nuisance insects, vectors 
of human and animal diseases, trash fish, algae, 
water weeds, and the like. 


2.65 Bio—concentration — See Bio-magnification 


2.66 Biodegradable — It is a substance that can be 
broken down to simple inorganic substances by the 
action of bacteria or fungi. 


2.67 Biodiversity Index — A factor derived from the 
number of kinds of organisms per unit area or volume 
that denotes the extent of diversity in an area. 


2.68 Biogas — Gas consisting mainly of methane 
produced by anaerobic digestion of organic waste. 


2.69 Biogeographer — A geographically trained 
scientist oriented toward spatial description of biotic 
features usually botanical. 


2.70 Biological Clock — An inherent timing 
mechanism inferred to exist in some living systems 
in order to explain various cyclical behaviors and 
physiological processes. 


2.71 Biological Degradation — The biochemical 
process of the breakdown of complex, large organic 
molecules into small, simple molecules. 


2.72 Biological Diversity — The variety inherent in 
natural biological systems. Three levels of biodiversity 
usually referred to — genetic diversity, species diversity 
and ecological diversity. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.73 Biological Indicator — A living organism that 
denotes the presence of a specific environmental 
condition. Such organisms are used to grade 
environmental quality of an area. 


2.74 Biological Mechanisms — The ways used by 
living organisms to process substances. 


2.75 Biological Processes or Biological Systems — 
Processes characteristics of or resulting from the 
activities of living organisms. 


2.76 Biological Productivity — The amount of 
matter produced by the unit in question. 


2.77 Biological Treatment — A treatment used to 
remove solids, biodegradable organics and micro 
organisms from waste water. The processes included 
biological oxidation. 


2.78 Biological Waste — Waste derived from living 
organisms. 


2.79 Biology — The scientific study of living 
organisms. 


2.80 Bio-magnification — Increase in chemical 
concentration in organisms as a result of passage of 
chemical through the food chain. 


2.81 Biomass — The total mass or amount of living 
organisms in a particular area or volume. 


2.82 Biomass or Standing Crop — The total mass or 
amount of living organisms in a given population, area 
or trophic level. 


2.83 Biometry — The measurements of biological 
parameters to the study of living things. 


2.84 Biosphere or Ecosphere — That portion of the 
earth and its atmosphere that can support life. 


2.85 Biota — The plant and animal life of a region. 
2.86 Biotic — Caused or produced by living organisms. 


2.87 Blue Water — Fresh surface and groundwater, in 
other words, the water in freshwater lakes, rivers and 
aquifers. 


2.88 Borrow Pit — An excavation dug to provide 
material (borrow) for fill elsewhere. 


2.89 Botany — The branch of biology dealing with 
plants. 


2.90 Brackish — Water of salinity 4-25 parts per 
thousand. 
2.91 Brackish Water 


a) Water rendered unpalatable due to excessive 
chloride content. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


b) A mixture of sea water and surface run off which 
occurs, in various proportions, at the lower reaches 
of streams that debouch into an ocean. 


2.92 Braded — Pattern of river bars with numerous 
interconnected small channels within the general bed 
of the river. 


C 


2.93 Canopy — A crown cover provided by shrubs/ 
trees above ground portion. 


2.94 Capillary Pores — Microscopic soil pores that 
may draw water upwards beyond its natural surface due 
to surface tension. 


2.95 Carbon Count — A measure of the amount of 
carbon dioxide you produce through your lifestyle 
every day, for example through driving or using 
electrical appliances and lighting. 


2.96 Carbon Credit — A unit of one tonne of co, to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 


2.97 Carbon Footprint — A measure of the impact 
our activities have on the environment, especially 
climate change, often reported in the units of tonnes (or 
kg) of carbon dioxide each of us produces over a given 
period of time. 


2.98 Carbon Offset — A unit, equal to one ton 
of carbon dioxide, that individuals, companies or 
governments buy to reduce short-term and long-term 
emissions of greenhouse gases. The payment usually 
funds projects that generate energy from renewable 
sources such as wind or flowing water. Individuals 
can choose whether to buy an offset (for example to 
compensate for air travel), but governments and large 
industries are sometimes required to buy them to meet 
international targets aimed at reducing greenhouse 
gases. 


2.99 Carbon Tax — A tax on fuels according to their 
carbon content, which aims to encourage people and 
businesses to use fuels with less carbon and reduce the 
amount of energy they use. 


2.100 Carcinogenic — Capable of producing cancer. 


2.101 Carnivore — An animal or plant that feeds on 
animals. 


2.102 Carrier — An infected person (or animal) 
that harbours a specific pathogen in the absence of 
discernible clinical disease and serves as a potential 
source of infection for other person or animal. 


2.103 Catchment Area — The area from which a lake, 
stream or waterway and reservoir receives surface flow 
which originates as precipitation. 


2.104 Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) — The 
catchment area treatment (CAT) plan pertains to 
preparation of a management plan for treatment of 
erosion prone area of the catchment through biological 
and engineering measures. A comprehensive CAT plan 
should also include the social dimensions associated 
directly or indirectly with the catchment. 


2.105 Cation — A positively charged ion. 


2.106 Channel — A natural or artificial watercourse 
of perceptible extent with a definite bed and banks 
to confine and conduct continuously or periodically 
flowing water. 


2.107 Chlorofluorocarbon (CFCs) — An organic 
compound that contains carbon, chlorine, hydrogen 
and fluorine, produced as a volatile. Halo derivatives 
of saturated hydro carbons such as methane or ethane. 
Many CFCs have been widely used as refrigerants, 
propellants (in aerosol applications), and solvents. 
CFC’s contribute to ozone depletion in the upper 
atmosphere. 


2.108 Channel Rugosity — A measure of the roughness 
of the surface of channel in which water flows. 


2.109 Channelization — Alteration of course of a 
stream to modify flow characteristic of water. 


2.110 Char — Large carbon particles. 


2.111 Check Dam — A small low fixed dam, 
constructed of brush, logs, timber, loose rock, masonry 
or concrete in an eroded channel to reduce the slope 
of the water flowing therein during high stages, and 
also the resulting velocity thereby preventing excessive 
scour and erosion and inducing deposition. Such dams 
are also used ‘to retain debris. They are usually built of 
inexpensive and temporary materials where dependence 
for ultimate protection is placed on vegetative cover. 


2.112 Chemical Oxygen Demand — A measure of the 
oxygen equivalent which is required for the oxidation 
through chemical process of an organically polluted 
water supply. 


2.113 Chlorination — The use of chlorine for the 
treatment of water, sewage or industrial wastes for 
disinfection or oxidation. 


2.114 Chlorophyll — The green pigment in plants 
responsible for photosynthesis. 


2.115 Climate — The average conditions of the 
weather over a number of years. 


2.116 Climate Change — Climate change refers to 
any change in climate over time either due to natural 
variability or due to human activities. However, 
according to United Nations Framework Convention 


on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the climate change 
is defined as ‘a change of climate which is attributed 
directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the 
composition of the global atmosphere and which is in 
addition to natural climate variability observed over 
comparable time periods’. 


2.117 Closed Lake — A lake that does not have a 
drainage outlet. 


2.118 Cloud Burst — A cloudburst is an extreme 
amount of precipitation, sometimes with hail and 
thunder, which normally lasts no longer than a few 
minutes but is capable of creating flood conditions 
(A rain fall rate equal to or greater than 100 mm per 
hour). The term cloudburst may be used to describe any 
sudden heavy, brief, and usually un-forecasted rainfall. 


2.119 Coastal Zone — Ocean water and adjacent land 
of the sea and its ecology. 


2.120 Coliform — A general term for the group of 
bacteria that comprise all of the aerobic and facultative 
anaerobic, gram negative (type of stain related to cell 
wall composition), nonspore forming, rod shaped 
bacteria which ferment lactose (milk sugar) with gas 
formation within 48 hours at 35 °C (95 °F) Examples; 
Escherichia, Citrobacter, Klebsiella (See Faecal, 
Coliform, Indicator Organisms (Fecal). 


2.121 Coliform, Faecal — Bacteria found in human 
and animals faeces. A high coliform count indicates 
potential contamination of a water supply by human 
waste and the potential to cause disease. 


2.122 Colony — A group of plants or animals living 
together. 


2.123 Compost — The humus-like product of the 
aerobic or anaerobic composting of either night soil or 
sludge mixed with organic material rich in carbon (such 
as refuse or sawdust). 


2.124 Concentration — Amount of any matter 
contained in liquid usually expressed in mass of that 
matter per unit volume of liquid. 


2.125 Conductivity 


a) The ability of water to conduct an electrical 
current, which is dependent on the concentration 
of ionized solids in the water. 


b) The reciprocal of electrical resistivity of a water 
sample with 1 square cm cross section and | cm 
long, often expressed as “reciprocal ohms” or 
mhos per centimeter. 


2.126 Confluence — Joining or the place of junction of 
two or more streams. 


2.127 Conifers — Cone bearing trees or shrubs. Mostly 
evergreens such as pine, cedar, spruce, etc. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.128 Conjunctive Use — Conjunctive use involves 
the coordinated and planned use of both, surface water 
and groundwater, resources to meet water requirements 
for optimum utilization of water resources. 


2.129 Consumptive Use — The quantity of water 
consumed in evaporation transpiration and metabolic 
processes during crop growth, including water 
consumed by accompanying weed growth. It is 
expressed in water-depth units per unit area, also called 
Consumptive Water Use or Evapotranspiration. 


2.130 Contaminant — Any physical, chemical, 
biological or radiological substance not normally 
present in the environment, or found at unusually high 
concentrations in water or soil. 


2.131 Contamination — A process in which the 
chemical composition of any substance changes due to 
a contaminant and makes the substance unsuitable for 
its intended use. 


2.132 Contiguous — In actual contact with; also, near 
or adjacent to. 


2.133 Correlation — Measure of inter dependence 
between two variables. 


2.134 Correlation Coefficient — A number or function 
that indicates the degree of correlation between two 
sets of data or between two random variables and that 
is equal to their covariance divided by the product of 
their standard deviations. 


2.135 Corridor 


a) A narrow strip of land reserved for specific 
purpose such as location of transmission lines, 
pipelines and service roads. 


b) An area through which species can move from one 
place to another over time in response to changes 
in environmental or as natural parts of their life 
history. 


2.136 Critical — A condition, measurement, or point 
at which some quality, property, or phenomenon 
suffers a definite change. 


2.137 Critical Concentration — The level of 
concentration of an impurity in water above which its 
use for specific purpose, such as drinking, industrial 
and agriculture gets adversely affected. 


2.138 Critical Pollutant — The pollutant or pollutant 
combination with the highest sub index during the 
reporting period. 


2.139 Crop Rotation — The practice of alternating 
crop types to maintain fertility levels, improve 
soil condition and avoid insect or disease infestations, 
etc. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.140 Cropland — Land regularly used for production 
of crops. 


2.141 Cross-section — Section of a stream having 
levels of bed and banks at right angle to the main 
(average) direction of flow. 


D 


2.142 Dam — A barrier constructed across a river or 
natural watercourse for the purpose of, 


a) Impounding water or creating reservoir; 

b) Diverting water there from into a conduit or 
channel for power generation and/or irrigation 
purposes; 

c) Creating a head which can be used for power 
generation; 

d) Improving river navigability; 

e) Retention of debris; 

f) Flood control; 

g) Domestic, municipal and industrial uses; 

h) Preservation of wildlife and pisciculture; and 

j) Recreation, etc. 


2.143 Data Base — Comprehensive set of related data 
files for a specific application. 


2.144 Data Processing — Handling of observational 
data until they are in a form ready to be used for a 
specific purpose. 


2.145 Dead Storage — Storage of a reservoir. Below 
the bottom of its lowest outlet which generally cannot 
be released through gravity. 


2.146 Decay Rate — The rate or reduction of the 
concentration of a quantity expressed by its half life. 


2.147 Deciduous — Falling off at one end ofa growing 
period (season) or at maturity as with some leaves, 
antlers, insect wings, etc. It is a commonly used term 
to distinguish trees that shed their leaves as opposed to 
evergreens which retain their leaves. 


2.148 Decomposers — Organisms such as fungi and 
bacteria that break down complex compounds into their 
constituent units. They are also known as reducers. 


2.149 Deep Seepage — Downwards water movement 
in the soil (and rocks) beyond the range of most plant 
roots. 


2.150 Deep Well Disposal — The disposal of raw or 
treated, filtered hazardous waste by pumping it into 
deep wells. 


2.151 Deforestation — The permanent removal of 
forest and undergrowth. 


2.152 Degradation — The morphological process 
wherein streambeds and flood plains are lowered 
in elevation for gradual erosion of bed natural. The 
opposite of aggradation. 


2.153 Dendritic — Channel patterns of streams with 
tributaries that branch to form a tree like pattern. 


2.154 Density — Mass per unit volume of any matter. 


2.155 Depletion — Continuous or sporadic withdrawal 
of water from a surface stream of ground water, or 
reservoir or basin at a rate greater than the rate of 
replenishment. 


2.156 Desalinization/Desalting — Removing salt 
from ocean water or brackish water. 


2.157 Desert — A large area of land that has very little 
water and very few plants growing on it. 


2.158 Desert Crust — A hard layer containing calcium 
carbonate, gypsum or other binding material exposed at 
the surface in desert regions. 


2.159 Desertification — The process of development 
of desert conditions. 


2.160 Detention Dam — A dam built to store 
streamflow or surface runoff and to control the release 
of such stored water. 


2.161 Detention Tank — A tank used in water or 
wastewater treatment to provide adequate time for 
chemical or physical reactions to take place in the body 
of water being treated. 


2.162 Dilution Factor — The number of times that a 
polluted effluent volume has to be diluted with ambient 
water in order to arrive at the maximum acceptable 
concentration level. 


2.163 Dioxins — Highly toxic chemicals that can be 
formed in small amounts from forest fires or volcanoes 
but more often are produced unintentionally from 
industrial activities and from incinerating waste and 
burning fossil fuels. 


2.164 Discharge — Volume of water flowing in a given 
stream at a given time usually expressed in cubic meter 
per second or cubic foot per second. 


2.165 Disease — A particular destructive process in 
an organism with a specific cause and characteristic 
symptoms. 


2.166 Disinfectant — An agent, such as heat, radiation, 
or a chemical, that destroys, neutralizes, or inhibits the 
growth of disease carrying microorganisms. 


2.167 Disinfection — A chemical or physical process 
that kills organisms causing infectious diseases. 


2.168 Disposal Well — A well used for the disposal of 
waste into a subsurface stratum. 


2.169 Dissolved Oxygen (DO) 


a) Amount of oxygen needed for the respiration 
of the micro-organisms responsible for aerobic 
decomposition of organic matter and for plants 
and animals that are engaged in resynthesizing 
organic matter. 


b) Amount of oxygen required to oxidize unstable 
materials and for aquatic life to survive. 


2.170 Dissolved Solids — The total amount of 
dissolved material, organic and inorganic, contained in 
water and wastewater. 


2.171 Ditch — An open waterway that collects and/or 
conveys drainage water. 


2.172 Diurnal — Occurring every day. 


2.173 Diversion Dam — A structure built across a 
stream to divert water. 


2.174 Diversity — A measure of the relative abundance 
of species and their populations in an ecosystem. 


2.175 Domestic Effluents/Domestic Wastes/Domestic 
Waste Water — See Domestic Sewage in 2.176. 


2.176 Domestic Sewage — Wastes consisting of 
human bodily discharges carried by flushing water, 
sludge water from kitchens, bathrooms and laundries; 
and, other waterborne material discarded as a result of 
regular household and human sanitary activities. 


2.177 Drainage Density — Drainage density is the 
total length of all the streams and rivers in a drainage 
basin divided by the total area of the drainage basin. It 
is a measure of how well or how poorly a watershed is 
drained by stream channels. 


2.178 Draw Down — The reduction in static head 
within the aquifer resulting from abstraction. 


2.179 Dredging — To remove earth/sediment from 
water bodies/streams. 


2.180 Drought — Drought is an extended period of 
months or years when a region notes a deficiency in 
its water supply whether surface or underground 
water. Generally, this occurs when a region receives 
consistently below average precipitation. The types of 
droughts are: 


a) meteorological drought, 
b) agricultural drought and 
c) hydrological drought. 


It can have a substantial impact on the ecosystem and 
agriculture of the affected region. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.181 Dry Farming — Agriculture practiced on non- 
irrigated land and dependent upon natural precipitation 
and its retention and distribution. 


E 


2.182 Ecological Balance — A state of equilibrium ina 
natural community, as indicated by the relative numbers 
of the components of the community remaining more 
or less constant, thus forming a stable eco-system. 


2.183 Ecology — That branch of the biological 
sciences which deals with the relationships between 
living organisms and their environment. 


2.184 Ecosystem — A complex system composed of 
a community of fauna and flora, taking into account 
the chemical and physical environment with which the 
system is interrelated. 


2.185 Effective Precipitation 


a) Part of the rain that appears as run off in the 
stream; 


b) In agricultural practice, that portion of total 
precipitation which is retained by the soil so that it 
is available for use for crop production; and 


c) The portion of precipitation that is becoming 
available for evapotranspiration and will be able 
to satisfy evapotranspirative demand. 


2.186 Effective Soil Depth — The depth of soil 
material that plant roots can penetrate readily to obtain 
water and plant nutrient. The depth to a layer that differs 
sufficiently from the overlying material in physical or 
chemical properties to prevent or seriously retard the 
growth of roots. 


2.187 Effluent 
a) A liquid which flows out of a containing space. 


b) Sewage, water or other liquid, partially or 
completely treated, or in its natural state, as the 
case may be, flowing out of a reservoir, basin, or 
treatment plant or part thereof. 


c) Stream flowing out of another stream or lake. 
d) Stream fed by ground water. 


2.188 Effluent Standard — The maximum amount of 
specified pollutants allowed in discharged sewage as 
established by regulating agencies to achieve desirable 
stream standards. 


2.189 EIS / EIA — Environmental Impact Statement / 
Environmental Impact Assessment. 


2.190 Electrical Conductivity — Electrical 
conductivity or specific conductance is the reciprocal 
of the electrical resistivity. It measures a material’s 
ability to conduct an electric current. It is expressed in 
mhos/cm. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.191 Electrical Resistivity — The electrical 
resistivity is the resistance in ohms of a conductor, 
metal, or electrolyte, which is one centimeter long and 
has a cross section area of | sq. cm. It is expressed in 
ohm-cm. 


2.192 Electrodialysis — A process that uses electrical 
current applied to permeable membranes to remove 
mineral from water. Often used to desalinize salt or 
brackish water. 


2.193 Electrolyte — A substance that dissociates into 
two or more ions when dissolved in water. 


2.194 Emission — A discharge of pollutants (generally 
gaseous air pollutants) into the atmosphere, usually 
as a result of burning or the operation of internal 
combustion engines. Like “effluent” but used in regard 
to air pollution. 


2.195 Endemic — A species restricted to a given 
geographic location or a native species to a given locale. 


2.196 Engineering Hydrology — That branch of 
applied hydrology which deals with engineering 
applications like hydrological observations, planning, 
designing, operating and maintaining engineering 
structures and engineering measures. 


2.197 Enhancement Flow — An improvement of 
flow that results in better stream conditions for aquatic, 
terrestrial and other resources. 


2.198 Environment — It includes water, air and 
land and inter-relation which exist between these and 
human beings including other living creatures, plants, 
micro-organisms and property. 


2.199 Environmental Agents — External influences 
and conditions (particularly physical, biological, and 
man made) and natural chemical substances found in 
the environment. 


2.200 Environmental Appraisal — A formal 
document based on environmental impact analyses, 
which supports affected environment, alternatives 
including proposed action, statement of purpose and 
need and environmental consequences. 


2.201 Environmental Assessment — The critical 
appraisal of the likely positive and negative effects 
of a proposed project, activity, or policy on the 
environment. 


2.202 Environmental Auditor — A professional 
who approves legal environmental compliance for an 
organization. 


2.203 Environmental Criteria — Standards of 
physical, chemical and biological components that 
define the given quality of an environment. 


2.204 Environmental Economics — A market based 
approach to achieving a sustainable economy that 
integrates long term economic growth, environmental 
quality and social fairness through innovative taxes, tax 
incentives, auctioned permits and other market based 
mechanisms. 


2.205 Environmental Effect — Effect of natural 
or man made actions which alter the environment 
as measured by physical, chemical and biological 
parameters. 


2.206 Environmental Elements — Any of the 
biological, physical or chemical condition within a 
defined geographic area that might be affected by a 
proposed human activity. 


2.207 Environmental Engineer — A person with 
technical engineering skills who utilizes systems or 
ecosystems concepts and guidelines for construction 
or design purposes. Space engineering, sanitary 
engineering, some aspects of civil engineering, public 
health engineering, noise control, risk assessment, and 
pollution abatement activities are covered under this 
title. 


2.208 Environmental Flow — The amount of river 
flow that needs to be maintained downstream of the 
dam in order to maintain specified valued features of 
the river ecosystem. 


2.209 Environmental Impact 


a) An effect on an environmental resources or value 
resulting from human activities. 


b) An effect of any kind of any components or the 
whole of the environment. Assessment of the 
impact generally involves two major elements 
a quantitative measure of magnitude and a 
qualitative measure of importance. 


2.210 Environmental Impact Assessment — A more 
or less formal consideration of the interaction of a 
proposed human activity with environmental elements 
that might be affected by the activity. Includes a 
determination of the probable effect of the activity on 
social and economic conditions. 


2.211 Environmental Impact Statement — 
Document describing a proposed project, its probable 
environmental impacts and alternatives to the proposed 
project and associated environmental impacts. 


2.212 Environmental Manager — A system oriented 
professional who coordinates social, administrative, 
political, legal, and economic concerns relating to 
ecosystem management. 


2.213 Environmental Monitoring 


a) The systematic measuring of various components, 
constituting the environment. 


b) The monitoring of implementation of the 
environmental safeguards stipulated by the 
concerned agencies while according clearance to 
a project. 


2.214 Environmental Parameters — Physical, 
chemical, or biological components and their 
interactions that can be stated in quantitative terms. 


2.215 Environmental Planner — An environmental 
planner putting his or her knowledge of the ecosystem 
into a planning process or predictive frame of reference 
to effect a better fit between the works of humans and 
nature. This type of planning is a paper exercise that 
begins a development process, a government process, 
or policy formulation process, environmental planning 
includes goal setting, information analysis, hearings 
and approvals. 


2.216 Environmental Planning — Planning activities 
with the objective of preserving or enhancing 
environmental values or resources. 


2.217 Environmental Quality Standard — The 
maximum limits or concentrations of pollutants 
permitted in specified media. 


2.218 Environmental Review — A formal evaluation 
undertaken to determine whether a proposed action 
may have a significant impact on the environment. 


2.219 Environmental Scientist — A person studying 
the interactions between the physical, chemical, and 
biological components of the environment, including 
their effects on all types of organisms but more often 
the human impact on the environment. 


2.220 Environmental Standards — Standards set to 
protect human health and well being; environmental 
sustainability and aesthetics, and the well being of plant 
and animal life. 


2.221 Environmental Surveillance — A program to 
monitor the impact on the surrounding region of the 
discharges from industrial operations. 


2.222 Ephemeral 


a) A stream or portion of a stream which flows only 
in direct response to precipitation. 


b) Small desert plants that complete a life cycle very 
rapidly following a desert downpour. 


2.223 Epidemic — Epidemic occurs when new cases 
of a certain disease, in a given human population, 
and during a given period, substantially exceed what 
is expected based on recent experience. Epidemics of 
infectious disease are generally caused by a change 
in the ecology of the host population (for example, 
increased stress or increase in the density of a vector 
species), a genetic change in the parasite population or 


IS 15832 : 2022 


the introduction of a new parasite to a host population 
(by movement of parasites or hosts). 


2.224 Epilimnion — The warm superficial layer of a 
lake between the surface and a horizontal plane marked 
by the maximum gradient of temperature and density 
change. 


2.225 Erode — To wear away or remove the land 
surface by wind, water or other agents. 


2.226 Estuary — Areas where fresh water meets salt 
water. These brackish water ecosystems shelter and 
feed wildlife, birds and marine life. 


2.227 Eutrophic Lakes — Lake or other contained 
water body, rich in nutrients. Characterized by a large 
quantity of planktonic algae, low water transparency 
with high dissolved oxygen in the upper layer, zero 
dissolved oxygen in deep layers during summer 
months, and large organic deposits, coloured brown to 
black. 


2.228 Eutrophication 


a) Eutrophication of any aquatic ecosystem is a 
multifaceted term associated with increased 
productivity, simplification of biotic communities 
and a reduction in the ability of the metabolism of 
the organisms to adapt to the imposed loading of 
nutrients. 


b) Nutrient enrichment of lakes, ponds and other 
such waters that stimulates the growth of aquatic 
organisms that leads to a deficiency of oxygen in 
water body. 


2.229 Evergreen — A tree or shrub that had green 
leaves throughout the year. 


2.230 Evolution — The cumulative change in the 
characteristics of populations or organisms occurring 
over the course of successive generations related by 
descent. 


2.231 Excess Rainfall — The difference over a period 
of time between the gains of water due to rainfall etc. 
and losses due to infiltration, evapotranspiration from 
the soil. 


2.232 Excessive Drainage — Rapid drainage of 
gravitational water such that plants suffer from stresses 
due to insufficient water in any dry season. Usually this 
occurs on sandy or gravelly soil profiles with large soil 
particles and large inter grain spaces. 


2.233 Excretion — The discharge of metabolic 
wastes. 


2.234 External Drainage — The movement of water 
across the surface of the land to outlets such as natural 
stream channels or waterways. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.235 Extinct Lake — A lake that has lost all of its 
water permanently, and when surface exposure of the 
water no longer exists. 


F 


2.236 Fallow — Cropland left idle in order to restore 
productivity mainly through accumulation of nutrients, 
water and organic matter. 


2.237 Fauna — All animal life associated with a given 
habitat, ecosystem, region or period. 


2.238 Fertilizer — Any organic or inorganic material 
of natural or synthetic origin that is added to a soil to 
supply elements essential to plant growth. 


2.239 Field Capacity — The water content of a soil 
after excess water has just finished draining by gravity. 


2.240 Filter Dam — A pervious dam of loose stones, 
etc, at the inlet outlet of a lake to prevent fish from 
entering or leaving. 


2.241 Filtration — Removing particles from water by 
passing it through a filtering medium. 


2.242 Firm Water Supply — An assured minimum 
supply of water under the most adverse water year 
supply conditions. 


2.243 Floc — A flocculent mass formed in a fluid 
through precipitation or aggregation of suspended 
particles with coagulant. 


2.244 Flocculation 


a) A condition in which clays, polymers or other 
small charged particles become attached and 
form a floc. In dispersed clay slurries, flocculation 
occurs after mechanical agitation ceases and the 
dispersed clay platelets spontaneously form flocs 
because of attractions between negative face 
charges and positive edge charges. 


b 


wm 


A condition in which non settleable suspended 
matters and some dissolved solids are converted 
into settleable solids and becomes amenable to 
sedimentation by aggregation and precipitation 
with chemicals/coagulants. 


2.245 Flood — It is a body of water which rises 
temporarily to overflow into land which is not normally 
submerged or, to flow in the river channel. Floods have 
two essential characteristics: the inundating of land 
within or outside the flow channel is temporary, and the 
land is contiguous to the flood axis. 


2.246 Flood Plain 


a) It includes the water channel, the flood channel 
and that area of nearby low land susceptible to 
flood by inundation. 


10 


b) Adjoining land at the bottom of a valley of a 
stream flooded only when the stream flow exceeds 
the bank-full stage. 


2.247 Flora — All plant life associated with a given 
habitat, country, or period. Bacteria are considered 
flora. 


2.248 Flow — The volume of water passing a given 
point per unit of time. 


2.249 Flushing Period — The time required for the 
water of a water body to be completely replaced. 


2.250 Food Chain — The step by step transfer of 
food energy and materials, by consumption, from the 
primary source in plants through increasingly higher 
forms of animals. 


2.251 Food Cycle or Food Web — All the 
interconnecting food chains in a community. 


2.252 Foreshore — A strip of land on the margin of a 
body of water, for example, a lake or stream which is 
intermittently exposed when the water level fluctuates. 


2.253 Forester — A professional trained in the 
planning and management of timber crops. 


2.254 Fossil Fuels — Remains of ancient plant and 
animal life consumed to produce energy like Coal, oil 
and natural gas. 


2.255 Free Drainage — Movement of water by 
gravity, through and below the root zone. Such water 
is only available for plant use while passing through 
the root zone. 


2.256 Freeboard — The difference in elevation 
between the maximum reservoir water surface and the 
dam crest. 


2.257 Freshwater — Water with salinity less than 500 
parts per million (ppm). 


2.258 Freshwater Lake — Any inland pond, reservoir, 
impoundment or other similar body of water that 
exhibits no anthropogenic sources of nutrients, oceanic 
and tidal influences and that has high biodiversity and 
low plant growth with TDS concentration of less than 
10000 ppm. 


2.259 Fungi — Tiny plants that lack chlorophyll. Some 
cause disease, others stabilise sewage and break down 
solid wastes for compost. 


G 


2.260 Geographical Information System (GIS) — 
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are 
computerized resource data base systems that are 
referenced to some geographic coordinate system. A 
GIS is primarily used to store, manipulate, analyze and 


display various spatial data. In addition, GIS combine 
special hardware and software to perform numerous 
functions and operations on various spatial data layers 
residing in the database. 


2.261 Geology — Geology is the science comprising 
the study of solid earth, the rocks of which it is 
composed, and the processes by which they change. 


2.262 Geomorphology — Geomorphology is the 
scientific study of landforms and the processes that 
shape them. 


2.263 Global Warming — An increase in the average 
temperature of the earth’s atmosphere, especially 
a sustained increase sufficient to cause climatic 
change, caused due to an increase in concentration 
of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere. 


2.264 Gradient — The general slope or rate of change 
in vertical elevation per unit of horizontal distance. 


2.265 Green Water — The precipitation on land that 
does not run off or recharge the groundwater but is 
stored in the soil or temporarily stays on top of the 
soil or vegetation. Eventually, this part of precipitation 
evaporates or transpires through plants. Green water 
can be made productive for crop growth (although not 
all green water can be taken up by crops, because there 
will always be evaporation from the soil and because 
not all periods of the year or areas are suitable for crop 
growth). 


2.266 Greenhouse Effect — The warming of the 
atmosphere by the trapping of long wave radiation 
being radiated to space by greenhouse gases. 


2.267 Greenhouse Gases — Gaseous constituents of 
the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that 
absorbs and emits radiation at specific wavelength 
within the spectrum of infrared radiation emitted 
by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere and clouds. 
This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water 
vapour (H,O), carbon dioxide (CO,), nitrous oxide 
(N,O), methane (CH,) and ozone (O,) are the primary 
greenhouse gases in the Earth’s atmosphere. 


2.268 Grey Water — Grey water is wastewater 
generated from domestic activities such as laundry, 
dishwashing, and bathing, which can be recycled on- 
site for uses such as landscape irrigation and constructed 
wetlands. Grey water differs from water from the toilets 
which is designated sewage or black water to indicate it 
contains human waste. 


2.269 Groundwater Contamination The 
pollution of springs and wells. It can result from 
indiscriminate land disposal of potentially hazardous 
waste materials that are then dissolved or suspended 


11 


IS 15832 : 2022 


in free liquids, usually water, and leached downward 
through the unsaturated profile to the zone of 
saturation or from improperly constructed or operated 
wells. 


H 


2.270 Habitat — The area or environment where an 
organism or ecological community normally lives or 
occurs. 


2.271 Half Life — The time required for the decay or 
disappearance of half of a substance that decays in a 
regular, exponential way. 


2.272 Hard Water — Alkaline water containing 
high amounts of dissolved mineral salts (mainly 
bicarbonates, chlorides and sulphates of calcium 
and magnesium) that interfere with some industrial 
processes and prevent soap from lathering. 


2.273 Hardness — A measure of calcium, iron and 
magnesium salts ( carbonates, nitrates, sulphates, 
chlorides, etc ) expressed as parts of equivalent calcium 
carbonate per million parts of water or mg/l. 


2.274 Hazard — A potentially damaging physical 
event, phenomenon or human activity that may cause 
the loss of life or injury, property damage, social and 
economic disruption or environmental degradation. 


2.275 Hazardous Substance — Substance which 
has the potential, though being used at work, to harm 
the health or safety of persons in the workplace. 


2.276 Hazardous Waste — It means any waste 
which by reason of any of its physical, chemical, 
reactive, toxic, flammable, explosive or corrosive 
characteristics causes danger or is likely to cause 
danger to health or environment, whether alone or 
when in contact with other wastes or substances. 


2.277 Hazardous Waste Management — The 
systematic control of the collection, source separation, 
storage, transportation, processing, treatment, recovery, 
and disposal of hazardous wastes. 


2.278 Head Loss — The difference in level of the 
groundwater table in different parts of the same aquifer 
resulting from resistance to ground flow through the 
aquifer. 


2.279 Headworks — Structure for diverting water 
into the head of a channel. 


2.280 Heavy Metals — Metals with a density of 
greater than 5 g cm”. 


2.281 Heterogeneous — Not from the same source, 
individual, or species. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.282 Heterotrophic — An organism that obtains 
nourishment from the ingestion and breakdown of 
organic matter being incapable of synthesizing the 
required organic materials from inorganic sources. 


2.283 Holomistic Lake — A lake with complete 
circulation (mixing). 


2.284 Homeothermic (Homoiothermic) — Warm 
blooded. Maintaining a relatively constant body 
temperature regardless of the temperature of the 
environment. 


2.285 Homing — The return of animal species to their 
spawning or breeding grounds. 


2.286 Homochromous — Alike in colour. 


2.287 Homogenous — Composed of similar or 
identical parts; uniform. 


2.288 Homomorphic — Uniform shape and size. 


2.289 Host — An organism that harbors a parasite, 
mutual partner, or commensal partner, typically 
providing nourishment and shelter. 


2.290 Humidity — Humidity is the amount of water 
vapor in the air. Humidity indicates the likelihood 
of precipitation, dew, or fog. There are three main 
measurements of humidity: 


a) absolute, 
b) relative, and 
c) specific. 


Absolute humidity is the water content of air. Relative 
humidity, expressed as a percent, measures the current, 
absolute humidity related to the maximum for that air 
pressure and temperature. Specific humidity is a ratio 
of the water vapor content of the mixture to the total air 
content on a mass basis. 


2.291 Humus — Partially decomposed organic 
material found in soil and water. 


2.292 Hybrid — An organism resulting from a cross 
breeding between parents of different genotypes. 


2.293 Hydraulic Conductivity — The rate of flow 
of water in litres/day through unit cross-section of 
soil under unit hydraulic gradient at a specified 
temperature. 


2.294 Hydraulic Gradient 


a) The change in hydraulic head of the aquifer per 
unit distance in the direction of flow; or 

b) The slope of the line of piezometric head (that is, 
sum of the pressure and elevation heads) at any 
point in the flow path. 


12 


2.295 Hydraulic Head — It is the height of piezometric 
surface (for confined aquifer) or water table (for 
unconfined aquifer) at a particular location above a 
datum. 


2.296 Hydrobiology — The scientific study of life in 
water environments. 


2.297 Hydrobiont — A discrete unit of aquatic living 
matter. 


2.298 Hydrocarbons in Air — Generally unburned 
petroleum products which serve as reductant precursors 
in the formation of photochemical smog. 


2.299 Hydrocoenosis — A community of organisms 
inhabiting an aquatic biotope. 


2.300 Hydroelectric Plant — An electric power plant 
using falling water as its motive force. 


2.301 Hydrogenation — The addition of hydrogen to 
a compound. 


2.302 Hydrogeology — A branch of earth sciences 
dealing with the subsurface distribution of rock 
formations and their ability to receive, store and 
transmit water. 


2.303 Hydrograph — A graph showing the stage, 
volume of flow, velocity, sediment concentration or 
sediment discharge or some other feature of flowing 
water with respect to time at a given place. 


2.304 Hydrologic Cycle 


a) The cycle of water movement from the atmosphere 
to the earth by precipitation and its return to 
the atmosphere by interception, evaporation, 


runoff, infiltration, percolation, storage and 
transpiration. 
b) The continuous circulation of water from the 


atmosphere through soil to ocean to atmosphere 
(inter-relationships between precipitation, 
evaporation, groundwater supplies, and water in 
general). 


2.305 Hydrology — Science of water dealing with 
occurrence, circulation and distribution of water of 
earth and earth’s atmosphere. 


2.306 Hydrolysis — The reaction of a compound with 
water resulting in the production of a weak acid and a 
weak base. 


2.307 Hydrophyte — A plant whose habitat is water or 
very wet places. 


2.308 Hypolimnion — Colder bottom water zone of 
a stratified lake, extending from the thermocline to the 
bottom. 


2.309 Hypoorheos — The saturated zone beneath a 
river or stream consisting of substrate such as sand, 
gravel and rock with water filled interstitial pore. The 
zone often extends beyond the width of the stream 
channel and is typically used by certain aquatic 
organisms during their normal life cycle and as a refuge. 


2.310 Hypothesis — A proposition, condition, or 
principle which is assumed to explain certain facts and 
guide in the investigations of others. 


I 
2.311 Ichthyology — The scientific study of fish. 


2.312 Immigration — The movement of an animal 
into an area not previously occupied by that animal. 


2.313 Impervious Material — Refers to relatively 
waterproof soils such as clay through which water will 
percolate at about one millionth of the rate at which it 
will pass through gravel. 


2.314 Impervious Soil — A soil through which water, 
air, or roots can not penetrate. No soil is impervious to 
water and air all the time. 


2.315 Impingement — Striking or dashing against; to 
be forced against a screen (fish) by water pressure so 
that escape is impossible. 


2.316 Impurity — A chemical substance that is 
unintentionally present with another chemical 
substance or mixture. 


2.317 Inbreeding — The mating of closely related 
individuals. 


2.318 Incidence Rate — The number of newly 
diagnosed or reported cases of the specified disease 
during a defined period of time divided by the 
population in which the disease occurred. 


2.319 Incinerator — A furnace that is designed to 
burn waste at very high temperatures under controlled 
conditions and is licensed by national regulatory 
authorities. Most modern and efficient incinerator 
generates heat and energy from burning waste. 


2.320 Indicator Organism (Faecal) — An organism 
that, while not pathogenic itself, indicates the possible 
presence of a pathogenic species (See Coliform). 


2.321 Indigenous — A species that is native to a given 
area. 


2.322 Industrial Effluent — The water and air borne 
wastes of industry. 


2.323 Industrial Waste — Any solid, semi-solid 
or liquid waste generated by a manufacturing or 
processing plant. 


13 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.324 Industrial Wastewater — The used water 
from industrial operation, which may be treated and 
reused at the plant, discharged to the municipal sewer, 
or discharged directly to surface waters untreated or 
partially treated. 


2.325 Infauna — Part of the burrowing benthos 
population. 


2.326 Infectious Disease (Water Related) — Caused 
by a pathogenic organism and can, therefore, be passed 
from one person to another. A person may be infected 
with a pathogen without suffering the symptoms of the 
disease. 


2.327 Influent 


a) Sewage, water, or other liquid, raw or partly 
treated; flowing into a reservoir, basin, or treatment 
plant, or part thereof. 


b) Astream flowing into a lake. 


2.328 Ingest — To take a substance from the outside 
into the digestive tract. 


2.329 Injection Wells — A device used to deposit 
materials into the soil by means of pressure. 


2.330 Insecticide — All substances or mixtures of 
substances intended for preventing or inhibiting the 
establishment, reproduction, development or growth 
of, destroying or repelling any insect declared to be 
a pest. 


2.331 Insectivorous — Organisms which consume 
insects as a primary food source. 


2.332 In-situ — In its original position or place. 


2.333 Insolation — The rate at which radiant energy 
is incident directly from the sun per unit horizontal 
area at any place on or above the surface of the 
earth. 


2.334 Instar — A state in the life cycle of an insect or 
other arthropod between two successive molts. 


2.335 Instream Flow Requirement — Water that 
remains within the river ecosystem is not withdrawn 
for use elsewhere outside the river ecosystem. 


2.336 Interception The process by which 
precipitation is retained by vegetation before it reaches 
the ground. 


2.337 Interceptor Ditches — Open channels excavated 
across the general slope of the land, along the upper 
margin of the area to be protected, to divert all flows at 
or near the surface. 


2.338 Interceptor Drains — Installed to control 
horizontal or upwards ground flow. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.339 Interflow — Lateral movement of water through 
topsoil when infiltration rate exceeds percolation rate. 


2.340 Interfluve — A ridge between river valleys. 


2.341 Intermittent (Stream) — Flowing at intervals, 
recurrent, periodic. 


2.342 Intermittent Saturation Zone The 
zone between the highest and lowest levels of the 
groundwater table as it responds to seasonal and short 
term weather changes. 


2.343 Internal Drainage — The movement of water 
down through the soil profile to porous aquifers or to 
surface. 


2.344 Interspecific — Relations between species. 


2.345 Interstitial Flow — The portion of the surface 
water that infiltrates the streambed and moves through 
pores in the subsurface. 


2.346 Intraspecific — Relations between individuals 
within a species. 


2.347 Inundate — To cover with impounded waters or 
floodwaters. 


2.348 Invader Plant Species — Species, often annuals, 
which are not a part of the climax vegetation. 


2.349 Invertebrates — Literally, all animals without a 
vertebral column. 


2.350 In Vitro — Biological reaction taking place in an 
artificial apparatus. 


2.351 In Vivo — Biological reaction taking place in a 
living cell or organism. 


2.352 Ions — An electrically charged atom or group of 
atoms in aquatic solutions. 


2.353 Irretrievable — Not retrievable. A natural 
resource (water course, fishery, wetland, wildlife 
habitat, etc.) which would be lost forever due to the 
implementation of a project action. 


2.354 Irreversible — Incapable of being reversed. 
A natural process or operation (migration pattern, 
landscape, fish and wildlife habitat, etc.) which would 
never occur again because of the implementation of a 
project action. 


2.355 Irrigation — The supply of water by artificial 
means for raising crops. 


2.356 Irrigation Return Flow — Surface water, other 
than navigable waters, containing pollutants that result 
from the controlled application of water by any person 
to land used primarily for crops, forage growth or 
nursery operations. 


14 


2.357 Irruption — A sudden or dramatic increase in a 
given wildlife population. 


L 


2.358 Lacustrine — Living in lakes or pertaining to 
lake environment. 


2.359 Lagoon 


a) An oxidation pond in which wastewater is purified 
through sedimentation, and both aerobic and 
anaerobic biochemical action over a period of 
time. 


b) A shallow area of water generally separated from 
a large body of water by a partial barrier. 


2.360 Lake — A large body of water contained in a 
depression of the earth’s surface and supplied from 
drainage of a larger area. 


2.361 Land Drainage — Removal of excess, 
superfluous or gravitational water from land surface to 
prevent or to relieve waterlogging, the accumulation 
of harmful amounts of salts and deterioration of soil 
structure. 


2.362 Land Drains — Drains that remove excess soil 
water from the profile to control a high groundwater 
table or a perched water table. Set at regular intervals 
across the land. Also called minor drains or lateral 
drains. 


2.363 Land Reclamation — Making land capable of 
more intensive use by changing its general characters, 
as by drainage of excessively wet land; irrigation of 
arid or semi arid land; or recovery of submerged land 
from seas, lakes, and rivers. 


2.364 Land Use Planner — A person coming from 
academic planning, geography, biological sciences, 
forestry, or environmental studies who conducts, 
analyses, and proposes solutions to land use issues, not 
necessarily with an ecosystem focus. 


2.365 Larva — An immature, often vermiform stage 
of an animal with indirect development (undergoes 
metamorphosis). Insects, Amphibians and a few 
other invertebrates have a larval stage in their 
development. 


2.366 Larvivore — Any group of organisms which 
consumes larva as a food source. 


2.367 Latent — The latent period of a pathogen is the 
time it requires to develop in the environment before it 
can cause infection. 


2.368 Lateral — The side of the body of an animal. 


2.369 Lateral Line — A series of sensory receptors 
along the sides of a fish. 


2.370 Latrine — A community toilet. 


2.371 Leachate — Liquid that has traveled through 
solid waste or other medium and has extracted dissolved 
or suspended material from it. 


2.372 Leaching 


a) The removal of soluble constituents from soils or 
other material by percolating liquid. It can also 
be termed as the removal of salts and alkali from 
soil matrix by abundant irrigation combined with 
drainage. 


b 


wm 


The disposal of a liquid through a non-watertight 
artificial structure, conduit, or porous material by 
downward or lateral drainage, or both, into the 
surrounding permeable soils. 


2.373 Lentic 
a) Standing waters such as lakes, ponds, and marshes. 


b) Pertains to lakes or ponds or any body of standing 
water. 


2.374 Lethal Concentration, Lethal Dose — The 
quantity of a substance that is fatal to 50 percent of the 
population on which it was tested after a given period 
of time. 


2.375 Lethal Dose — The amount of a poisonous 
substance (toxic) which will kill an organism. 


2.376 Life Cycle — The various stages an animal 
passes through from egg fertilization to death. 


2.377 Life Expectancy — The average time an animal 
is expected to live after reaching a certain age. 


2.378 Life Zone — Any series of bio—geographic 
zones into which a continent, region, etc., is divided 
both by latitude and altitude on the basis of the 
characteristic animals and plant life in a zone. 


2.379 Limnetic — Pertaining to open waters of 
lakes. 


2.380 Limnokrene — A lake or pond formed by a 
spring. 


2.381 Limnology — That branch of hydrology relating 
to water of lakes and ponds. 


2.382 Linkages — Characteristics of a landscape that 
provide direct physical connections between two or 
more places. 


2.383 Liquid Limit — The water content corresponding 
to the arbitrary limit between the liquid and plastic 
states of consistency of a soil. 


2.384 Liquid Waste — A general term denoting 
pollutants such as soap, chemicals or other substances 
in liquid form. 


15 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.385 Litter — The uppermost organic materials partly 
or not at all decomposed on the surface of the soil. 


2.386 Littoral 


a) Azone ofa lake or ocean in which light penetrates 
to the bottom. 


b) Inhabiting bottom of sea or lake near shore, 
roughly within a depth to which light and wave 
action reach. 


2.387 Loam — A detrital deposit consisting of nearly 
equal proportions of particles of the sand, silt and clay 
grade. 


M 


2.388 Macro Organisms — Organisms visible with 
the unaided eye. 


2.389 Macrophytes — Large forms of vegetation. 
2.390 Macroscopic — Visible with the unaided eye. 


2.391 Marine — Pertaining to the ocean, sea or other 
bodies of salt water. 


2.392 Marsh — Area of low lying wetland usually 
characterized by non-woody vegetation; it may be 
either fresh or salt water. 


2.393 Maximum Allowable Concentration — The 
concentration of a pollutant considered (in regulations) 
harmless to healthy adults during their working hours, 
assuming that they are not in contact with the pollutant 
the rest of the time. 


2.394 Maximum Contaminant Level The 
maximum permissible level of a contaminant in water 
that is delivered to any user of a public water system. 


2.395 Maximum Permissible Level — A general term 
covering the greatest degree of contamination that is 
permitted from any source. 


2.396 Meromictic Lake 


a) A lake in which dissolved substances create a 
gradient of density differences with depth that 
prevent complete mixing or circulation of water 
masses. Circulation is only in the upper layers. 


b) A lake with incomplete circulation (mixing). 


2.397 Mesotrophic — A naturally occurring or artificial 
(due to nutrient enrichment) condition intermediate 
between eutrophic and oligotrophic. 


2.398 Mesotrophic Lake — A lake containing a 
moderate amount of plant nutrients. 


2.399 Metabolism — The sum total of the chemical 
transformations (anabolism and catabolism) occurring 
in the body of a living organism. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.400 Metalimnion — A zone of abrupt temperature 
change (thermocline) between the warm epilimnion 
and the cool hypolimnion of a lake. 


2.401 Metamorphosis — The transformation of a 
larval form into an adult form. 


2.402 Microaerophile — Microorganisms requiring 
oxygen in very low concentration for optimum growth. 


2.403 Microbes — Microscopic living organisms, 
including bacteria, protozoa, viruses, and fungi. 


2.404 Microbiota — The microscopic plants and 
animals of a given habitat. 


2.405 Microorganisms — Organisms so small as to 
require magnification for observation. 


2.406 Microphytes 
a) A microscopic plant. 


b) Aplant dwarfed due to unfavorable environmental 
conditions. 


2.407 Microscopic — Visible only with the aid of 
some magnifying device. 


2.408 Migration — Moving from one locale to another 
particularly during a change of season. 


2.409 Mineral Soils — Soils having less than 
approximately 20 percent (by mass) organic carbon. 


2.410 Mineral Water — Water that contains a high 
quantity of mineral salts. 


2.411 Minimum Flow — Negotiated lowest flow in a 
regulated stream that will sustain an aquatic population 
of agreed upon levels. This flow may vary seasonally. 


2.412 Mitigate — To render or become mild or milder; 
to modify. To moderate or make or become less severe, 
violent, fierce, cruel, intense, harsh rigorous, painful, 
etc; to soften, appease, meliorate, diminish, lessen, 
temper. 


2.413 Mitigation — To render or become mild or 
milder; to modify. 


2.414 Mixing Layer — The zone separating regions 
occupied by two physically or chemically different 
fluids across that a gradient of the mixed fluid 
properties exists. Also called transition zone or zone of 
transition. 


2.415 Monitoring — Periodic or continuous sampling 
to determine the level of pollutant or radioactivity 
present in the environment. 


2.416 Monitoring Programme — A programme 
designed to measure, quantitatively or qualitatively, the 
level of a substance over a period of time. 


16 


2.417 Monitoring Well — A well used to obtain 
water samples for water quality analysis or to measure 
groundwater levels. 


2.418 Monoculture — Cultivation of land in a single 
crop. 


2.419 Mortality — Death rate of population. 


N 


2.420 Nanoplankton — Minute plankton, including 
algae, bacteria and protozoans of size 2 — 20 um. 


2.421 Necrosis — The localized death of living cells 
(as from infection or the interruption of blood supply); 
the process where localized tissue becomes infected. 


2.422 Nocturnal — Active or functioning at night. 


2.423 Non-point Pollution — Pollutants whose 
sources can not be pinpointed. Pollution from a 
widespread area. 


2.424 Nutrient — A chemical compound (such as 
protein, fat, carbohydrate, vitamins, or minerals) or a 
substance that promotes growth. 


2.425 Nymph — Immature form of an insect. 


O 


2.426 Oceanic — Inhabiting the sea where it is deeper 
than 200 m. 


2.427 Oligomictic Lakes — Warm water lakes where 
water temperature is considerably higher than 4°C the 
year round. 


2.428 Oligotrophic — Referring to a water body low 
in nutrient supplies. Such water bodies contain little 
organic matter; have a high dissolved oxygen level and 
low numbers of aquatic organisms. 


2.429 Organic — Referring to or derived from living 
organisms. In chemistry, any compound containing 
carbon. 


2.430 Organic Compound — A chemical compound 
containing the element carbon. 


2.431 Organism — Any living thing. 


2.432 Osmosis — The movement of a substance 
dissolved in a solution, through a semi permeable 
membrane, from a region of lower concentration to a 
region of higher concentration. 


2.433 Ossified — Bone hardened by the deposition of 
mineral matter. 


2.434 Outfall — The mouth ofa sewer, drain or conduit 
where an effluent is discharged into receiving waters. 


2.435 Outlet — Any channel into which water is 
diverted to aid land drainage. 


2.436 Outlet Channel — A waterway or drainage 
channel provided to collect and carry away discharge. 


2.437 Outwash — Mineral materials which have been 
carried and sorted by water from high to low elevations. 
This would include glacial outwash materials originally 
suspended in glaciers which have been moved and 
deposited by melted water. 


2.438 Overturn — The complete circulation or mixing 
of the upper and lower waters of a lake when the 
temperatures (and densities) are similar. 


2.439 Oxidation — Generally the addition of oxygen 
to a chemical species. The process by which electrons 
are removed from atoms or ions. 


2.440 Oxygen Depletion — Removal or exhaustion of 
oxygen by chemical or biological use. 


2.441 Oxygen Sag — A drop in oxygen concentration 
usually at night due to biological respiration. 


2.442 Ozone Layer — The thin protective layer of 
gas 10 to 50 km above the earth that acts as a filter 
for ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun. High UV 
levels can lead to skin cancer and cataracts and affect 
the growth of plants. 


P 


2.443 Paddy — A specially irrigated or flooded field 
where rice is grown. 


2.444 Parasite — An organism living in or on another 
organism at the expense of the latter. 


2.445 Particulate Matter — Any material, except 
water in uncombined form, that is or has been airborne 
and exists as a liquid or a solid at standard conditions. 
Larger particles settle out of the air. However, the 
smaller particles (less than 1 um) are readily respirable 
contributing significantly to respiratory disease and 
reducing visibility. 


2.446 Pathogen — An organism capable of causing 
disease. 


2.447 Pediments — Areas along the face of the 
uplifted mountain ranges which are relatively gently 
sloping and which have been formed by several factors 
including sheet erosion and deposition, stream braiding 
etc. The general slope of these areas is governed by 
the slope and erodibility of the underlying bedrock 
formations. 


2.448 Pelagic — Pertaining to open water, generally 
the ocean. 


17 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.449 Perched Water Table — The upper surface 
of a body of groundwater in a zone of saturation that 
is separated by unsaturated material from a body of 
groundwater below it. 


2.450 Percolation Rate — The rate (in units of 
velocity) at which water flows from top soil to subsoil 
under specific conditions. 


2.451 Perennial 


a) A plant that lives for an indefinite period, dying 
back seasonally and producing new growth from a 
perennating part. 


b) Flowing during all the year, for example, perennial 
stream, perennial canal. 


2.452 Permeability — It is defined as the characteristic 
of a medium to transmit water. 


2.453 Permeable Material — That which allows water 
to pass through easily. 


2.454 Pervious — Capable of being penetrated through 
the pores (for example, sandstone). 


2.455 Pest — Any insect, rodent, nematode, fungus, 
weed or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant 
or animal life or virus, bacteria or other microorganism 
that causes economic, social or psychological harm to 
humans or human endeavors. 


2.456 Pesticide — Pesticides are chemical compounds 
used to rid an area of unwanted organisms such as 
weeds, insects, bacteria and fungi. 


2.457 pH 


a) At a given temperature the intensity of the acidic 
or basic character of a solution. 


b) The pH value of an aqueous solution is the 
logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of 
hydrogen ion concentration (expressed in g/l) of 
the solution. Distilled water, which is neutral, has 
DH value of 7. 


2.458 Phenology — The study of recurring natural 
phenomena such as migration of animals, leafing 
of trees, blossoming of plants, etc. in relation to the 
seasons. 


2.459 Photoperiodism — Response of plants and 
animals to relative duration of light and darkness. 


2.460 Photosynthesis — The process by which 
chlorophyll containing plant cells use solar energy, 
carbon dioxide and water to produce carbohydrates. 


2.461 Phreatophyte — A plant that draws its water 
supply from groundwater. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.462 Physical Geographer — A geographically 
trained scientist oriented toward spatial description of 
physical features and natural resources. Generally the 
emphasis is toward physiography, geomorphology, or 
climatology. 


2.463 Physiography — Branch of science that deals 
with the physical features of earth. 


2.464 Plankton — Passively floating or weakly motile 
aquatic plants and animals ranging from 20 cm to 
<0.2 um, in size. 


2.465 Pluvial 
a) Of or pertaining to rain; and 
b) Due to the action of rain. 


2.466 Point Source — A highly localized pollutant 
source. 


2.467 Poly Chlorinated Biphenyl (PCB) — Any 
of several organic compounds used in plastics 
manufacture, transformers and capacitors that are toxic 
and persistent environmental pollutants and tend to 
accumulate in animal tissues. 


2.468 Pollutant — A contaminant which is present 
in excess of permissible limit and becomes harmful. 


2.469 Pollution 


a) The alteration of the physical, chemical, or 
biological properties of the atmosphere or any 
water supply including change in temperature, 
taste, color, turbidity, or odor, or the discharge of 
unnatural liquid, gas, solid, radioactive, or any 
other substance which is likely to create nuisance 
problem or render the air and/or water supply 
injurious to public health or safety or render the air 
and/or water supply detrimental to wild animals, 
birds, and fish or other aquatic life. 


b 


wm 


The presence of matter or energy whose nature, 
location or quantity produces undesirable 
environmental effects. Any other substance that is 
likely to create a nuisance problem or render the 
air and/or water supply injurious or detrimental to 
living organisms. 


2.470 Pollution Load — The quantity of material in 
a waste stream that requires treatment or exerts an 
adverse effect on the receiving system. 


2.471 Pollution Plume — The trace or path of leachate 
or other pollutant substances, moving along the flow 
paths of groundwater or in surface water. 


2.472 Polymictic — A lake that shows continuous 
mixing at temperatures just over 4 degree centigrade 
and stratification does not develop in it. 


2.473 Pond — A small lake. 


18 


2.474 Ponded Water — Water that remains on the soil 
surface when the soil is saturated. 


2.475 Population — An interbreeding group of plants 
or animals; the entire group of organisms of one 
species (as used in ecology). 


2.476 Population Density The number of 
individuals of a population per unit area or volume. 


2.477 Porosity — Porosity is an index of the void 
characteristics of a soil or stratum as pertaining 
to percolation. It is the ratio, usually expressed as 
percentage, of the volume of voids of a given soil mass 
to the total volume of soil mass. 


2.478 Portable — Easily or conveniently transported. 


2.479 Potable Water — Water that does not contain 
objectionable pollution, contamination, minerals, or 
infectious agents, and is considered satisfactory for 
human consumption. 


2.480 Potamology — The scientific study of the 
chemical, physical, geological and biological nature of 
lotic environment. 


2.481 Potential Evapotranspiration — The amount 
of water that could pass into the atmosphere by 
evapotranspiration if the amount of soil water were not 
a limiting factor. 


2.482 Precipitate — A solid that separates from 
a solution because of some chemical or physical 
change. 


2.483 Predator — An animal that feeds on other 
animals but is not a parasite. 


2.484 Pretreatment Processes — Processes used to 
reduce the amount of pollution in water before it enters 
the sewers or the treatment plant. 


2.485 Prey — An animal hunted or killed and used as a 
food source by another animal. 


2.486 Pristine State — A state of nature without or 
with negligible human interference. 


2.487 Profundal — Deepest part of the ocean or lake 
where light does not penetrate, characteristically it is 
low in nutrients, has few organisms as compared with 
the surface. 


2.488 Protected Species — Any species whose 
existence may be in jeopardy and in need of special 
protection throughout all or a portion of its range. 


2.489 Protozoa — Single celled animals which inhabit 
fresh water, salt water and soils. 


2.490 Pupa — The non-feeding stage in an insect’s 
development between larva and adult (plural pupae). 


2.491 Purification — The removal of objectionable 
matter (chemical substances, living organisms and 
physical properties) from water by natural or artificial 
methods. 


R 


2.492 Rain Forest — A tropical forest having an annual 
rainfall of at least 2540 mm. 


2.493 Receiving Waters — Rivers, lakes, oceans or 
other water bodies that receive treated or untreated 
wastewater. 


2.494 Reclaimed Water — Water that has undergone 
such treatment so as to make it suitable for a direct 
beneficial use. 


2.495 Reforestation — To restock otherwise felled or 
cleared woodland. 


2.496 Rehabilitation — The restoration of people 
or a degraded natural resource to the former status or 
capacity. 


2.497 Remote Sensing — The technique of deriving 
information about the earth’s surface from images 
acquired from a distance, using airborne equipment 
installed in an aircraft or satellite. 


2.498 Reservoir 


a) A pond, lake, basin or other space, either natural 
in its origin or created in whole or in part by 
building of engineering structures, which is used 
for storage, regulation and control of water. Small 
reservoirs are also called tanks. 


b) An extra supply of any thing, as a reservoir of 
infection etc. 


2.499 Reservoir Capacity — Capacity of the reservoir 
to hold water in it. 


2.500 Residue — The material that remains after 
completion of a chemical or physical process such as 
combustion, distillation, evaporation or filtration. 


2.501 Resilience — The ability of any system to 
recover from or to resist being affected by a shock, 
stress or disturbance. 


2.502 Resource — A tangible product of the earth or 
biosphere capable of serving, supplying, or supporting 
some human purpose or need. 


2.503 Resource Conservation — Reduction of the 
amounts of solid waste that are generated, reduction 
of overall resource consumption and utilization of 
recovered resources. 


2.504 Resource Management — The introduction and 
enforcement of restraints, including specified technical 


19 


IS 15832 : 2022 


practices, to safeguard the future of renewable resources 
and uphold the principle of sustained yield. 


2.505 Respiration — Commonly breathing; in biology 
the oxidative breakdown of food molecules of cells with 
the release of energy. The complex series of chemical 
and physical reactions in living things by which energy 
and nutrients are made available for use. Oxygen is 
used and carbon dioxide released during the process. 


2.506 Retention Dams — Small earthen dams designed 
to retain water for only short periods of time to prevent 
excessively rapid runoff and erosion. 


2.507 Return Flow — That portion of water previously 
diverted from a stream and subsequently returned to 
that stream or to another body of ground or surface 
water. 


2.508 Reuse — The planned and deliberate use of 
treated wastewater for some beneficial purpose, 
such as irrigation, recreation, industry, recharging of 
underground aquifers, and drinking. 


2.509 Riparian — Pertaining to banks of a stream or 
body of water, for example, ‘riparian rights’ are natural 
rights due to the proprietor of lands along the river 
banks. 


2.510 River Basin — The portion of land drained by 
a river and the streams that flow into it. The quality of 
a river basin affects the quality of water, so efforts to 
protect and improve water quality must often include 
plans for managing river basins. 


2.511 Riverine — Riparian; pertaining to a riverbank. 
2.512 Rivulet, Runnel — A small stream. 


2.513 Rock Permeability — The capacity of a rock 
(or soil) to transmit water specified as a velocity (for 
example cm/h) 


2.514 Runoff — It is defined as that portion of the 
precipitation which is not absorbed by the deep strata 
but finds its way into the streams after meeting the 
persistent demands of evapo-transpiration including 
interception and other losses. It includes surface run 
off received into the channels after rainfall, delayed run 
off that enters the streams after passing through portion 
of the earth, and other delayed run off that has been 
temporarily detained as snow cover or stored in natural 
lakes or swamps. 


2.515 Saline 
a) Relating to or containing salt. 


b) Water containing dissolved salts, usually at 
concentrations from 10 000 to 33 000 mg/l. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.516 Saline Alkaline Water — Water which has 
moderate concentration of soluble sodium salts. 


2.517 Saline Water — Water which contains moderate 
concentration of total dissolved salts. 


2.518 Salinisation — Excess accumulation of salt. 


2.519 Salt Balance — The salt balance of an irrigated 
area is commonly defined as the difference between the 
total dissolved solids brought to the land annually by 
the irrigation water and by seepage water and the total 
solids carried away annually by the drainage water and 
by seepage water. 


2.520 Salt Index — A formula for ascertaining 
whether water suitable for irrigation is: 


Salt Index= (Total Na — 24.5) [Total Ca — Ca in 


{CaCO,* + Ca (HC O,),} x 4.85] 


All quantities in the formula refer to parts per million. 
The salt index is negative for all good waters and 
positive for those unsuitable for irrigation. 


2.521 Salt Water Intrusion — The movement of 
saltwater inland into subterranean aquifers. 


2.522 Sanctuary — An area usually set aside by 
legislation or deed to observe restriction for the 
preservation and protection of organisms. 


2.523 Sand — Mineral particles whose effective 
diameters lie in the range 0.02 — 2.0 mm. 


2.524 Saprophyte — An organism that obtains 
nutrition from dead organic matter. 


2.525 Seasonality — Phenomena that shows cyclic or 
repeated behaviour according to the season. 


2.526 Secchi Disc — Black and white disc used to 
visually measure light penetration through water. 


2.527 Secondary Pollutant — A pollutant formed 
by the combination or reaction of other primary 
pollutants. 


2.528 Sediment 


a) Fragmental material transported by, suspended 
in or deposited by a flowing channel without any 
regard to size. 


b) Usually finely divided organic and / or mineral 
matter deposited by air or water in non turbulent 
areas. 


2.529 Sedimentation — The process of deposition 
and subsidence of suspended matter carried by 
water, or other liquids, by gravity. It is usually 
accomplished by reducing the velocity of the liquid 
below the point where it can transport the suspended 
material. 


20 


2.530 Seepage 


a) Slow percolation generally associated with flow 
in an unsaturated medium. Seepage into a body 
is termed ‘influent seepage’ and that away from a 
body as effluent seepage‘. The difference between 
percolation and seepage is that the latter is through 
unsaturated material while the former is through 
saturated material. 


b) Movement of water through pores and interstices 
of unsaturated packed soil material into or out of a 
surface or subsurface body of water, such as river, 
canal, reservoir, etc. 


2.531 Seismicity — The phenomenon of earth 
movements or seismic activity. 


2.532 Self Purification, or Natural Purification — 
The general tendency of a body of water to recover 
naturally from contamination by organic wastes. 


2.533 Semi Confined Aquifer — An aquifer that has a 
semi- confining rock formation above it. 


2.534 Semi Confining Rock Formation — A rock 
formation that is capping an aquifer that is not totally 
impermeable. 


2.535 Semi Desert — A region with conditions less 
harsh (some rainfall) than in a desert. 


2.536 Septic — Referring to the presence of disease 
producing bacteria or other micro— organisms. 


2.537 Septic Tank — A water tight sedimentation tank 
for sewage in which the sludge settling on the bottom 
is allowed to digest and liquefy by anaerobic bacterial 
action. The liquid effluent may be passed from the tank 
into the ground, or into a seepage tank in which it is 
filtered through sand or gravel before release. 


2.538 Seston — Minute living organisms and particles 
of non living matter which float in water and contribute 
to turbidity. 


2.539 Sewage — Liquid wastes from communities, 
which may be a mixture of domestic effluent from 
homes and liquid waste from industry. 


2.540 Sewage Effluent — The liquid and solid waste 
carried off with water in sewers or drains. 


2.541 Sheet Flow — Flow of water across the whole 
soil surface. 


2.542 Shrub — A woody perennial of smaller height 
than a tree. 


2.543 Silt — A general name for muddy deposit of fine 
sediment. 


2.544 Siltation — Referring to the deposition of silt 
sized (smaller than sand sized) particles. 


2.545 Silva — A treatise or description of trees of a 
given area. 


2.546 Site — An area of land large enough to be 
mapped with specific soil characteristics such as water 
holding capacity and available nutrients. 


2.547 Slurry — A watery mixture of insoluble matter 
pumped to form an impervious barrier beneath a dam 
to impede seepage. 


2.548 Smog — Air pollution consisting of smoke and 
fog, which occurs in large urban and industrial areas 
and is mainly caused by the action of sunlight on burned 
fuels, mostly from car exhausts. Smog can cause eye 
irritations and breathing problems and damage plant 
life. 


2.549 Sodium Adsorption Ratio (SAR) — A ratio for 
soil extracts and irrigation waters used to express the 
relative activity of sodium ions in exchange reaction 
with soil; 


Na* 
Ca** +Mg** 
2 


SAR = 


where, the ionic concentrations are expressed in, 
milliequivalents/liter. 


2.550 Soft Water — Water with less than 17.0 mg/l of 
calcium and magnesium carbonates. 


2.551 Soil Aeration — Movement of air into the soil 
as water is drained out; process by which air and other 
gases in the soil are renewed. 


2.552 Soil Aggregation — The lumping together of 
soil particles into a coherent mass. 


2.553 Soil pH — A measure of how acidic or basic, 
a given soil is, determined by measurement on the 
saturated paste, or the saturated extract, of the samples 
of the soil in question. 


2.554 Soil Pores — Air spaces in the soil. 


a) Macropores: diameters >0.05 mm and visible to 
the naked eye; 


b) Mesopores : diameters between 0.002 — 0.05 mm; 
and 


c) Micropores; diameters < 0.002 mm. 


2.555 Soil Porosity — Percentage of soil volume not 
occupied by solids, including all the pore space filled 
with air and water. 


2.556 Soil Salinization — Detrimental process 
through which the concentration of soluble salts in a 
soil can increase as water is removed from the soil by 
evaporation and transpiration. 


21 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.557 Soil Structure The combination or 
arrangement of primary soil particles into aggregates 
(or peds) which, together with the associated 
pore spaces, constitutes the physical framework of the 
soil, 


2.558 Soil Texture — Refers to the relative proportions 
of the various size groups (sand, silt and clay) of the 
individual soil grains in a mass of soil. 


2.559 Soil Water Deficit — The quantity of water 
required (mm) to restore the moisture content of a soil 
to field capacity. 


2.560 Soil Water Tension 


a) The pressure (negative) or suction of the liquid 
phase in an unsaturated soil. 


b) The force per unit area that must be exerted to 
remove water from the soil. 


2.561 Solute — A substance dissolved in another 
substance usually the component of a solution present 
in the lesser amount. 


2.562 Spawn — To produce or deposit eggs or 
discharge sperm; applied to aquatic animals. 


2.563 Spawning Beds — Those places in which the 
eggs of aquatic animals lodge or are placed during or 
after fertilization. 


2.564 Species 


a) Groups of actually or potentially interbreeding 
natural populations which are reproductively 
isolated from other such groups. 


b) The basic unit of biological classification. 


2.565 Species Density — The number of individuals of 
any given species per unit area at any given time. 


2.566 Specific Yield — The quantity of water that 
a unit volume of permeable rock or soil, will yield 
when drained by gravity, after being saturated. It may 
be expressed as a ratio or as a percentage by volume. 
The sum of specific retention and specific yield equals 
the porosity of the material drained. (This definition is 
different from that of surface water.) 


2.567 Spillway — A waterway in a dam or other 
hydraulic structures for the escape of flood/excess 
water. 


2.568 Spleen Index — The proportion of a population 
with a clinically palpable spleen and used as a measure 
of malarial endemicity. 


2.569 Sporadic — Widely scattered biological form. 


2.570 Spring — A concentrated natural discharge of 
groundwater appearing at the surface as a current of 
flowing water. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.571 Stability (Ecological) — The tendency of 
systems, especially ecosystems, to persist relatively 
unchanged through time; also, persistence of a 
component of a system. 


2.572 Static Head — The height, relative to an 
arbitrary reference, level or a column of water that can 
be supported by the static pressure at a given point. 


2.573 Storm Water Runoff 


a) The runoff, or stream flow, is the water that is 
gathered into rivulets brooks, and rivers. The 
water that is derived directly from precipitation 
and passes over the ground into water courses is 
known as the surface, storm, or flood runoff. 


b) The flood waters that descend the water courses 
of a drainage basin or that collected by the storm 
drains or combined sewers of a municipal drainage 
district derived from the rains that fall upon the 
tributary watershed. 


2.574 Stratification/Density Stratification — The 
existence or formation of distinct layers identified 
by differences in temperature, salinity, or oxygen or 
nutrient content. Lakes usually have three layers of 
varying temperature epilimnion, metalimnion and the 
hypolimnion. 


2.575 Stratified Flow — A condition that occurs when 
water of a given density flows under, over, or around a 
mass of water of a different density. Examples of such 
flow are Heavier inflowing water such as that of a cold 
or turbid stream which may flow under less dense water 
in a lake or a reservoir; and Fresh water, being less 
dense, may flow over heavier saline water. 


2.576 Stratigraphy (Geological) — The study of rock 
strata or rock layers. 


2.577 Stream Load — All rock fragments and 
dissolved substances from rocks moved along in the 
stream water. 


2.578 Stream Restoration — Various techniques 
used to replicate the hydrological, morphological and 
ecological features that have been lost in a stream due 
to urbanization farming or other disturbance. 


2.579 Stress — The result of consequent state of a 
physical or chemical or social stimulus on an organism 
or system; properly, a state of strain. 


2.580 Sub-species — A sub-division of a species 
forming a group whose members resemble each 
other in certain characteristics, and differ from other 
members of the species, though there may be no sharp 
dividing line. 


2.581 Sullage — Domestic dirty water not containing 
excreta, also called grey water. 


22 


2.582 Surface Irrigation — Application of water to 
the soil surface via furrows, border strips, basins or by 
wild flooding. 


2.583 Surface Water — Water that flows exclusively 
across the surface of the land from the point of 
application to point of discharge. 


2.584 Suspended Solids — Particulate matter in water 
that can be removed by filtration. 


2.585 Sustainable Development — Development 
using land or energy sources in a way that meets the 
needs of people today without reducing the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs. 


2.586 Swamp — A flat, wet area usually or periodically 
covered by standing water and supporting a growth 
of trees, shrubs and grasses in contrast to a bog, the 
organic soil is thin and readily permeated by roots and 
nutrients. 


T 
2.587 TDS — Acronym See total dissolved solids. 
2.588 Terms — Definition 


2.589 Terrain (or Terrane) — A tract of land or its 
physical features with special emphasis on bedrock 
geology. 


2.590 Terrestrial — Not aquatic, refers to the land. 


2.591 Territory — An area over which an animal or 
group of animals establishes jurisdiction. 


2.592 Thermocline, Mesolimnion, Metalimnion — 
A thin horizontal zone of water in lakes and oceans 
with a steep temperature gradient, separating a warm 
surface layer (epilimnion) from a cooler bottom layer 
(hypolimnion). 


2.593 Thermophilic — Requiring high temperatures 
(above 45 degree centigrade) for optimum growth. 


2.594 Tolerance — An organism’s capacity to endure 
and adapt to unfavorable environmental factors. 


2.595 Topography — The physical shape of the ground 
surface. 


2.596 Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) 


a) An aggregate of carbonates, bicarbonates, 
chlorides, sulfates, phosphates, nitrates, etc. of 
calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium, and 
other cations which form salts. 

b) Theconcentration of dissolved mineral constituents 
in water, commonly expressed in parts per million 
(by mass) or mass per unit volume. 


2.597 Total Irrigation — Irrigation that supplies all 
the water needs of plants. 


2.598 Toxic — Poisonous or harmful to the body 
(ecotoxic relates to damage to the environment). 


2.599 Toxicity — The degree of danger posed by a 
substance to animal or plant life. 


2.600 Toxin — A poisonous substance that can either 
be natural (produced by plants, animals or bacteria) or 
manufactured. 


2.601 Trace Elements — A chemical present in a 
minor amount. 


2.602 Transient Species — A species that migrates 
through a locality without breeding or overwintering. 


2.603 Translucent — Transmitting but diffusing light 
so that objects beyond cannot be clearly seen. 


2.604 Transpiration — The process by which plants 
dissipate water from their leaf and body surfaces in the 
phenomena of growth. 


2.605 Treatment — Any method, technique or process 
including neutralization designed to change the physical, 
chemical or biological character or composition of any 
hazardous waste so as to neutralize such waste or so 
as to recover energy or material resources from the 
waste, or so as to render such waste non hazardous or 
less hazardous; safer to transport, store, dispose off; or 
amendable to recovery, storage or reduction in volume. 


2.606 Treatment (Wastewater) — Domestic sewage 
can be treated to reduce pollutants in three ways; each 
way can be followed by disinfection, if necessary. 


2.607 Tree Limit or Tree Line — The altitude in 
mountains or in the southern or northern latitudes 
where only isolated trees grow and beyond which only 
stunted forms occur. 


2.608 Trickle Irrigation, Drip Irrigation — Irrigation 
by means of pipe (usually plastic) that is perforated, 
porous or filled with emitters, so that water is applied 
at very slow rates to the soil near each irrigated plant. 
Such pipes can be buried or hung from trellises, not 
necessarily along the ground. 


2.609 Trophic — Refers to nutrition. 


2.610 Trophic Level — Place of an animal in the food 
chain. 


2.611 Tsunami — A tsunami is a series of water waves 
caused by the displacement of a large volume of a body 
of water, typically an ocean or a large lake due mainly 
due to earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and other 
underwater explosions. 


23 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.612 Turbidity — Reduction of transparency of 
water due to presence of suspended particles. It is 
evaluated by comparison with standard suspension 
in a standard light intensity and expressed in terms 
of concentration of the material used in standard 
suspension, commonly silica or mg (silica)/litre. 
Alternatively it may also be expressed in terms of mg/l 
or parts per million of the suspended material present in 
the actual water sample. 


2.613 Turnover (Lake) — See overturn. 


2.614 Type Specimen — The original specimen from 
which a description of a new species is made. When the 
exact specimen is not known or is lost, the one selected 
to replace it is called the lectotype or neotype. 


U 


2.615 Unavailable Water — Water in the soil that is 
not available for use by plants because it is held by such 
high tensions by the soil particles. 


2.616 Unconfined Aquifers — An aquifer in which the 
groundwater table is free to rise and fall according to 
hydraulic gradients. 


2.617 Underdrainage — Removal of excess water 
from the soil by a subsurface system of drainage. 


2.618 Undergrowth 


a) Collectively, the shrubs, sprouts, seedlings, 
and sapling trees and all herbaceous plants in a 
forest. 


b) The shrubs, sprouts, seedlings and sapling trees 
and all herbaceous plants in a forest. 


y 


2.619 Vascular — Refers to vessels or ducts that 
conduct fluids in organisms. 


2.620 Vector — An organism that carries a disease, 
parasite, or infection. 


2.621 Vector Control — Process of controlling a 
disease, parasite or infection by control of the carrier. 


2.622 Vertebrate — Animals which have backbones or 
vertebral columns. 


2.623 Virus — Ultramicroscopic, obligate intracellular 
parasites whose genetic material consists of 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid 
(RNA) but never both within the same cell. 


2.624 Volatiles — Material that pass into a gaseous 
state at ordinary temperatures and pressures; substances 
that readily move or have moved through the earth’s 
atmosphere. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


2.625 Virtual Water Content — The virtual water 
content of a product is the freshwater embodied in 
the product, not in real sense, but in virtual sense. It 
refers to the volume of water consumed or polluted 
for producing the product, measured over its full 
production chain. If a nation exports/imports such a 
product, it exports/imports water in virtual form. 


W 
2.626 Waste 


a) Refuse from places of human or animal habitation; 
a solid, liquid, or gaseous by product derived from 
human activities. 


b) Any substance, solid, liquid, or gaseous, for 
which no use can be found by the organisms or 
system that produces it, and for which a method of 
disposal must be devised. 


2.627 Waste Load Allocation Study — A study 
involving monitoring and calculations based on model 
and the monitoring data to determine the total maximum 
daily load for a segment’s stream. 


2.628 Water logging 


a) A phenomenon where water stands near, at, or 
above the land surface causing damage to plant 
roots. 


b) The saturation of soils with water like the soaking 
of agricultural land caused by a rising water table 
or excessive irrigation. It compacts soil, deprives 
roots of oxygen and contributes to salinization. 


2.629 Waste Management — The term describing 
a comprehensive, integrated, and rational system 
approach towards the achievement and maintenance of 
acceptable environmental quality. 


2.630 Waste Treatment — Any process to which 
wastewater or industrial waste is subjected, to make it 
suitable for subsequent use. 


2.631 Waste Water 
a) Water carrying dissolved or suspended solids from 
homes, farms, businesses and industries. 


b) Water derived from a municipal or industrial 
waste treatment plant. 


2.632 Waste Water Reclamation, Waste Water 
Treatment — Processing of wastewater for reuse. 


2.633 Water Pollution — The addition of harmful or 
objectionable material causing an alteration of water 


quality. 


2.634 Water Pollution Level — Degree of pollution of 
the run-off flow, measured as the fraction of the waste 
assimilation capacity of runoff actually consumed. 


24 


A water pollution level of 100 percent means the 
waste assimilation capacity of the runoff flow has been 
fully consumed. 


2.635 Water Quality — The chemical, physical, and 
biological characteristics of water, with respect to its 
suitability for a particular purpose. 


2.636 Water Quality Criteria — Upper limits on 
dissolved or suspended constituents of water as set by 
a regulatory agency that govern the water suitability 
for a designated use. The constituents might include, 
dissolved solids, turbidity, pesticides, micro— organisms 
etc. 


2.637 Water Quality Management — The plan for 
managing the water quality. 


2.638 Water Quality Standards — Specific limits 
assigned to a substance or characteristic ina water which 
must be maintained if the water is to be suitable for the 
use designated for it by the water use classification. 


2.639 Watershed — The entire drainage area that 
contributes water to a system; the line of separation 
between adjacent water catchment areas. 


2.640 Water Table — The upper surface of a zone 
of saturation except where the surface is formed by 
an impervious body. No water table exists where the 
upper surface of a zone of saturation is formed by an 
impermeable body. 


2.641 Weed — A plant considered undesirable, 
unattractive or troublesome, especially growing where 
it is not wanted like in cultivated ground/water body. 


2.642 Wetland 


a) Wetlands are areas of marsh, fen, peat land or 
water whether natural or artificial, permanent or 
temporary, with water that is static or flowing, 
fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine 
water. 


b 


ma 


Anarea of land that has hydric soil and hydrophytic 
vegetation, typically flooded for part of the year 
and forming a transition zone between aquatic and 
terrestrial ecosystem. 


2.643 Wildlife — Living organisms that are not in 
any way artificial or domesticated and which exist in 
natural habitats. Commonly refers to fauna that is, 
mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and insects, 
living in a natural environment. 


2.644 Wildlife Habitat — Suitable upland or wetland 
areas promoting survival of wildlife. 


2.645 Worm Load — The number of parasitic worms 
with which a person is infected. 


Z 


2.646 Zero Emissions — An engine, motor or other 
energy source that does not produce any gas or release 
any harmful gases directly into the environment. 


2.647 Zero Liquid Discharge — Zero Liquid Discharge 
process is the most advanced waste water treatment 
technology that recycle and purify the produced waste 
water. This process is highly advantageous for different 
industries and municipal corporations for effectively 


25 


IS 15832 : 2022 


reusing their waste water and effluent to achieve 
zero liquid discharge. The process is cost effective, 
environment friendly and no effluent or discharge is 
left. 


2.648 Zoology — The study of all aspects of animal 
life. 


2.649 Zooplankton — Free swimming or floating 
animal plankton. 


IS 15832 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Composition of Environmental Assessment and Management of Water Resource Projects 
Sectional Committee WRD 24 


Organization 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
AIIMS Rishikesh, Rishikesh 
Alternate Hydro Energy Centre Indian Institute of 


Technology, Roorkee 
Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 
Central Ground Water Board, New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Cetus Consulting Solution Services Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi 


Forest Survey of India, Dehradun 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


ICAR — Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, 
Kolkata 


India Water Partnership, Gurugram 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
IRG Systems South Asia Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nashik 
Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 
Ministry of Environment & Forests, New Delhi 

Mu Gamma Consultants Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Narmada Control Authority, Indore 


Narmada Water Resources and Water Supply 
Department, Gandhi Nagar 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


National Water Development Agency, New Delhi 


26 


Representative(s) 


SHRI AMRENDRA KUMAR SINGH (Chairman) 
Dr SUREKHA KISHORE 


PROF ARUN KUMAR 
ProF M. K. SINGHAL (Alternate) 


Dr G. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


Suri G. C. PATI 
SRIMATI RUMI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Suri R. M. BHARDWAJ 
SHRI N. C. DURGAPAL (Alternate) 


Suri B. B. SAIKIA 
DEPUTY. DIRECTOR (EM) (Alternate) 


DR AJAY PRADHAN 
DR VIVEK KUMAR SINGH (Alternate I) 
PRINCIPAL SCIENTIST (Alternate II) 


SHRI ABHAY KUMAR SAXENA 


DR K. JAYABALAN 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR GENERAL (Alternate) 


Dr B. K. Das 


DR VEENA KHANDURI 
DR SURENDRA KUMAR MISHRA 


SHRI AMIT JAIN 
SHRI KRISHNA KUMAR (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


DR NANDINI SHARMA 
DR S. KERKETTA (Alternate) 


Dr MOHIT SAXENA 
Deputy DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


DR GIRIJA K. BHARAT 
Ms AvanTI Roy Basu (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI USHA DWIVEDI 
SHRI V. P. KAPADIA 


Dr C. K. JAIN 
DR PRADEEP Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. JAIN 
SHRI MUZAFFAR AHMAD (Alternate) 


Organization 


NHPC Limited, Faridabad 


North Eastern Regional Institute of Water and Land 


Management, Assam, Tezpur 
NTPC Limited, Noida 


Regional Remote Sensing Centre-East Under National 


Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


RS Environlink Technologies Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Soil & Land Use Survey of India, Delhi 


TERI School of Advanced Studies, New Delhi 


THDC (India) Limited, Rishikesh 


University School of Environment Management, GGSIP 


University, Delhi 
Wapcos, Gurugram 


In personal capacity (.A-66, Vrindavan Apartment, 
Plot No. 1, Sector-6, Dwarka, New Delhi ) 


In Personal Capacity ( Jawaharlal Nehru University, 


New Mehrauli Road, New Delhi ) 
In personal capacity, ( Dept of Sociology, 


Maitreyi College, Delhi University South Campus, 


D-104, Anand Niketan, New Delhi ) 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 15832 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI GAURAV KUMAR 
SHRI ASHIS Kumar Das (Alternate 1) 
Ms Sureya (Alternate II) 


PROF AMULYA CH DEBNATH 
DR UzzAL MANI HAZARIKA (Alternate) 


DR VAY PRAKASH 
Dr D. L. NANDESHWAR (Alternate) 


DR S. BANDOPADHYAY 
Dr V. M. CHowpary (Alternate) 


DR ARUN BHASKAR 


SHRIMATI RAJNI TANEJA 
SHRI RAVINDRA KULKARNI (Alternate) 


DR VINAY SHANKAR PRASAD SINHA 
SHRIMATI RANJANA Ray CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


Dr D. L. BHATT 
SHRI SURAJ AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr DEEKSHA KATYAL 
Dr AMAN SHARMA 
SHRI A. STEPHEN LEO (Alternate) 
ER R. K. KHANNA 
DR A. L. RAMANATHAN 
DR M. KAPUR SHANKAR DASS 


SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (WRD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ALOK SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (WRD), BIS 


27 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 24 (10944). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


