IS 15109 ( Part 2 ) :2002 ISO 11269-2:1995

WRanFm

Ww$iW
m2

Wicw

mDrHT?"qFmx=rT

mm&ihm?&iwiwmllHlm

Indian Standard DETERMINATION OF THE EFFECTS OF POLLUTANTS ON SOIL FLORA
PART 2 EFFECTS OF CHEMICALS ON THE EMERGENCE

AND GROWTH OF

HIGHER PLANTS

ICS 13.080

@ BIS 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI March 2002

Price Group 4

Soil

Quality

and Improvement

Sectional

Committee,

FAD 27

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) which is identical with ISO 11269-2:1995 `Soil quality -- Determination of the effects of pollutants on soil flora -- Part 2: Effects of chemicals on the emergence and growth of higher plants' issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Soil Quality and Improvement Sectional Committee and approval of the Food and Agriculture Division Council. In the adopted standard, certain terminology and conventions Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International read as Indian Standard'. Standard' appear are not identical to those used in Indian

referring

to this standard,

they should be

b)

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, is to use' a' point ( . ) as the decimal marker. REFERENCES Standard

the current

practice

CROSS

/nternationa/

Corresponding Indian Standard
Doc : FAD 27 ( 1321 ) Soil quality : Part 1 Guidance on sampling design of sampling programmed

Degree of Equivalence
Identical

ISO 10381-6:1993 Soil quality -- Sampling -- Part 6: Guidance on collection, handling and storage of the soil for the assessment of aerobic microbial processes in the laboratory ISO 10390: Determination 1994 Soil quality of pH --

Doc : FAD 27 ( 1319 ) Soil quality -- Determination of pH

do

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'.

IS 15109 ( Part 2 ) :2002 ISO 11269-2:1995

lndian Standard DETERMINATION OF THE EFFECTS POLLUTANTS ON SOIL FLORA OF

PART 2 EFFECTS OF CHEMICALS ON THE EMERGENCE AND GROWTH OF HIGHER PLANTS

1

scope

ISO 10390:1994,

Soil quality -- Determination

of PH.

This part of ISO 11269 describes a method that is applicable to the determination of possible toxic effects of solid or liquid chemicals incorporated in soil on the emergence and early stages of growth and development of a variety of terrestrial plants. It does not give an indication of damage resulting from direct contact of seedlings with the chemical in the vapour or liquid phase outside the soil environment. The method is also applicable to the comparison of soils of known and unknown quality. Information on how to adapt the method for this purpose is given in annex B.

3

Definitions

For the purposes of this part of ISO 11269, the following definitions apply.

observed effect concen3.1 LOEC (lowest tration): Lowest concentration used in the test at
which the substance is observed to have a significant effect on emergence or growth as compared with the control. All test concentrations above the LOEC shall have a harmful effect equal to or greater than those observed at the LOEC. 3.2 NOEC (no observed effect concentration): Test concentration immediately below the LOEC.

2

Normative references

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of ISO 11269. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part of ISO 11269 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. ISO 10381-6:1993, Soi/ qua/ity -- Samp/ing -- Part 6: Guidance on the collection, handling and storage of soil for the assessment of aerobic microbial processes in the laboratory.

3.3 visual assessment Describes any damage the test species, in terms of stunting, chlorosis necrosis in both treated and control pots.

to or

4

Units
are expressed as

Concentrations of test substances milligrams per kilogram of dry soil.

Emergence is expressed as the percentage of seedlings which emerge compared with the control pots. Effects on growth are expressed as the difference in mass of the aerial parts of the plants between the treated plants and those in the control pots.

1

IS 15109 (Part2) ISO 11269-2:1995

: 2002

5

Principle
Table 1
Category 1 Rye Ryegrass, perennial Rice Oat (common or winter) Wheat, soft Barley (spring or winter) Sorghum, common (or shattercane or durra, white or millet, great) Sweetcorn 2 Secale cereale L. Lolium perenne L. Oryza sativa L. Avena sativa L. Triticum aestivum L. Hordeum vulgare L. Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench Test species

This phytotoxicity test is based on the emergence and early growth response of a variety of terrestrial plant species to various concentrations of a chemical added to the test soil. Seeds of selected species of plants are planted in pots containing soil to which the test chemical has been added and in control pots. The pots are kept under growth conditions for the test species selected. The emergence and mass (dry or fresh basis) of the shoots of the test plants are compared with those of the control plants.

6
6.1

Test plants and materials
Equipment

Zea mays L.

Suitable facilities for carrying out the test include phytotrons, plant growth rooms and greenhouses. The planting containers shall be non-porous plastics or glazed pots with a top internal diameter of between 85 mm and 95 mm. 6.2

Mustard, white Rape [or rape (summer) or rape (winter)] Radish, wild

Sinapis alba f3rassica napus (L.) SSP.napus Raphanus sativus L. Brassica rapa SSP.(DC.) Metzg. Brassica campestris L. var. chinensis Trifolium ornithopodioides (L.) Lactuca sativa L. Lepidium sativum L. Lycopersicon esculentum Miller Phaseolus aureus Roxb.

Testplants
selected for the from each of the Category 1 are are dicotyledon-

Turnip, wild Chinese cabbage Birdsfoot fenugreek Lettuce Cress, garden

A minimum of two species shall be test, comprising at least one species two categories shown in table 1. monocotyledonous and category 2 Ous. 6.3

Soil

Tomato Bean

Either sterile or non-sterile soil may be used. The field-moist soil shall be passed through a sieve, of square mesh 4 mm to 5 mm, to remove coarse fragments. The carbon content shall not exceed 1,5 YO (3 YO organic content). Fine particles (less than 0,02 mm) shall not exceed 20 % of dry mass. The pH determined in accordance with ISO 10390 shall be between 5 and 7,5. If the soil is prepared specifically for the purposes of the test and this involves the addition of nutrients, necessa~ precautions shall be taken to ensure that these nutrients do not interfere with the test substance (e.g. by allowing a sufficiently long period between preparation of the soil and running the test). It is recommended that sand should be added NOTE 1 to bring the organic or fine particle content of natural soils to within the approved limits. If non-sterile soil is used, it shall be stored in accordance with ISO 10381-6.

6.4

Soil treatment

Any method ensuring an even distribution of the chemical throughout tie soil may be used, excluding the use of surfactants. Recommended methods for incorporation chemical are described in annex A. of the

6.5

Recommended reference substance

NOTE 2 It is recommended that a reference substance be tested to demonstrate the uniformity of the laboratory test conditions. Sodium trichloroacetate IS the recommended reference substance. A reference test should be carried out if any major changes in operating procedures
are introduced, for example, change of phytotron/growth

IS 15109 ( Part 2 ) :2002 ISO 11269-2:1995

roomlgreenhouse; change of soil or change of watering regime, etc.

test no sooner than 14 days and no later than 21 days after 50 YO of the control seedlings have emerged.
NOTES

7 7.1

Methods Experimental design
of
4 The following ommended conditions and procedures are rec-

Pots containing control soil and each concentration chemical shall be replicated four times. 7.1.1 Preliminary test

a)

Testing facility: greenhouse.

phytotron,

plant

growth

room

or

b)

Temperature: to meet the normal growing of the species selected. Lighting: 16 h/day.

conditions

The preliminary test is used to find the range of concentrations affecting soil quality. The chemical is incorporated in the soil according to annex A at concentrations of O (control), 1 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg, 100 mg/kg, 1 000 mg/kg, of oven-dried soil. 7.1.2 Final test

c)

7000 lx minimum light intensity in the wavelength suitable for photosynthesis. Therefore, in a greenhouse, additional lighting may be necessary during times of low natural light intensity. d) Soil moisture content: daily adjustment of the moisture content of the soil is necessary to maintain a predetermined percentage water holding capacity e.g. 80 `XO for Avena sativa and 60 Y. for Brassica rapa. A sufficient check can be made by weighing several randomly selected pots daily, Anaerobic conditions should be avoided and noted in the test report. Records: temperature a greenhouse, and humidity, especially if using

The concentrations shall be selected in a geometric series (preferably with a factor not exceeding two) to give an estimate of the lowest concentration that induces reduced emergence and growth (LOEC). Substances need not be tested at concentrations of higher than 1 000 mg/kg of oven-dried soil.
NOTE 3 A geometric series is a series of quantities in which each term is obtained by multiplying the preceding term by some constant factor termed the common ratio, e.g. 1, 2, 4, 8, 16.

e)

f)

7.2

Preparation

of the pots

When testing volatile substances, interaction between batches should be avoided by using separate phytotrons or by specialized separation. If this is not possible, a note to this effect should be included in the test report.

Fill the pots with the prepared soil and obtain the required water holding capacity, expressed as a percentage, by adding deionized water. Place the pots on individual saucers and arrange them in a randomized block design.

5 A limit test may be performed under the conditions of this test in order to demonstrate that the LOEC is beyond the limit concentration.

7.5

Validity criteria

7.3

Preparation

of the seeds

Emergence shall be sufficient to provide five healthy seedlings per pot in the control.

Plant 20 uniform undressed seeds of the selected species from the same source either immediately after incorporation of the chemical or up to 24 h later. The seeds shall not be imbibed before planting. 7,4

8 8.1

Assessment

of results

Data presentation

Growing

conditions

The temperature, humidity and light conditions shall maintaining be such that they are suitable for "normal" growth of all selected species for at least the duration of the test period. After the emergence assessment within each pot, thin the seedlings to give a total of five evenly spaced representative specimens of the plants in the pots: Terminate the

Present the data in tabular form, recording the number of plants that emerge per replicate and the total mass of shoots of seedlings per replicate at harvest; either the fresh mass weighed immediately after cutting the shoots above the soil surface or the dry mass after oven drying at 70 `C to 80 `C for 16 h.
NOTE 6 dry mass. To minimize the trial error it is preferable to use

3

IS 15109 (Part 2):2002 ISO 11269-2:1995

8.2

Calculations

-- general soil composition (including additional nutrients, etc.), -- type and intensity of supplementary

details

of

For each replicate in each treatment, calculate the percentage emergence compared with the mean emergence of the control pots. Repeat this percentage calculation for the mean total mass (fresh or dry) at harvest per replicate, and the mean mass (fresh or dry) at harvest per plant per replicate. d) NOTE 7
The use of an appropriate statistical analysis to highlight significant differences between the control and the test concentrations is recommended. In cases of low homogeneity of replicate results, non-parametric methods are recommended e.g. the U-test by Mann and Whitney.

lighting, of {

-- justification of the selected test substance;

concentrations

all operating details not specified ISO 11269, and any occurrences affected the results;

in this part of liable to have

e)

method used to incorporate the chemical in the soil and the form of the substance dissolved, i.e. emulsion or suspension; date of planting and harvest; for each replicate: -- number of seeds emerging, -- number of plants remaining at harvest,

8.3

Expression

of results
f) in milligrams per g)

Results a) and b) shall be expressed kilogram of oven-dried soil. a)

The highest concentration tested showing no reduction in growth/emergence compared to the control (NOEC). The lowest concentration tested showing a reduction in growth/emergence compared to the control (LOEC). NOTE 8 Wherever possible, growth response data should also be represented graphically.

b)

-- total mass (fresh or dry) at harvest; h) for each treatment, including the control: per replicate

-- mean number of seeds emerging and standard deviation, . mean vest, number of plants

9

Test report
information:

per replicate

at har-

The test report shall include the following a) b) a reference to this part of ISO 11269;

-- mean total mass (fresh or dry) per replicate at harvest and standard deviation, -- mean mass (fresh or dry) at hawest per rep!icate and standard deviation; i) description ceptable); of visual damage (photographs per plant

information about the test plant species (Linnaean classification, variety, source); description -- pot size, j) -- mass of soil per pot, -- type of environment -- temperature, 1) -- humidity, -- lighting conditions, (greenhouse, etc.), k) of the test conditions including:

c)

are ac-

table of percentage mean emergence for each concentration; highest concentration causing no effect est concentration causing effects;

and mass

and low-

a test report on the performance of the reference compound shall be completed periodically and if the test conditions have changed.

4

IS 15109 ( Part 2 ) :2002 1S0 11269-2:1995

Annex A (informative) Details of methods for incorporation
A.1 Recommended method for mixing chemicalsthat are soluble in water with the soil
Dissolve the chemical in water and mix the soil. Ensure that the volume of water not exceed the water holding capacity same quantity of water is used for each and for each concentration of chemical. directly with added does and that the batch of soil

A.5

Problems due to evaporation

When the added chemical may evaporate at temperatures used when mixing or during the test, it may be necessa~ to analyse the soil at the end of the test to confirm that the soil contains the required amount of the test chemical.

A.2 Recommended method for mixing chemicals with low volubility in water with the soil
Dissolve the chemical in water and mix with dry sand. A rotating drum is useful for this. Mix the treated sand with soil. If large quantities of water, i.e. those likely to exceed the required water holding capacity of the soil are required, the sand can be dried in the rotating drum, with a current of air, before mixing with the soil.

A.6 Recommended method for the measurement of the water-holding capacity of the soil (until an appropriate has been prepared) International Standard
Fill a tube of known volume, with the base closed by a sheet of filter paper, with the soil and cap the tube. Submerge the tube in a water bath at room temperature (with the water level beneath the top of the tube) for 2 h. Then lower the tube below the water level for a further 1 h. Place the tube in a tray of wet, finely ground, quartz sand to drain for 2 h. Weigh the sample and d~ to constant mass at 105 `C. The water-holding age of dry mass. capacity is calculated as a percent-

A.3 Recommendation for mixing chemicalsthat are soluble in a solvent with the soil
Dissolve the chemical in a suitable volatile solvent and mix with sand. Dry the sand in a stream of air while continuing to mix (e.g. while rotating the drum). Mix the treated sand with soil. Ensure that the same quantity of solvent and of sand is used for all treatments, including the control. The soil with added sand should be allowed to equilibrate for 24 h.

Wc =
where %

%-:-%

~loo

is the water-saturated soil mass mass + filter paper mass;

+ tube

mt md

is the tare (tube mass + filter paper mass); is the dry mass of soil (mass of tube with dry soil and filter paper less the tare mass of the tube and filter paper).

A.4 Recommended methods of mixing solid chemicals with the soil
The dry soil sufficient for all replicates is suitable mixing device (e.g. end-over-end the required amount of solid chemical is lowing the mixing period, the soil is added placed in a shaker) and added. Folto the pots.

5

IS 15109 ( Part 2 ) :2002 ISO 11269-2:1995

Annex B (informative) Adaptation of the method for the comparison of soils of known and unknown quality
class as the soil under test and the soil with conlamination of an unknown type are each replicated four times. The control soil "is used to confirm the reproducibility of the test carried out on different occasions, whilst the extents of emergence growth in the other two soils are compared statistically. If appropriate, further sets of four pots with mixtures of the unknown soil and sieved control soil may be filled to prepare diluted samples containing various concentrations of substances in the soil with contamination of an unknown type. Mixtures of contaminated soil and control soil may be prepared to provide dilutions of the unknown chemicals in the soil for further testing. This may be necessa~ when lack of emergence and growth is likely to occur on the unknown soil.

B.1

Principle

The quality of an unknown soil is estimated by determining the emergence and early growth response of a variety of terrestrial plant species in a soil of unknown quality and two control soils. Statistically significant differences in emergence and growth of seedlings grown in the test medium compared to the controls are indicative of an effect. B.2

Soil

The soil under test and the control soil of the same textural class but of a quality that is known to be good should be prepared and stored under the same conditions as the second control soil used as a standard (recommendations for a suitable standard are given in 6.3). Precise matching of soil properties is not critical to the test: most plants are sufficiently robust to be relatively unaffected by small differences in soil properties.

B.4

Expression of the results

B.3

Experimental design

Any reduction of emergence or growth of plants in the test soil should be expressed as a percentage of the data obtained from the plants grown on the control soil, of which the quality is known to be good, of similar textural class. If the test soil was diluted, the lowest dilution factor showing an effect significantly different from the control should be reported.

Effects on emergence and growth are assessed in three growth media; a control soil which has the properties specified in 6.3, a soil of which the quality is known to be good preferably of the same textural

6

IS 15109 ( Part 2 ) :2002 ISO 11269-2:1995

Annex C (informative) Bibliography
[1] ISO 11465:1993, Soil qua/ity Gravimetric method. -- Determination of dry matter and water content on a mass basis --

7

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Zndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations, Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed
from

Doc : No. FAD 27 ( 1037 ).
Issued Since Publication

Amendments

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern: 1/14 C, I. T. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Northern: SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern: C. I. T. Campus,, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 { 3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printing
Press, Khurja, India

