RAT AAF IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Na Vatersay Tq SUT ENTUAT — 
Uta afa 
AM 1 strareta, MORA sit 
aten FAST carrera 
( haqa FRAT ) 


Liquefied Petroleum Gas Storage 
Installations — Code of Practice 


Part 1 Residential, Commercial and 
Industrial Cylinder Installations 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 23.020.35; 77.160.30 


@ BIS 2018 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 8 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional 
Council. 

This standard was first published in 1971 and subsequently revised in 2000 and 2013. In this revision the following 
major changes have been made: 


a) Cylinder location, cylinder manifolds, pressure regulators and piping, tubes and fittings have been 
modified; 
b) Anew Annex A has been added to include requirements of liquid off take valve multi cylinder installation; 
and 
c) Other technical changes for better implementation of this standard. 
While implementing this standard, compliance with statutory regulations shall be ensured. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS STORAGE 
INSTALLATIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 1 RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND 
INDUSTRIAL CYLINDER INSTALLATIONS 


(Third Revision ) 
ABGOFE IS No Title 
1.1 This standard (Part 1) lays down the requirements 4576: 1999 Liquefied petroleum gases — 


for the installations of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) 
cylinders for vapour and/or liquid withdrawal from 
cylinders, the associated piping and equipment in 
residential, commercial and industrial premises, where 
cylinder manifold is provided for installation capacity 
up to 8000 kg. 


1.2 The specific requirements for installation of liquid 
withdrawal from cylinders are covered in Annex A. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicted below: 


IS No Title 
383 : 2016 Coarse and fine aggregate for 
concrete — Specification (third 
revision ) 
1239 (Part 1) Steel tubes, tubulars and 


: 2004 other wrought steel fittings — 
Specification: Part 1 Steel tubes 


(sixth revision) 


2379 : 1990 Pipelines — Identification — 


Colour ( first revision) 


2501 : 1995 Solid drawn copper tubes for 
general engineering purposes — 


Specification ( third revision ) 


2878 : 2004 Fire extinguisher, carbon dioxide 
type (portable and trolley mounted) 


— Specification (third revision ) 


3043 : 1987 Code of practice for earthing (first 


revision ) 


3601 : 2006 Steel tubes for mechanical and 
general engineering purposes — 


Specification (second revision) 


Specification (second revision ) 


6044 (Part 2) Code of practice for liquefied 
: 2001 petroleum gas storage installations: 
Part 2 Commercial, industrial and 
domestic bulk storage installations 

(first revision ) 
7241: 1981 Glossary of terms used in gas 


cylinder technology ( first revision ) 


9573 (Part 1) Rubber hose for liquefied petroleum 


: 2017 gas (LPG) — Specification: Part 1 
Industrial application (fourth 
revision ) 


9573 (Part 2) 
: 2017 


Rubber hose for liquefied petroleum 
gas (LPG) — Specification: 
Part 2 Domestic and commercial 
application ( fourth revision) 


Portable fire extinguishers — 
Performance and construction — 
Specification 


15683 : 2006 


16484 : 2017 Liquid off-take valve fitting to gas 
cylinders or tanks (mobile or static) 
for liquid petroleum gas (LPG) — 


Specification 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 7241, and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Installation — A designated premises in an 
establishment where the complete multi cylinder system 
comprising of cylinder, valve fittings, piping, manifold, 
vapourisers, pressure regulating station etc, is installed. 


3.2 Header and Manifold — A header is the main pipe 
of an installation, that serves as a central connection 
for other manifolds. Manifold is a branched pipeline 
of header provided with suitable pipe fittings for 
individual cylinders. 


3.3 Distribution/Distributing Company — The 
company which is in the field of marketing LPG and is 
owner of the cylinders. 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


3.4 Statutory Authority — The Authority designated 
under Gas Cylinder Rules, 2016 for approving LPG 
cylinders, valves and regulators. 


3.5 Authorized Agency — Person or agency or a 
corporate body authorized by distribution company 
to execute the job of designing, erection, testing and 
maintenance of multi cylinder installation. 


4 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 


4.1 The system shall be installed by an authorized 
agency. The Authorized Agency shall have trained 
manpower that is well versed with the characteristics 
of LPG and is trained in good practice of handling, 
installing, testing and maintaining installations. 


4.2 The system shall be installed in line with the 
requirements of this standard shall conform to the 
layout approved by the distributing company or by any 
other statute as applicable. 


4.3 The maintenance, inspection, testing, repair, etc, of 
the system shall be carried out by agencies authorized 
by the distribution company. 


4.4 Cylinders and valve fittings shall comply with 
the relevant Indian standard and shall be approved 
by the Statutory Authority. All other equipment such 
as pressure regulators and other installation material 
shall conform to the relevant Indian Standard or any 
other equivalent international standards. For LPG lines, 
threaded joints shall not be provided except for special 
fittings like excess flow check valve, thermal relief 
valves (TRV), pressure gauges etc. 


4.5 Point of Delivery 


Location of cylinder bank and point of delivery of 
LPG cylinders shall be acceptable to the distributing 


company. Proper motor able approach to the point 
of delivery shall be provided for ease in delivery/ 
receipt of filled/empty cylinders through vehicles. 
The approach is also required to provide free access 
to fire tender and firefighting personnel in case of any 
emergency. 


The access route to the point of delivery must be firm 
and compact even in wet conditions and adequate space 
must be provided for parking of cylinder truck making 
delivery of cylinders. 


The distance from point of delivery to cylinder 
bank should not be more than 75 m and the path 
should firm and compact even in wet condition 
and minimum 600 mm wide for easy movement of 
cylinder trolley. 


4.6 The colour coding of LPG liquid and vapour lines 
shall be as per IS 2379. The colour coding shall be 
clearly stated on an instruction board provided in the 
shed and also at the main office. The direction of flow 
shall be indicated on the pipeline with black colour 
paint. 


4.7 Fire extinguishers of powder type (see IS 15683) 
or carbon dioxide (see IS 2878) type or stored pressure 
Type A, B, C (see IS 15683) shall be provided in 
places where LPG cylinder installations are situated 
and shall be located near such installations. The 
installations with multi manifolds above 2000 kg 
and up to 4000 kg shall have either water sprinkler 
system or gas monitoring system with local as well 
as remote alarm system. Two buckets filled with 
sand and two with water shall be provided nearby. 
Installation above 4000 kg to 8000 kg shall have both 
water sprinkler as well as gas monitoring system. In 
addition, for installations above 2000 kg, following 
shall be applicable (the number, type, sizes of the fire 
extinguishers): 


SINO. Capacity of LPG Number of Fire Type Capacity 
Installations Extinguisher in kg 

1) For installations with LPG 2 Dry powder 10 
40 kg to 200 kg 

ii) For installations with LPG 3 Dry powder 10 
more than 200 kg 
and up to 320 kg 

iii) For installations with LPG 4 Dry powder 10 
more than 320 kg 
and up to 1000 kg 

iv) For installations with LPG 2 numbers for each Dry powder 10 


more than 1 000 kg 


additional 1000 kg or 


a fraction thereof. 


NOTE — For electrical installation 1 No. carbon dioxide (CO,) (4.5 kg capacity) fire extinguisher shall be provided. 


4.7.1 Gas Monitoring System (GMS) Configuration 


4.7.1.1 For LPG installations from 2000 kg and up to 
4000 kg 


One sensor at each corner of shed shall be provided. 
The sensors shall be provided within 3 m from nearest 
cylinder of manifold. 


4.7.1.2 For LPG installations beyond 4000 kg and up 
to 8000 kg 


In addition to 4.7.1.1, two additional sensors shall be 
provided. The additional two sensors shall be located in 
middle of each of the longer sides of the shed. 


4.8 Safety cap shall be put on all cylinders when not in 
use, whether empty or filled with gas. Storage of filled 
cylinders shall be as per statutory requirement. 


4.9 The installation shall have caution signs such as 
‘LPG’, ‘DANGER’, “HIGHLY INFLAMMABLE 
GAS’, ‘NO SMOKING’, etc, painted in luminous red 
paint, outside at a prominent place. 


5 CYLINDER LOCATION 


5.1 Stationary Installations 


5.1.1 Stationary installation not exceeding 50 kg 
of LPG may be installed indoor on any floor. It is 
recommended to have a minimum floor area of 5 m? for 
such an installation. 


5.1.2 Stationary installations each not exceeding 50 
kg of LPG may be installed indoors on any floor and 
within the same workspace provided the minimum 
distance between two such installations is 3 m. The 
proportion of such installations to floor area is one 
installation per 5 m? and the aggregate quantity of gas 
of all such installations does not exceed 200 kg. 


5.1.3 Stationary installation not exceeding 100 kg of 
LPG may be installed indoor on any floor provided the 
floor area for such an installation is not less than 12 m°. 


5.1.4 Stationary installations each not exceeding 100 kg 
of LPG may be installed indoor on any floor and within 
the same workspace provided the minimum distance 
between two such installations is 3 m. The proportion 
of such installations to floor area is one installation 
per 12 m? and the aggregate quantity of gas of all such 
installations does not exceed 200 kg. 


5.1.5 Stationary installation not exceeding 400 kg of 
LPG may be installed indoors in an enclosed section 
of a building or a room reserved exclusively for this 
purpose and ventilated at low level directly to the 
outside air. 


5.1.6 Stationary installations above 400 kg (200 kg in 
case provision as given in 5.1.5 is not possible) but 
not exceeding 1 000 kg shall be installed outdoors on 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


ground floor level only. A minimum distance of 3 m 
shall be maintained between such installation and public 
place, roadways, other surroundings and any building 
other than the one where LPG from the installation is 
intended to be used. The installation shall be protected 
from excessive weathering by sun, rain, etc. and from 
tampering by unauthorized persons. A lean-to roof with 
expanded metal on angle-iron framework on the sides 
are considered suitable for this purpose. In any case, 
adequate ventilation at ground level to the outside air 
shall be provided. 


5.1.7 If the installation is more than 1000 kg, 
installations in multiples of 1000 kg with manifold, 
safety devices, change over mechanism may be 
provided with minimum inter distance of 2 m from 
all sides. Total number of such installations shall not 
exceed 8 including standby installation. 


5.1.8 Cylinders shall be installed upright with the 
valves upper most. 


5.1.9 Cylinder containing more than 20 kg of gas shall 
not be located on floors above ground level. 


5.1.10 Cylinders shall be located on a concrete or brick 
floor, preferably raised in case of outdoor installations. 


5.1.11 In order to prevent the hazardous collection of 
gas, cylinders shall be placed at least 1 m away from 
culverts, depressions, or openings leading to below 
ground level compartment and drains. 


5.1.12 Cylinders which have safety relief valves 
or similar devices incorporated in them shall be so 
positioned so that if the relief device operates, escaping 
gas is not hazardous. 


5.1.13 Cylinder installation for commercial/industrial/ 
residential complexes, etc, or at any public place shall 
meet the following requirements: 


a) For commercial and industrial cylinder installation 
for any public places like mall, buildings, 
industries, hotels, etc, the sum total of all stationery 
installations inside the building shall not exceed 
400 kg of LPG in any case. In case sum total of net 
weight of all the cylinders installed indoors exceed 
400 kg provision for outdoor installations shall be 
made. For installations where the sum total is less 
than 400 kg of LPG provisions of 5.1.2 to 5.1.5 
shall apply. 


b 


== 


For commercial and industrial cylinder installation 
for any public place, industry, etc, if the net weight 
of all the cylinders installed is more than 400 kg 
but less than 1000 kg, then the installation shall 
be provided outdoors in line with 5.1.6. The 
cylinder installation shall be provided in a covered 
industrial shed but open from all sides for proper 
ventilation. In case the installed capacity increases 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


more than 1000 kg, then the installation shall be 
provided in line with 5.1.7. 


c 


— 


Cylinders shall not be installed at a place where 
they are likely to cause obstruction, suffer damage 
or be exposed to conditions likely to affect safety; 


d 


wa 


Cylinders installation shall not be located along 
the drive way. Under unavoidable conditions, 
minimum distance of 3 m from drive way shall 
be maintained. Brick masonry (minimum 230 mm 
thick)/concrete (minimum 100 mm thick) walls 
or metallic Shields/barriers (minimum 1.63 mm 
sheet) and of minimum 2 m height shall be erected 
between drive way and cylinder installation for 
the safety and security of the installation; 


e 


wa 


Cylinders shall be located on a concrete or brick 
floor that is firm, at level, smooth, drained in case 
of outdoor installation; and 
f) The cylinder shall be installed in upright position 
with the valve pointing upwards and away from 
any combustible materials. 


NOTE — No installation shall be provided at basement or 
below ground level. 


5.2 Portable Installations 


When portability of cylinders is necessary, the 
following requirements shall be fulfilled: 


a) The sum total of capacity of the cylinders 
connected to each manifold shall not exceed 100 
kg of LPG. The total quantity of gas thus installed 
in a workspace shall not exceed 200 kg. 


b 


wm 


If cylinders are mounted on a trolley, the trolley 
shall be stable. Where necessary, the cylinders 
shall be secured to prevent them from falling. 


c 


wa 


The regulator shall be connected directly to the 
cylinder valve or to a manifold which shall be 
connected to the cylinder valves by means of 
rigid connections to give adequate support to the 
regulator. The only exception to this requirement 
is where cylinders are mounted on a trolley and 
the manifold is rigidly supported on the trolley. In 
such a case flexible or semi-flexible connections 
may be used between the cylinder valves and the 
manifold but not between the manifold and the 
regulator. 

d) Anytime the total quantity of gas at portable 
installations shall be in proportion to the floor 
area as specified in 5.1.1 to 5.1.7. 

e) At any time the provision at 5.1.1 to 5.1.13 shall 

be ensured for all installations. 


6 CYLINDER MANIFOLDS 


6.1 All materials, fittings, etc, used in cylinder manifold 
systems shall comply with the statutory provisions 
or relevant Indian Standards. In absence of any such 


provisions or Indian Standards, equivalent international 
standards shall be followed. 


6.2 The individual component parts of manifolds, 
that is, piping, fittings, flexible hoses etc, which 
are subject to cylinder pressure shall be capable of 
withstanding a test pressure of 25 kgf/cm? or 1.5 
times the developed pressure at 65°C, whichever 
is more, without bursting. Rubber hoses used shall 
confirm to IS 9573 (Part 1). 


6.3 Where cylinder installations are made up with 
service and reserve batteries of cylinders, suitable 
change-over devices or valves shall be incorporated in 
the manifold header to prevent undue escape of the gas 
when cylinders are changed. 


6.4 In case PRV, manifold headers and automatic 
change-over devices are connected to cylinder by semi- 
flexible connectors, these shall be rigidly supported. 
Copper tube pigtails are considered to be semi-flexible 
for this purpose. 


6.5 It is recommended that joints in manifold headers 
which do not have to be broken in normal use should 
be welded or brazed using a material which shall have 
a melting point of at least 540°C. 


6.6 All joints between manifold headers and cylinder 
connectors shall be readily accessible. 


6.7 All joints in the manifold should be welded 
(except for valve fixation) and be easily accessible for 
inspection/repairs, etc. 


6.8 Each manifold arm shall be fabricated in such a 
way that minimum joints are provided. Only seamless 
pipes are recommended for use in manifolds. There 
should be a minimum gap of 300 mm between the 
manifold and valve protection ring of the LPG 
cylinders. 


6.9 The cylinders connected to a manifold shall 
be safely spaced for easy and safe replacement 
of cylinder when empty. A minimum distance of 
400 mm shall be maintained between two nipples 
provided on the manifold for connecting the cylinders 
to the manifold. In case of staggered arrangement 
of cylinders, a minimum distance of 150 mm shall 
be maintained between two nipples provided on the 
manifold. 


In case, the diameter of the cylinder is higher than 
400 mm, then the minimum distance between the two 
nipples shall be diameter of the cylinder plus 100 mm. 


6.10 A pressure gauge of minimum dial size of 10 cm 
shall be provided in the manifold to indicate the gas 
pressure in the manifold. The pressure gauge shall be 
suitable for a pressure range 0 to 30 kgf/cm’. 


7 PRESSURE REGULATING DEVICE (PRV) 


7.1 PRV and other devices used to control the gas shall 
comply with the relevant Indian Standards. In absence 
of any such provisions or Indian Standards, equivalent 
international standards shall be followed. 


7.2 If the PRV is fitted with a relief valve, care should be 
taken in positioning the regulator to avoid unnecessary 
hazards, if the relief valve functions. 


7.3 PRV and other control devices shall be adequately 
supported. 


7.4 The PRV installed shall be accessible for servicing 
and they shall be protected against any physical 
damage. 


7.5 Venting 


An independent vent to the outside of the building, 
sized in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions/distributing company’s guidelines will be 
provided, where the location of a PRV is such that a 
ruptured diaphragm shall cause a hazard. Where more 
than one PRV is installed, then each PRV shall have 
separate vent to the outside. The vent shall be designed 
to prevent the entry of water, insects, or other foreign 
material that could block the passage. The height of the 
vent shall be 1.5 m above the eaves end of the shed 
or from the bottom of the roof. All vents connected to 
outlet of SRV, TRV etc., shall not be vented to the gas 
equipment flue or exhaust system. 


7.6 Parallel PRV 


Where uninterrupted supply is required two PRV, in 
parallel along with non-return valves, double isolation 
valves may be installed. Both PRV may be set at 
slightly different pressures so that one of the PRV shall 
act as a stand by. 


7.7 Identification 


When multiple PRV are installed in a building/ 
system, then they shall be marked by a metal tag or 
other permanent means indicating the building or 
part of the building/gas utilizing equipment being 
supplied. 


7.8 Over Pressure Protection Devices 


Over pressure shut-off (OPSO) protection required 
to protect the downstream appliances from excessive 
pressure or the failure of the PRV shall be provided. 


7.9 Under Pressure Protection Devices 


Under pressure shut-off (UPSO) protection shall be 
provided in PRV near gas utilizing appliances. This 
shall shut-off gas flow in case of low pressure in the 
downstream gas supply. 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


8 PIPING, TUBING AND 
(EXCLUDING MANIFOLDS) 


FITTINGS 


All piping, tubing and fittings shall comply with the 
relevant Indian Standards. In absence of any such 
provisions or Indian Standards, equivalent international 
standard shall be followed. 


8.1 Copper Tube 


Solid drawn copper tubes of outside diameter 10 mm, 
12 mm or 20 mm, as suitable, conforming to IS 2501, 
shall be used. The wall thickness of the tubes shall be 
minimum 1 mm and suitable for withstanding 25 kgf/ 
cm? pressure. 


8.2 Steel Tubes 


Cold drawn seamless, electric welded, cold drawn 
electric resistance welded (ERW) or oxyacetylene 
welded tubes of suitable sizes conforming to IS 3601 
shall be used. 


8.3 Mild Steel Tubes 


Hot finished seamless, or electric resistance welded 
(ERW) mild steel tubes of suitable size, conforming to 
medium or heavy class of IS 1239 (Part 1), or any other 
steel tube approved by statutory authority shall be used. 


8.4 The material used for flexible tubing and hose 
which are not subjected to full cylinder pressure shall 
be conforming to IS 9573 (Part 2). 


8.5 The material used for shut-off valves and similar 
equipment which are not subjected to full cylinder 
pressure shall be such that, they shall withstand one and 
a half times the maximum working pressure to which 
they may be subjected in normal use. 


8.6 Cast iron and aluminium fittings shall not be used. 


8.7 In the case of flange connections, the flanges shall 
be machined and should preferably have raised face. 
Metallic/spiral wound metallic gasket of minimum 
thickness of 1.5 mm is preferable for use. 


8.8 For any kind of movable appliance or burner, 
flexible connectors shall be used and they shall conform 
to IS 9573 (Part 2). 


8.9 Emergency Shut-off Valve 


A quarter turn emergency shut-off valve (ESOV) 
designed to work on LPG, shall only be used form a 
inline for shut-off operation. These are quick shut off 
valves like ball/plug valves. They should be installed 
as close as practicable to the point where gas enters the 
premises to which adequate access shall be provided. 
If it is installed inside the building it should be close to 
the entry point. In open position, the lever/key of the 
ESOV shall be in parallel to the axis of the pipeline on 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


which it is installed. An emergency operating procedure 
shall be distinctly displayed near the ESOV. 


8.10 Flanges 


In case of flange connections, the flanges shall be 
machined and should preferably have raised face. For 
LPG lines subjected to full cylinder pressure of LPG 
liquid lines the minimum flange rating shall be 300 
class rating. 


8.11 Flange Gaskets 


The acceptable materials for gaskets are metal or spiral 
wound metallic gaskets. Whenever flange connection is 
opened, gasket shall be replaced. For liquid lines, only 
spiral wound metallic gaskets shall be used. 


8.12 Used Pipes, Fittings 


Pipe, fittings, valves or other materials can be re-used 
subject to conforming all the requirements prescribed 
in this standard. 


9 I NSTALLATION OF PIPING AND VALVES 
9.1 Flexible Hose 


9.1.1 Installations on which flexible hose is used shall 
satisfy the following conditions: 


a) Cylinder and the appliances connected to it shall 
be in the same room/shed; 


b) Length of hose shall be kept as short as possible 
and should normally not exceed 2 m; and 


c) Appliances connected shall be of portable type 
and not mounted in a fixed position. 


9.1.2 Flexible hose shall not be extended from one room 
or verandah or one space to another and, therefore, 
shall not be passed through doors, windows, walls, 
partitions, ceilings, or floors. 


9.1.3 Flexible hose shall be accessible for easy 
inspection and shall not be connected from hole in 
walls, cupboards, cabinets and other obstructions. 


9.1.4 Flexible hose shall not be used in conditions 
where ambient temperature exceeds 52°C. 


9.1.5 Flexible hose shall be so installed that it is not 
twisted, looped or kinked and is not subjected to any 
external pressure. 


9.2 Appliances which are rigidly fixed in position shall 
be connected by means of rigid piping. 


9.3 Appliances which are portable, if connected to rigid 
piping, shall be connected through flexible or semi 
flexible connections. 


9.4 Cylinder Pigtails 


The hose used for connecting the cylinders with 
manifold as well as at any part of the piping which is 


subjected to full cylinder pressure shall be conforming 
to IS 9573 (Part 1). The free nut at the end of pig tail 
shall be of non-corrosive metal. 


9.5 Adaptor 


If an adaptor is used to connect the pigtails to the 
cylinder valves (self-closing) of the LPG cylinders, 
then it shall have non-return valve (NRV). 


9.6 Pressure Gauge 


A pressure gauge with a range of 0-5 kgf/cm? shall be 
provided in the pipeline after the first stage PRV. The 
joint at which pressure gauge is fixed shall be thoroughly 
checked for leakage. Milibar pressure gauges (0-500 
mili-bar) shall be provided in the pipelines after second 
stage PRV. 


9.7 Excess Flow Check Valve 


The excess flow check valve shall be provided on each 
arm of the manifold to ensure stoppage of LPG supplies 
in case of heavy leakage/damage to the pipeline in the 
downstream facilities. The capacity of the excess flow 
check valve shall be +10/-20 percent of designed flow rate. 


9.8 Piping 


9.8.1 Piping (internally and externally) shall be free of 
cutting burrs, loose scales, dirt, dust and other foreign 
matter before the installation. 


9.8.2 Wherever possible, joints should not be placed 
beneath ground level in inaccessible places, confined 
places (for example cellars), air or ventilating ducts, 
space under flooring or lift shafts. 


9.8.3 If joints have to be used in piping beneath ground 
level in inaccessible places or confined places, they 
shall be welded or brazed to minimize the risk of 
leakage which may lead to collection of hazardous gas. 


9.8.4 Where welded or brazed joints are used, they shall 
be of adequate mechanical strength, and the material 
used for welding or brazing shall have a minimum 
melting point of 540°C. 


9.8.5 Joints other than welded or brazed shall be readily 
accessible. 


9.8.6 Piping shall be so located or protected so as to 
avoid extremes of temperature which might give rise to 
condensation or cracking of the gas. 


9.8.7 Provision shall be made to avoid damage to the 
piping from its expansion, contraction and vibration 
and by settlement of the building by which it is carried. 


9.8.8 Piping shall be protected against corrosive 
atmospheres and materials. 


9.8.9 As far as possible, concealed piping shall 
be avoided. If concealed piping is used, it shall be 


protected against inadvertent damage, such as from 
nails and knocks, by its location, type of material used 
or sheathing. 


9.8.10 Piping shall not be run in or through an air or 
ventilating duct, chimney, flue or lift shaft. 


9.8.11 Piping up to an outside diameter of 12 mm shall 
be supported at intervals of about 50 cm by means of 
pipe saddles or clamps in a way to avoid sagging and 
shifting. For larger diameter pipes, suitable longer 
supporting intervals may be used. 


9.8.12 It is recommended that if the pipes are run 
along a surface of a structure, the supports should be 
so designed that the joints are sufficiently clear of the 
surface to permit the use of tools without damage to 
the surface. 


9.8.13 It is recommended that when installing pipes 
along a surface of a structure, the installation is done 
in such a way that moisture is not trapped between the 
surface and the pipeline. 


9.8.14 It is recommended that the piping passing 
through walls should be protected by a covering sleeve. 
If it is necessary to pack the space between the piping 
and the sleeve, a moisture-proof material which does 
not corrode the piping shall be used. 


9.8.15 The distance between gas piping and electrical 
wiring system shall be at least 600 mm and, where 
necessary; they shall be securely fixed to prevent 
contact due to movement. The gas piping should run 
below the electrical wiring. 


9.8.16 The distance between the gas piping and steam 
piping, if running parallel, shall be at least 150 mm. 
The gas piping should preferably run below the steam 
piping. 


9.9 Suitable line shut-off valves shall be fitted for each 
appliance or burner. 


9.10 A main valve shall be fitted in the piping as near as 
possible to its point of entry into building with proper 
sealing arrangement. 


9.11 It is recommended that the number of fittings 
used in an installation should be kept to a minimum 
in order to reduce the risk of gas leakage. As far as 
possible, straight lengths of piping should be used. 
Where there are bends in the pipeline, these should 
have a radius of at least five times the diameter of the 


pipe. 


9.12 The open ends of piping and fittings (with the 
exception of terminal taps or valves in regular use) 
shall always be made gas-tight by means of either an 
appropriate terminal fitting or a plug, welded or brazed 
in position. Welding or brazing material shall have a 
melting point of at least 540°C. 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


9.13 The distribution pipeline in residential buildings 
shall always be laid on walls with proper cleat supports/ 
hanged from the roofs with adequate clearance from 
wall surface so that surface preparation and painting 
will be easier. The piping shall be anchored to prevent 
undue 


strains on connected equipment and shall not be 
supported by other piping. The spacing of supports in 
gas piping installations shall not be greater than 1.8 m 
for 12 mm/15 mm dia pipe, 2.4 m for 20 mm/25mm dia 
pipe, 3 m for 40 mm dia pipe and above. 


9.14 The pipeline connecting the storage shed to 
the main installation should preferably be brought 
overhead without creating any hazard for the people/ 
vehicles passing through the same. In case of any 
foreseen hazard the pipeline can be laid underground 
in a trench filled up with sand of grading zone IV as 
per IS 383 having MS/RCC cover. The underground 
pipe shall be provided with adequate protection like 
wrapping coating, etc, for protection against corrosion. 


9.15 The single stage pipeline network (down the range 
of first stage PRV) from the installation onward should 
work at pressure very close to the working pressure of 
the appliances. Under no circumstances, the pressure 
of the pipelines shall exceed 1.5 kg/cm’. This should 
be obtained by double stage regulation of pressure, if 
necessary. 


10 LEAKAGE TESTING 


10.1 Before any system of gas piping is finally put 
into service, it shall be carefully tested as per A-8.3 of 
Annex A to ensure that it is gas-tight. Where any part of 
the system is to been closed or concealed, the test shall 
precede the work of closing in. 


10.2 Naked flames shall never be used for checking 
gas-tightness of the installations. 


10.3 It is recommended that the location of leaks should 
be detected by the use of soap solution or similar 
materials. 


10.4 Defective pipes or fittings shall be replaced and 
shall not be repaired in-situ. 


10.5 Electronic gas leak detectors duly approved by 
statutory authority along with control panel for giving 
audio/visual alarms shall be used for leak detection 
especially in commercial/industrial installations and 
in domestic/residential housing complexes, where 
combined capacity of all installations is exceeding 
1000 kg or where reticulated system has been provided. 


11 MAINTENANCE 


11.1 The distribution company shall design an elaborate 
work permit format for the maintenance work which 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


shall be used by the service provider for carrying out 
any maintenance work. It shall be the responsibility 
of the service provider to make necessary inspection 
in line with the work permit before commencement of 
the work. 


11.2 The user shall get the inspection of the cylinder 
manifold, distribution piping, safety system, equipment, 
valves fittings, auto change over system, gas monitoring 
system, hydranthoses, etc, regularly as perthe periodicity 
defined by the Distributing Company. However, 
minimum periodicity of inspection shall be once a year 
and the records have to be maintained. The inspection 
shall include checking the health, performance of all 
equipment like valves, PRV, auto change over system 
for proper operation (wherever installed), underground 
piping, etc. Work permit system developed by the LPG 
distribution company shall be followed. 


11.3 The repair, maintenance of any defective piping, 
manifold or any other equipment has to be carried out 
by agencies approved by the LPG distribution company 
or distributing company itself. 


11.4 Pneumatic testing and hydro testing of piping shall 
be done once in five years by agencies approved by 
distribution company. 


11.5 All PRV shall be throttled once a year for its 
accurate throttled pressure and safe operation. 


11.6 The pigtails shall be checked visually every time 
when empty cylinder is replaced. 


11.7 Hydro test of pig tails and flexible LPG hoses shall 
be carried out on yearly basis. 


11.8 The distribution company shall conduct a safety 
awareness camp for the consumers particularly for 
residential and commercial consumers. 


11.9 A fire hydrant line wherever provided, shall be 
in the vicinity of the installation and a hydrant point 
with hoses to take care of any exigency or emergency 
situation. 


12 INSTRUCTIONS TO CONSUMERS 


12.1 Consumers shall be instructed by the distribution 
company on the following aspects: 


a) Operation of the whole system; 

b) How to recognize gas leaks; 

c) Action to be taken in case of leakage; 
d) Action to be taken in case of fire; and 


e) Action to be taken in case of damage to, or failure 
of, any part of the installation. 


12.2 Part of the Installation working at cylinder pressure 
to be tested at 25 kgf/cm?’ or 1.5 times the developed 
pressure at 65°C, whichever is more, once in a year. 


12.3 Downstream part of the installation after PRV to 
be tested atone and a half times the maximum outlet 
pressure that may be given by an adjustable PRV or 
2 kgf/cm’, whichever is more, once in a year 


12.4 Portions of installation not subjected to cylinder 
pressure but carrying gas at pressure more than 30 gf/ 
cm? to be tested at 2.5 times the working pressure for 
2 min, once in a year 


12.5 Portions of installation subjected to gas pressure of 
30 gf/cm? or less, to be tested at 2.5 times the working 
pressure for 2 min, once in a year. 
12.6 Handling and Use 
a) Cylinders shall be adequately supported during 
handling and shall not be dropped or should not 
be allowed to fall upon one another. 
b) Trolleys and cradles of adequate strength shall as 
far as possible be used when moving the cylinders. 
c) Use of high powered magnets for lifting the 
cylinders and chains for slinging the cylinders 
shall not be permitted. 
d) No lubricant should be used on the valve or any 
other fitting on the cylinder. 
e) Open flames, lights, lighting of fires, welding and 
smoking shall be prohibited in close proximity. 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 1.2 ) 


REQUIREMENTS OF LIQUID OFF TAKE VALVE 
MULTI CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


A-1 GENERAL 


a) The liquid withdrawal or liquid off take (LOT) 
valve (see IS 16484) multi cylinder installation 
shall meet the requirements given in IS 6044 
(Part 2) and this standard. 


b) The cylinder and valve used for liquid off take 
shall be approved by statutory authority. 


c) For any additional cylinders which are to be 
kept loose, the customer can store them within 
stipulations as provided for in Gas Cylinders 
Rules, 2016. 


The manifold and the LOT valve installation 
shall be certified by the officer of the distributing 
company or third party inspection agency 
recognized by distribution company prior to 
commissioning. 


d 


wn 


A-2 LAYOUT 


a) The site for LPG cylinder manifold shall be located 
away from the furnace, any source radiating 
heat like steam pipes and boilers, etc, to prevent 
cylinders from getting affected due to radiant heat. 


b 


x 


The area where this installation is provided shall: 


1) be a segregated area with all round fencing as 
per 5.1.13c) and plain cement flooring/paver 
block in the open space inside the fenced 
area. The plain cement flooring / paver block 
shall be raised by minimum 100 mm from the 
natural ground; and 


2 


w 


have mastic flooring inside the shed, raised by 
minimum 100 mm from plain cement flooring/ 
paver block. The cylinders shall be stored in 
dry, cool and well ventilated shed. 


c 


wa 


The cylinder installation area and the area where 
vaporizer is installed shall be a covered shed with 
sides open for ventilation. Flammable materials 
like wood and plastic shall not be stored in this 
area. Flame proof (FLP) light fitting approved by 
the Statutory Authority for lighting with armoured 
aluminium/copper PVC extruded cable with fire 
retardant properties conforming to relevant Indian 
Standards shall be provided. 


The cylinder shall be installed in upright position 
with the valve pointing upwards. 


d 


wn 


e) The cylinder installation should be so located so 
as to facilitate the following: 
1) Full and empty cylinders can be easily 
changed, disconnected and removed quickly at 
the time of normal operation or emergency. 


2) It is easy to operate and maintain the valve 
provided between the manifold and the 
cylinder. 

3 


4 


Manifold maintenance is easier. 


= == 


Cylinders shall not be installed below ground 
level in cellars or basement or at a place where 
they are likely to cause obstruction, suffer 
damage or be exposed to conditions likely to 
affect safety. 


f) Since LPG is heavier than air, proper ventilation 
shall be provided at floor level open to atmosphere. 


g) Main shut-off valve (Plug or ball-type) on the 
pipeline emerging out of cylinder installation area 
shall be located in such a manner that it just falls 
outside the cylinder installation area and shall be 
easily accessible at all times. At the point of entry 
of each work place, the line shall have a quick 
shut-off valve (plug or ball-type). 


h 


x 


Wherever the pipelines are passing through walls, 
slacks shall be provided so that the pipeline does 
not get a braised. 

A minimum distance of 1 m shall be maintained 
between the cylinder installation and the surface 
water drain, if any. 


wa 


j 


A-3 INSTALLATION 


Following provisions, in addition to requirements given 
in IS 6044 (Part 2), and this standard are to be made for 
LOT valve installation: 


a) A safety valve, thermal relief valve, excess flow 
check valve and non-return valve shall be provided 
on liquid line as shown in Fig. 1 (for illustration). 
SRVs may be inter-connected through a common 
vent flow which shall be at a height of minimum 
1.5 m above eaves end of the shed. 


The safety relief valves shall be as per IS 12992 
(Part 1) and have adequate capacity. 


[oy 
wm 


le 
wm 


The vent of the safety valve/thermal relief valve 
shall be at a height of minimum 1.5 m above eaves 
end of the shed. It shall be adequately supported. 
A thermal relief valve is required to be provided 
between two isolation valves in the liquid pipeline. 


d 


x 


The name plate shall be provided on the piping 
manifold assembly containing the following 
information: 


1) Name of the owner; 
2) Type of installation; 
3) Installation date; 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


4) Date of test and test pressure, in kg/cm’; and 
5) Manufacturers identification symbol. 
e 


wm 


The typical installation layout, piping and distance 
is provided in Fig. 1 to Fig. 6 as directional 
guidelines for installation up to 8000 kg capacity. 
Any modifications and changes shall be as 
accepted by the distribution company. 


A-4 PIPE AND PIPE FITTINGS FOR PIPING 
MANIFOLD AND HEADER UP TO PRV 


a) The pipe fittings used shall be forged fittings of 
SCH 80, as per specifications approved by the 
distributing company. 

b) All fittings of less than 50 NB shall also be forged 
fittings of 300 class rating. 


c) The pipe used for liquid line that is upto vapourizer 
shall be seamless steel pipes as per specifications 
accepted by distribution company. Pipes of below 
50 NB shall be of SCH 80 and pipes of 50 NB 
and above shall be of SCH 40. Copper tubing 
manifolds shall not be allowed. The pipe used 
for vapour service (after vapouriser) shall be as 
specified in 8. 


0000000000 
0000000000 


MANIFOLD ARM 
ees VALVE 


FLEXIBLE HOSE PIPE 
OT ADAPTORS 


SAFETY RELIEF VALVES 


“LOT CYLINDERS 
PRESSURE SWITCH 


LOT CYLINDER 
CONNECTIONS 


E 
say! MIN. 2 H~ VAI —MIN 2 M- 
A T T Fi i: 


T TOWARDS 
TION POINT 


d) No screwed connection shall be allowed. In case, 
due to any reason screwed connection is used, the 
pipe used shall be of SCH 80 only. 


e) The valves, sight flow indicator, thermal relief 
valve, NRV, etc, shall be of 300 class rating. Only 
cast steel ball valves with fire safe feature shall be 
used. 


f) All flanges used shall be of carbon steel, SA105, 
300 class rating with dimensional standard 
as per specifications approved by distribution 
company. No screwed connections should 
be provided except for the special fitting as 
specified in 4.4. 


g) All weld joints provided on the line shall be 
accessible and shall be hydro-tested for 25 kgf/cm? 
pressure. The welding shall be fusion welding. 


h) Only metallic/spiral wound metallic gaskets shall 
be used for liquid line that is up to vapourizer and 
also down stream of vapourizer. 


j) Each arm of the manifold shall have a control 
valve. To each arm of the cylinder manifold, 
cylinders shall be connected through a pigtail. 
A check valve and an isolation valve shall be 


0000000000 
0000000000 


20x20 LPG LOT CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


PRESSURE REGULATING STATION - PRV 


- SRV Š 
PRESSURE GAUGE VAPORISERS Vi & v2 
ISOLATION VALVES LIQUID LPG PIPELINE 


PS 7 VAPOR LPG PIPELINE 


TEMPERATURE GAUGES SIGHT FLOW INDICATOR 


Y TYPE STRAINER SRV VENT LINE 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION FOR INSTALLATION AND PIPING LAYOUT 
FOR 20 x 20 Lec Lot CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


i 


= lo 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION FOR INSTALLATION LAYOUT AND DISTANCE 
FOR 20 x 20 LrG Lot CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


al 


o 


sev 19 — HIN. 2 M- MIN. 2 M— VAP—— MIN 2 M-—— HIN, 2 H- 
Lo == pd) K. 


L 


u 
a ..... ..... .... 
= 


KAIA AA AAAA) 
(sI TsIsIsIsIsIsIsYS] 


| 
ea 


w 


z 


Ls 


MANIFOLD ARM PRESSURE REGULATING STATION - PRV 
SOLATION VALVE 
— V VAPORISERS - wie ve 

LEXIBLE HOSE PIPE 

OT ADAPTORS LIQUID LPG PIPELINE - 
“LOT CYLINDERS 

VAPOR LPG PIPELINE = Ñ 

I 


L1 

2 
iS 
Y YP STRAINER 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION FOR INSTALLATION AND PIPING LAYOUT 
FOR 40 x 40 LPG Lot CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


11 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


| 


40x40 LPG LOT CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


FIG. 4 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION FOR INSTALLATION LAYOUT 
AND DISTANCE FOR 40 x 40 LrG Lot CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


pm MIN. 3 M- —MIN. 19 M— MIN 3 M- 
T 7 7 


i a Ol o e a T wa ew HN 2:42] HIN. 2 H-———4IN 2 Ne 
> 


sed Sant O E ART LIU) kM (Os i E ee! an 


ma 


M2 
0000000000 


ML 
2000000000 
000000000 
0000000000 
000000000 
000000000 


0000000000 
0000000000 


0000000000 
0000000000 
MI 
2000000000 
‘000000000 
0000000000 
000000000 
0000000000 


80x80 LPG LOT CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


MANIFOLD ARM SAFETY RELIEF VALVES = SRV & PRESSURE REGULATING STATION - 
MUA VALVE PRESSURE GAUGE PI ° 
a = f 
Smears a ur 
> LIQUID LPG PIPELINE 
LOT CYLINDERS 
PRESSURE SWITCH = PS 7 VAPOR LPG PIPELINE = L2 
LOT CYLINDER TEMPERATURE GAUGES e TI SIGHT FLOW INDICATOR x SFI 
Y TYPE STRAINER N SRV VENT LINE - 13 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION FOR INSTALLATION AND PIPING LAYOUT 
FOR 80 x 80 LPG Lot CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


12 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


k 


m 


— 


— 


80x80 LPG LOT CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


Fic. 6 TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION FOR INSTALLATION LAYOUT AND DISTANCE 
FOR 80 x 80 LPG Lot CYLINDER INSTALLATION 


provided with each cylinder pigtail connection 
to protect the system from back flow of LPG in 
event of any flexible pigtail rupture. The distance 
between two pigtail connections on manifold shall 
be minimum 300 mm. 


Cylinder manifold is subjected to full cylinder 
pressure at all times. The fabrication/welding 
of the manifold should be of the best available 
quality. All such manifolds shall be designed 
to a pressure equivalent to the maximum 
developed cylinder pressure (assessed at 65°C) 
of LPG that is 16.87 kgf/cm’. The test pressure 
should be 1.5 times the maximum pressure 
(assessed at 65°C) that is 25 kgf/cm’ for a 
period of 2 min. 


Painting — Piping manifolds and the supporting 
structure shall be painted with two coats of red 
oxide primer and with two coats of first quality 
synthetic enamel paint. The colour of the LPG 
lines shall be as per IS 2379. 


A-5 VAPOURIZER 


a) The vapourizer used shall be approved by statutory 


authority. Vapourizers may be low pressure steam 
heated, hot water heated, electrically heated type 


or heater less. In case electrical vapourizer is used, 
it shall have FLP connections. 


b) A minimum distance of 2 m of vapourizer from 


cylinder installation shall be maintained. 


c) The vapourizers shall be provided with suitable 


automatic means to prevent liquid LPG passing 
from the vapourizer to gas discharge piping. 


A-6 FLEXIBLE HOSE 


a) The hoses connecting cylinder with manifold shall 


b 


we 


be in line with IS 6044 (Part 2), and shall be used 
for connecting the cylinder to manifold. The hoses 
shall be as per IS 9573 (Part 1) The hoses shall 
be hydro tested at 25 kg/cm? pressure once in six 
months. 

The design, material and construction of hoses 
shall be suitable for grade of LPG. Currently, it 
is envisaged that LPG as per IS 4576, shall be 
supplied. 


c) The flexible hoses should have electrical continuity 


of 0.75 Q/m. 


d) All flexible hoses used before first stage PRV 


and after second stage PRV shall be tested at 
3.5 MPa (35 kgf/cm’) during initial manufacture 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


and should be designed to withstand a minimum 
bursting pressure off our times the maximum 
working pressure. 


e 


wa 


The flexible hose/pigtail shall be in the same room 
and its length shall not exceed 2 m. Flexible hose/ 
pigtail shall not pass through doors, windows, 
walls, ceiling (or) floors. The pigtails shall be 
accessible for inspection. 


f) In case the ambient temperature exceeds 52°C, 
flexible hose shall not be used. 


g) The flexible hose shall not be twisted, looped or 
kinked. It should not be subject to any external 
pressure. 


h) The hose shall be tested half yearly and proper 
records of testing, etc, shall be maintained. 


A-8 SAFETY AND INSPECTION 


a) The consumer has to be trained to use the LOT 
cylinder installation. A trained personnel who has 
minimum qualification as diploma in engineering 
or a science graduate at supervisory level shall be 
responsible for the installation from customer’s 
end. However for daily operation of connecting 
and disconnecting the cylinders and for other 
operation a trained ITI technician is preferred. 


b 


= 


Distributing company shall assist the consumer in 
organizing regular safety programmes, drills, etc, 
and will also provide regular training on use of 
LPG. 

Empty cylinders shall be placed in a safe place and 
proper safety cap shall be provided on the valve so 
as to ensure that no leakage takes place. 


c 


wa 


A-8.1 Maintenance of Cylinder Manifold 


Maintenance of the cylinders manifold and the 
equipments shall be undertaken regularly and the 
periodicity of the maintenance shall be as under: 


A-8.1.1 Periodicity of Checks and Maintenance 


a) Valves 


1) All the valves that is safety valves, TRV shall 
be checked once a year. 


2) All the other valves should be checked once 
a year for free and full range of movement, 
positive shut off, mechanical damage, etc. 

b) Piping and manifold 

1) It should be checked once a year visually for 
corrosion, any physical damage. All supports 
of manifold should also be checked for any 
corrosion, etc. 


2) The manifold should be internally cleaned once 
a year and should be free from contaminants. 

3) The strainer provided on the manifold should 
be cleaned at least once in a month. 


4) Hydro testing of manifold and pneumatic 
testing of pipelines should be done once in 
5 years. 


c) Vapourizer shall be checked as per maintenance 
schedule. 

d) The burners shall be regularly cleaned. 

e) Pigtails shall be checked every time empty cylinder 
is replaced by a filled cylinder and replaced in case 
of any physical damage. 

f) The PRV should be checked once in a year for 
correct settings and performance as well as for 
corrosion and mechanical damage. 

g) The pressure gauges should be calibrated once in a 
year and proper records should be maintained. The 
dial of the gauge should be clearly visible. 


A-8.2 Inspection 


a) All the manifold installations shall be checked 
once in six months by the authorized agency or 
the LPG distributing company and record to be 
maintained at the installation location. 


b 


== 


The installation shall be checked once in a year by 
the sales officer of the LPG distributing company 
or by their authorized third party inspection 
agency. 

c 


— 


The area of LOT installation should be free of any 
uncontrolled weed growth and accumulation of 
waste products. 


A-8.3 Leak Testing 


a) It shall be ensured that the manifold provided 
has been subjected to the hydro test pressure 
of 25 kgf/cm? atleast for a minimum period of 
30 min and inspected by the authorized agency or 
the distribution company. 


b) It shall be ensured that the fire extinguishers and 
sand buckets are provided and installations are 
adequately protected from weather conditions. 


c) The gas piping system should be carefully tested 
for ensuring gas tightness. 

d) Naked flames shall never be used for checking gas 
tightness of the installation. 

e) Leak detection should be done using soap solution 
or similar material. 


f) All defective pipes should be replaced and no 
repair should be carried out in-situ. 


A-8.4 Warning Signals 


a) Smoking or naked flames shall not be permitted 
within the Safety Zones of the installation. *NO 
SMOKING’, ‘HIGHLY INFLAMMABLEGAS’, 
‘DANGER’, boards shall be provided. 


b) Sign boards, instruction boards for ‘DOs’ and 
‘DONTs’ shall be provided. 


c) Instruction board with emergency telephone 
numbers and important telephone numbers shall 
be provided. 


d) Instruction board prohibiting unauthorized entry 
shall be provided. 


e) It shall be ensured that all signage are in place and 
are legible. 


A-8.5 Source of Leakages 

a) Cylinders: 
1) Welded seams; 
2) The cylinder/valve connection bung joint; and 
3) Cylinder valve. 

b) Check Leakage from PRV at: 
1) Near the joints; 
2) In the PRV itself; 


3) Check leakage from the piping and manifold 
PRV; 


A-8.6 Action to be Taken when Leakage is Detected 


a) Leakage of Cylinder — Any cylinder which 
develops a leak should be promptly removed to 
an isolated open place away from any source of 
ignition. 

b) In case of leakages of piping, appliances or 
pressure regulators, close the valves and isolate 
the part, disconnect the cylinders and place the 


15 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


safety cap on the valve of the cylinder. Never 
repair the appliance or any other part of system 


when in use. 

c) The matter should be immediately reported 
to the in charge and the officer of distribution 
company. 

A-9 EARTHING AND ELECTRICAL 
PROTECTION 


a) The cylinder manifold installation, the vapourizer 
installation and the downstream installation shall 
be earthed at two places. Two earth pits as per 
IS 3043, shall be provided and the earthing 
resistance should not exceed 10. 


b) The system should be tested for electrical 
continuity and resistance to earth. 


c) The earthing resistance shall be checked twice a 
year once during the summer season and once 
during winter and records for same shall be 
maintained. 

d) Only flame proof electrical fittings approved 

by statutory authority shall be used in the area 

segregated for LOT installation. These shall be 
earthed at two points: 


1) Only flame proof hand torches shall be used; 
and 


2) Copper jumpers shall be provided at flange. 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


ANNEX B 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, 
Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 


New Delhi 
Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 

GSPC Gas Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 

Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 

INOX India Ltd, Vadodara 

International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 
Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 
Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 

LINDE India Ltd, Kolkata 

LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 
Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 

Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 
Sakha Engineers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
(SIAM), New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri N. T. SHAHU (Chairman) 
SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANISH PATEL 
Suri K. R. SAHASRANAM (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
SHRI VED PRAKASH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


SHRI Sumit Roy 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate I) 
Suir H. D. KuATRI (Alternate II) 


Suri RAVI RAVIPALLI 
Suri P. N. KANTH 


SHRI DEBASHISH CHAKRAVERTY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
SHRI SANJAY Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri UswAL BHANDARI 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK V. PATWARDHAN 
SHRI DEEPAK V. ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
SHRI NIKHILE K. GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI. S. GOPALAIAH (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL K. DEY 
Suri S. B. Borma (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
SHRI PRADEEP (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. THAKUR 
Suri A. K. BERA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MURALI 
SHRI ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. KOHLI 
SHRI R. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. GANDHI 
Suri AMIT Kumar (Alternate) 


16 


Organization 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, RDCIS, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 

The Automotive Research Association of India, 
Pune 

Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


Representative(s) 
SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr ANJANA Deva (Alternate) 
Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


SHRI PALLIPALAYAM. GOWRISHANKAR 
SHRI SHAILLENDRA DEWANGAN (Alternate) 
SHRI Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. Behani (Alternate) 
Dr S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RAIRIKAR (Alternate) 
SHRI A. K. JAIN 
Suri P. K. MATHUR (Alternate) 


Suri S. J. VISPUTE 
Suri A. S. LATKE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (MED) 


[Representing Director General ( Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Low Pressure Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16:2 


Organization 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturer Association, 


Delhi 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Hindalco Industries Ltd, Mumbai 
Ideal Engineers Hyderabad Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Pvt Ltd Gwalior 
LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 
Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 
Petroleum And Explosive Safety Organization, 


Nagpur 
Sahuwala Cylinders (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. N. Kantu (Convenor) 
SHRI DEBASHISH CHAKRAVERTY (Alternate) 


SHRI ANISH PATEL 
Suri K. R. SAHASRANAM (Alternate) 


SHRI Sumit Roy 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
SHRI SUDHIR JAIN (Alternate ) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri DEEPAK KABRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
SHRI SANJAY Gupta (Alternate) 
SHRI SANJAY Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK K. NIGAM 
Suri. MANU K. NIGAM (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. THAKUR 
Suri A. K. Bera (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
SHRI K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH 


Suri P. K. Gupta 


17 


IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 


Organization Representative(s) 
Shri Shakti Cylinders Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad Suri D. V. RAJASEKHAR 
SHRI. Younus GEELANI (Alternate) 
Steel Authority of India Ltd, Salem/Delhi SHRI M. PRABAKARAN 
Suri N. K. VIJAYAVARGIA (Alternate) 
Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 
The Supreme Industries Ltd, Halol, Gujarat SHRI PRADEEP KAMAT 
Tata Iron and Steel Company Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI SUDIPTO SARKAR 
Dr A. N. BHAGAT (Alternate) 
Time Technoplast Ltd, Mumbai SHRI NAVEEN KUMAR JAIN 


SHRI VENKATESHWARAN N. (Alternate) 


18 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (11682). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


