**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11609 (1986) : Technical supply conditions for pneumatic 
tools [PGD 8: Pneumatic Tools] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



U DC 622*23-05: 621 -942: 006-87 IS: 11609*1986 




( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 
Indian Standard 

TECHNICAL SUPPLY CONDITIONS 
FOR PNEUMATIC TOOLS 



1. Scope — Covers the technical supply conditions for percussive as well as rotary type of pneumatic 
tools, used in the mining, construction and manufacturing industries. 

2. Terminology — The terms and definitions as laid down in 18:5727-1981 'Glossary of terms 
relating to compressors and exhausters {first revision)' along with the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Ma/7i/facriyrer — The firm manufacturing the tools. The manufacturer may or may not be the 
supplier. 

2.2 Pi/rc/7a5er-- The firm/person purchasing the tools. The purchaser shall also cover the person or 
persons authorized in writing by the purchaser to act on his behalf for inspection of the tools. 

2.3 Supplier— The firm supplying the machine. The supplier may or may not be the manufacturer of 
the tools. 

3. General Requirements 

3.1 Pneumatic tools and accessories supplied along with the tools shall be designed for the required 
duty as specified in the relevant Indian Standards and/or as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 

3.2 If specifically requested by user/consumer, the endurance testing of tool as specified in the 
standard, shall be carried out in the presence of his representative. 

3.3 The manufacturer/supplier shall ensure that the accessories fitted, if any, on the tool shall 
not obstruct the operation of operator. 

3.4 The tools shall be safe to operate at an inlet pressure of 10 percent above the rated pressure for 
a maximum period of one hour. 

4. Enquiry, Proposal and Guarantee 
4.1 Enquiry 

4.1.1 The purchaser shall complete the data as given in Appendix A to the extent possible and 
applicable. Purchaser shall also specify any known abnormal conditions of working. In addition, the 
purchaser may specify any requirements deemed essential by him. 

4,1.2 A reference to following Indian Standards will help the purchaser in framing his specification of 
tools and its accessories: 

For Percussive Tools 

IS : 3559-1966 Specification for pneumatic concrete breakers 

IS : 7605-1976 Specification for pneumatic chippers 

IS : 7978-1984 Specification for portable pneumatic rivet cutters 

IS : 7979-1984 Specification for portable pneumatic riveting hammers 

IS : 9419-1980 Specif ication^or pusher legs 

IS : 11 183-1984 Specification for portable pneumatic rammers 

For Rotary Tools 

IS : 5441-1985 Specification for pneumatic portable drilling machine 
IS : 7157-1974 Specification for portable pneumatic grinding machines 
IS : 8067-1976 Specification for pneumatic impact wrenches 
IS : 9707-1981 Specification for pneumatic screw drivers and nut runners 
IS : 9828-1981 Specification for portable pneumatic sanders 



Adopted 20 March 1986 



O September 1986, IS! 



Gr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAMAK BHAVAN. 8 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 11609-1986 

4.2 Proposals 

4.2.1 The supplier shall include a data sheet in his proposal according to Appendix B. Any other 
details required by the purchaser shall also be included. 

4.2.2 The proposal shall include a specific statement that tool is in strict compliance with the 
purchaser's speciifications or a specific list of deviation shall be attached. 

4.2.3 The supplier shall include a list of recommended spare parts along with his proposal for two 
years of normal operation. 

4.2.4. Unless otherwise specifically agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser, the condi- 
tions of commissioning will be as per suppliers' standard conditions. 

4.3 Guarantee 

4.3.1 Supplier/manufacturer shall guarantee the tools for a period of six months from the date of 
supply. The quick wearing parts shall not be covered under the guarantee. 

^.Z,2 Performance Guarantee — The tools shall be guaranted for satisfactory performance at the 
specified operating conditions by the supplier. The supplier/manufacturer shall specify the declared 
values of the parameters as required in accordance with the relevant Indian Standards. They shall also 
certify having complied with specifications. Such a certificate shall be supplied along with the 
despatch documents. 

4.3.3 Workmanship Guarantee — Supplier/manufacturer shall guarantee the tool against the defects 
which despite proper use appear there in and arise from defective or improper materials or poor or 
faulty workmanship. Unless specifically agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser, the 
supplier's normal terms and conditions shall apply for the purpose of this standard. 

5. Material 

5.1 Materials for the construction of pneumatic tools shall be of uniform quality and shall be free 
from defects and imperfections that might affect the serviceablity of the finished products. 

The materials selected shall be such as to meet the requirements of performance, quality and the 
endurance tests given in the relevant Indian Standards. 

6. Manual and Documents — Each pneumatic tool shall be supplied with the following: 

a) Instruction manual, 

b) Guarantee certificate, and 

c) Special maintenance tools. 

6.1 Instruction Manual — Instruction manual shall contain the foHowing informations; 

a) General operating and maintenance instructions; 

b) An exploded/cross-sectional view of the tools showing the sequence of the assembly; 

c) List of parts with their respective part numbers; 

d) Quick wearing parts duly identified; 

e) Defects and faults likely to occur durirrg x)peration, and their remedies; 

f) Lubricating instructions along with the recommended grades of lubricants; and 

g) Any other specific instructions which the manufacturer feels necessary for proper operation 
and maintenace of the tools. 

7. Marking — Each tool shall be fixed/punched with a suitable name plate having complete data as 
given in relevant Indian Standards, 

8. Packing — Each pneumatic tool shall be suitably packed to avoid any damage during transit. If 
agreed to between the manufacturer/supplier and the purchaser, the packing case shall be in accord- 
ance with IS : 1503-1979 'Specification for wooden packing cases {second revision)*. 



18:11609-1986 

APPENDIX A 

{Clause 4.1.1 ) 

DATA SHEET CONTAINING PURCHASER'S SPECIFICATIONS 

A-1. General 

a) Free air consumption in m^'h and applicable tolerances 

b) Recommended operating pressure with limitations or range if it is different from tine relevant 
Indian Standards. 

c) The tool designation as given in relevant Indian Standard. 
A-2. Operating Conditions 

a) Site details 

b) Ambient temperature variations 

c) Application 

A-3. Type of Control Preferred 

A-4. Scope of Supply 

A-5. Inspection Procedure and Inspection Agency 



APPENDIX B 

( C/ause 4.2.1 ) 

DATA SHEET TO BE ENCLOSED BY THE SUPPLIER 

B 1. Type of Tool Offered 

a) Tool designation as per relevant Indian Standard, 

b) Type of control. 

B-2. Performance Data 

a) Air consumption in m^/h and tolerances, 

b) Operating pressure range, if different than specified in relevant Indian Standard. 

c) Power developed in kW and speed with applicable tolerances, or pellot reduction value and 
tolerances. 

B"3. inspection Procedure 

a) Component Inspection 

b) Final assembly test 

B-4. Scope of supply 

B-5. Deviations, if any, from the Purchaser's Specification 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been provided by leading manufacturers of the 
pneumatic tools and its users. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



