iI

,"

_`T;. _;,`

,i

cG%'

~~&_AFFIRMELI 1996"
lS:7204(PutI~-1974

Indian Standard
PART I TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 1996 )

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

SPECIFICATION FOR STABILIZED POWER SUPPLIES, DC OUTPUT

( Second Reprint JANUARY

UDC

621.311.6.078.3:001.4

II [I I< 15 A
MANAK

IT 0 1; INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MAI<G

ISI.IAVAN, 0 I~AIIADUI~ SlIAll NliW 1)1:1~111 110002

Gr 5

October 1974

ls:7204(Put1~-1974

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR STABILIZED POWER SUPPLIES, DC OUTPUT
PART I TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

Power Convertors Sectisnal Committee, ETDC 31
Chairman Smu A. K. K~OSLA Members SHRI M. S. SR~WMA Representing

Heavy Electricals ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal

MURTHY( Alfemafr to Shri A. K. Khosla ) AnmrtoNaL CHIEPENOINEER Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs, Jabalpur
DIRECTOR OF TELEORAPHS (X ) ( Alternate )

DIVISION ENGINEER TELEQRAPHS ( AUTO) ( Altemde ) SHRI R. S. ARORA Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspeetion Wing ), New Delhi SHRIV. S. KRIPALANI ( Alfemak J . SHRI P. K. BANERJEB *Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi &-IRI S. L. BHATIA( Alfemafe ) DRR. L, CHOUDHURY Usha RectiGer Corporation ( India ) Ltd, Faridabad SHRI S. C. CHOIIDHERY ( Ahmafe )
DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELEC) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELEC3 ) ( Altcrnats ) DIRECTOR ( TRANSM!SSION ) Central Water & Power Commission ( Power Wing),

New Delhi
De~un DIRECTOR ( TRANWISSION ) ( Affemufe ) SHRF M. W. DUKLE E. Ruttonsha Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. S. PATWARDHAN ( Alfemale ) SHRIT. K. GHOSE The Calcutta Electric Supply

Corporation

I.td,

SHRIP. K. BHATTACHARIEE I Alfemate 1 ' SHRI M. S. JAYASIYHA India; Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore Slat S. T. PILLAI( Altemrtc) SHRI S. M. KHER Hind Rectifiers Limited, Bombay SXRI A. B. KALBA~ (~!crnafe )

Calcutta

(cmtiaafsdoapo~2)
B) Copyrighf 1974

OF INDIAN STANDARDS 7%~ ublicatiora is protected under the fmkm Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproBuction in whole or in part by any meansexcept with written permission of the publkher shall bo &rmed to ba an infrio@mmt of copyright under the said Act.

BUREAU

(t2mtinued fiam$age1)
Members
LT-CohK. &jWWillg

V. KUDVA

SHR~ S. K. MANX ( Allcrnafc) The Fertilizers Corporation of India Ltd, Nangal SHSU S. K. MAL~K SHR~GURU PARTAP ( Altcmal~ ) Elvoc Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRI R. MAnMOHAN DR J. K. C~OWDHUXY( Allcrnutc ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay Saax T. K. MIS~A SHRI A. V. CHXNDARMR ( Altcr~lc ) Directorate General of Technical Development, New SHRI K. N. UASWAMY Delhi
SHRI G. L. KESWANI ( Altcrnatc )

Directorate (WI)

of Standardization,

Ministry

of Defen~c

SHRI Rrsnt PRATAP

SHRI D. N. SEN SHRI R. K. Dwrr ( Alternate ) Hindustan Aluminium Corporation Ltd, Renukoot SHRI M. S. SURANA NGEF Ltd, Bangalorc SHRXM. B. TAMBAKAD SHRI A. N. TANDON ( Altcrnatc ) Director General, IS1 (&-&?cia Mdm ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director ( Elcc tech) Sccrclary SHRt S. K. GAMEHIR Assistant Director ( Elcc tech), ISI

Research & Development Organization Industries, Bhopal Martin Burn Ltd, Calcutta

for Elcctrkal

2

IS:7204(PartI)-1974

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR STABILlZED POWER SUPPLIES, DC OUTPUT
PART I TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 8 January 1974, after the draft finalized by the Power Convertors Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 Indian Standard Specification for stabilized power supplies is being plepared in four parts. This part covers terms and definitions only. The other parts are as under: Part II Part III Part IV Rating and performance Radio interference tests Tests other than radio interference

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Document No. 22E ( Central Office ) 4 ` Draft Recommendations for Stabilized Power Supplies, DC Output - Part 1: Terms and Definitions ' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) covers definitions applicable to stabilized power supplies designed to supply dc power from an ac or dc source for applications, such as in computers, communication, laboratories and industry. 1.2 Calibrated stabilized power supplies for electrical measurement purposes are excluded. 2. GENERALTERMS 2.1 source - A point of origin of electrical energy. In this standard it is used as an adjective to describe the input to the equipment. 2.2 Innuencc QpantityAny quantity generally external supply, which may affect its performance. 3 to a power

IS:

7294(PartI)-1974

2.3 Stabilization --The reduction of the effect of changes of influence quantities on the output quantity by means inside the power supply. An apparatus which takes electrical 2.4 Stabilized Power Supplyenergy from a source and supplies it in a stabilized form to one or more pairs of output terminals. 2.4.1 Constant Voltage Power Supply - A power supply that stabilizes output voltage with respect to changes of influence quantities. 2.4.2 Constant Current Power Supply - A power supply that stabilizes output current with respect t.o changes of influence quantities. 2.4.3 Constant Voltage/Constant Current Power Sup& - A power supply that operates as a constant voltage power supply or constant current power supply depending on load conditions. 2.5 Crossover Area - The range of values of the output quantities within which a change of mode of operation occurs.
NOTE 1 -Within this area, the output quantities arc not well defined. of the

NOTE2 -Unless otherwise specified, the crossover area is given by the overlap load effect bands or of the tolerance bands.

2.5.1 Crossover Point-A point given bf the intersection of the lines representing t.he nominal values of the two stabilized output quantities, usually the centre of the crossover area. 2.5.2 Adjurtable Crossover - A feature of a constant voltage/constant current power supply whereby the nominal values of the two stabilized output quantities can be adjusted independently withm the range of the rated values of the power supply. 2.6 Control - The determination of the power supply output by means of a variable element or signal, the relevant vab& of which may be changed continously or in steps, to change the value of the stabilized output quantity accordingly. 2.6.1 Local Control - The determination of the power supply output by means of a control element integral with the power supply. 2.6.2 Remote Control - The setting of the power supply output by means of an externaHontro1 quantity.
Nors - In general, particular modes oftemote control shall be designated according to the applied signal or signalquantity,such as rcsistancefontrol, conductance control, voltage control, current control and digital control.

Remote Sensing - A means by which the power supply monitors a stabilized output quantity directly at the load using extra ` sensing ' leads. 2.7
NOTE - Usually, the remote sensingleads monitor voltage directlyat the load, and the reulting circuit action compensates for voltage drops in the load leads up to a rprcihcd limit.

4

Is:72@4(PartI)-1974 source of an electrical quantity, 2$ Reference Source -The of which is referred to in closed loop stabilization. the value

2.9 Power Factor - The active source power divided by the apparent source power. 2.9.1 Displacement Factor - The active source power of the fundamental waves divided by the apparent source power of the fundamental waves.
NOTE- Diiplacement factor is also equal to the cosine of the phu~ the fundamental components of source voltage and current.

angle repanthg

2.10
current

Inrush Carrent -The maximum instantaneous value of the input to the power supply when switching on the power supply.

deviation of the source voltage or current 2.11 Source Distortion -The from an ideal sine wave of the same rms value.
NOTE! - Source distortion may be expressed and content, individual harmonic content, duration and rate of change. using quantities, such as total harmonic instantaneous amplitude deviation, iu

2.11 .l Source Current Distortion - That distortion of the source current resulting from the power supply presenting an impedance to the source or due to a change in impedance which varies with time. 2.11.2 Source Voltage Distortion -That distortion of the source voltage which exists without the power supply being connected. 2.11.3 Total Source Voltage Distortion -The source voltage distortion together with that resulting from the interaction of the source current distortion with the source impedance. 2.11.4 Voltage Unbalance - In a polyphase system, a condition in ivhich the rms value of at least one phase voltage or line-to-line voltage is significantly different from the others. NOTE -Unbalance can be expressed standards on elcctrotcchnical vocabulary, using quantities defined in the other Indian such as the use of symmetrical components.

2.12 Efficiency -The power. 2.12.1 $vslem E'ciency
input power, where the

total output power divided by the active input
--The

total output power divided by the active includes the power required to operate any auxiliary devices which are essential for operation.
input power

2.12.2 Conversion Factor - The ratio of the product of the mean values of direct voltage and direct current to the power on the ac side, or vicr versa. 3. TERMS RELATED ASPECTS TO PHYSICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL

3.1 Ambient Temperature - The temperature of the medium in which the power supply is immersed, usually the temperature of the air surrounding the power supply.

5

xs:7294(PartI)-1974
3.2 Cooling Medium Temperature -The temperature of @c cooling medium when meeting the power supply, for example, in the case of air cooling, the temperature of the air immediately at the air inlet. 3.3 Thermal EquilibriamA state under which the internal temperature of a power supply does not change significantly. 3.4 Capacitance to Frame -The capacitance measurable between a specified terminal and a common point, such as frame, guard or ground. 3.4.1 Ca~ahnce to Soum Tminals - The capacitance between the specified source terminals and output terminals. Norm- Sometimer referredto ar ' leakagecapacitance`. : 3.5 Insulation Resistance -The resistance measurable specified points not conductively connected. measurable

between any

3.5.1 Insulation Test Voltage - The ac or dc voltage applied between specified points not conductively connected, and maintained for a specified period of time without breakdown or flashover. 3.6 Isolation Voltage - In the case of a floating output, input, or control input, the maximum voltage that may be permanently maintained between the specified terminals. 3.7 Common Mode Output -The electrical energy which is unintentionally supplied to an external impedance connected between the terminals of the floating output and a common point, such as frame, chassis, ground or shield. Common mode output is expressed in terms of common mode current and common mode admittance. 4. TERMS RELATED TO STATIC OPERATION

4.1 Terms related to the steady-state ( or non-transient ) portion of a power supply output change which results from a steady-state change of one or more influence quantities, with all other quantities held constant. 4.1.1 Steady-StaL Value - The value of a quantity which persists after all non-recurring transients have decayed to an insignificant magnitude.
NOTE 1 -Steady-state values, with respect to average values unless 0tF -rwise specified. NOTE 2 - Steady-state otherwise specified. valueP referred

dc input or output values,
mean the rms

mean

the

to the ac side

valuu

unless

4.2 Nominal Value -The value which exists ` in name only `, not the actual value. For example, in the case of a power supply with a calibrated output control, the nominal output is the value indicated by the control setting. For a supply with a fixed output, the nominal output is the output For ac line input voltages, the nominal indicated on the nameplate. 6

Is:7204(PartI)-1974
value is usually the ` design central ' value. For example, the nominal value of a 115V f 10 percent line voltage is 115 volts. In the case of remote control, the nominal value is the output value predicted by the remote control coefficient. a power supply, the error is the true value of the 43.1 Error -For stabilized output quantity minus its rated or preset value. 4.2.2 4.2.3 Intrinsic Error Opcratitlg Error The error under reference conditions.

The error under rated operating conditions.

4.3 Output EfGct -The change in the steady-state value of a stabilized output quantity ( voltage, current or power ) due to a specified change in the steady-state value of one or more influence quantities with all other influence quantities maintained constant.
-Output effects may bc expressed as absolute values or relative values or a Naral combiition of both. Valuesgivenin percent shall be the percentages of the central value. Nors 2 -For the purposes of the subsequent is used for steady-state conditions only, whereas assigned to transients. Nors 3 -Output cfkts dcfinititmq, the term ` output effects ' special terms, swh as overshoot, arc drift and thermal settling.

as defined above may include

$3.1 Individual Efict - The change of value of a stabilized output quantity, resulting from a specified change in one influence quantity, with all other influence quantities maintained constant.
Non - In general, abbreviated terms will be used for individual effects. Example. rource cffkct = ctTcct of the stabilized output quantity due to the changes' of the source voltage. 4.3.2 Interaction E&t - The effect on an output quantity of a stabilized power supply which results from a specified change in the load or one of the other output quantities of another output of the same power supply. maximum Change in the steady-state value 4.3.3 Combined Efect -The of a stabilized output quantity resulting from any concurrent changes in two or more of the following influence quantities within their rated ranges of use: a) c) Load, Source frequeticy, aid b) Source voltage, d) Temperature. Combined effect as defined above does not include periodic and random deviation ( PARD ), drift, settling effects and setting deviations,

7

IS : 7204 ( Part I ) - 1974 4.3.4 Combined Source und Load E'fict - The maximum effect resulting from arty concurrent change in source voltage and load conditions within their rcspcctive rated ranges of use ( se< Fig. 4 on page 18 ).

Nvre -- Combined wm~ce and load cfkct may be equal to or differ from the sum of snurcc effecr and load effwt, tbc I.ltm hcing possible because load effect may depend on source volt:lgc and source elfcct may drpedd on load condition. 4.4 Effect Band -The range of steady-state values of a stabilized output quantity resulti?! from any change of one influence quantity with ~11other intlucnce quantltles mainrained constant. 4.2.1 Nominal l<`/G-ti;nmi ~-.~ `I'hc steady-stats values of a stabilized output quantity resuili+~ li.0111 z111v c hangc of one influence quantity within its rated range of use, with ail ot!lcr- iniItlencc quantities maintained constant. 4.4.2 Indioidunt E&t Bund --- The range of steady-state values ofa stabilized output quantity resulting from any change of one influence quantity within its rated range of use, with all other influence quantities maintained constant.
NOTE -Terms, such as source effect band and load effect band, will be used (see Note under 4.3.1 ).

4.4.3 Combined Ffecct Rand - The range of steady-state values corresponding to the combined effect of several influence quantities on the sta!,ilized output quantity ( see Fig. 4 ). 4.4.4 Combined Source and Load E&t Band - The range of steady-state values corresponding to the combined source and load effect on the stabilized output quantity. 4.5 Output Effect Coe5cient ( Ratio ) - The maximum change in the value of an output quantity per unit change of one influence quantity with all the other influence quantities maintained constant.
NOTE Temperature coefficient is the most commonly used output effect coefficient.

and Random Deviation ( PARD ) - The Periodic and Random Deviation of a dc output quantity from its average value, over a specified bandwidth, with all infl ence and control quantities maintained constant. 4.6 Periodic
NOTE 1 -It bandwidth. NOTE 2 may be stated in rms and/or peak-to-peak values for a specified

In the case of asymmetric waveforms, a peak figure may 6c quoted.

4.6.1 Psophometric Voltage - The effective noise voltage which is defined considering human hearing, using a specified frequency weighting factor.

4.7 Drift - The maximum change of an output quantity during a'specified period of time following the warm-up time, with all influence and control 8

quantities maintained constant during the warm-up time and the period of drifI Inearurcment.
NOTE1 Drift includes both periodic and random deviations over the bandwidth frequency ( dc ) *o a specifiedu per frequency limit. Tbir rpccificd u limit for drift mwt coincide with tge lower frcoucncv limit for PAR 8!Yok&Y deviations undu constant operating condition; are' covered by one 6r tbc
zao apccihtion. Can otba

4.8 &ttBag

Effect -The

relatively slow change of an output quantity
of an influence quantity and exists as an of tbcrmal

which follows an initial change added output effect.

NoTE - Tbii settling usually accompania the gradual re~tabliibmcnt equilibrium within the power suppply ( see Fig. 1 on page 15 ).

i

maximum change in the steady-state value of a 4.9 Total Effect -The stabilized output quantity resulting from any concurrent changes in all
influence quantities within their rated include PARD, drift and settling effects. ranges of use. Total &ect also

4.10 Total Efkt Band-The range of steady-state vahtes of Power : supply output resulting from the concurrent changes of all the influence quantities within the rated conditions of use.

4.11 Tolerance Band -The
output quantity lying between

range of steady-state the limits of operating
the permissible

values of a stabilized error (see Fig. 4).
of a stabilized output

NOTE 1 - Tolerance band describes quantity from a rated or preset value.

deviation

&cu, 4.12

NOTE 2 -

and intrinsic errors ir not of interest.

A statement

on tolcrancc band is useful when a subdivision into output

Settling Time - The time interval between a change of an influence quantity or output setting and the point where changes of an output quantity are due only to drift or PARD.

4.12.X Start- Up Time - The turn-on of the power supply.

specified

initial

settling

time

following

4.12.2 Warm-U' Time - The time interval after switching on the power supply until it complies with all performance specifications. 4.13 Settling Range - The range over which the value of the stabilized output quantity may be adjusted.
power

4.13.1 Control Range-That. part of the setting range within which the supply meets its specifications.

4.14 Discontissuoum control Resolkml - In the case of discontinuous control ( for example, by means of switches, wire-wound adjustable resistors ) the maximum increment in the value of a stabilized output quantity arising from the smallest reproducible control element sttp. 9

EB:7204(Pirt1)-1974 4.14.1 Incremental Control Coejkient - The ratio of an incremental change in a stabilized output quantity to the incremental change in the control quantity or output control knob position causing it. maximum rate at which the stabilized output 4.15 Control Rate -The can be varied as a result of control quantity changes without the value of the stabilized output quantity leaving the control deviation band. Non - The control rate is applicable output control range.
only when it is essentially constant over the

4.15.1 Control Time Constgnt - The time constant which characterizes the fastest change of the stabilized output which may be accomplished without the value of the stabilized output quantity leaving the control deviation band.
only when the tranrition of the NOlZ - Tbe control time constant is applicable rtabilized output quantity between its initial and final va!ua is asentially exponential.

4.16 Colitrol Coefficient - The ratio of the control quantity value to the intended value of the output quantity ( see Fig. 3 on page 17 ).
NOTE - The conirol coefficient may vary over a range of control quantity ir not necessarily a constant. values and

4.16.1 Control Deviation -The difference between the actual value of the output quantity and the control quantity, divided by the control coefficient.' - The control deviation includes non-linearity, slope error, and o&t etTects. NOTE 4.16.2 Control Deviation Band - The range of permissible values of the output quantity resulting from the control deviation (see Fig. 3 ). 4.17 Load Characteristic --- `The functional relationship between the value of the output voltage and the value of the output current for a specified kind of load. 4.18 Constant Voltage/Constant Current Crossover - The behaviour of a power supplv that automatically converts the made of operation from voltage stabiliza:!un to cllrrent stabilization when the output current reaches a preset value, and ~.iceversa. 5. TERMS RELATED TO DYklAMIC OPERATION

5.1 Terms related to the dynamic ( or non-steady-state ) portion of a power supply output change, resulting from changes in influence quantities or from changes in the remote or local coutrol setting. The adjective ` control * may be used as a prefix to designate phenomena resulting specifically from ( Example, the control overshoot amplitude ). the latter. 5.1 .l Transient Recovery Band - A range of values of a stabilized output quantity centred about the final value of the output quantity, or centred about the nomiual value in the case of a tolerance band. 10

IS:7204(PutI)-1974 In the case of a change in an influence quantity, the width' of the transient recovery band is equal to the asso&ted effect band u&ss other~iK stated. In the case of a change in a control quantity, the width of the transient recovery band is equal to the control deviation band unless otherwise gtated. When the tolerance band is specified, the tolerance band serves as the transient recovery band. 5.1.2 Transient Initiation Band - A ra&e of values of a stabilized output Its width is identical with that quantity centred about the initial value. of the transient recovery band. When the tolerance band is specified the tolerance band serves as the transient initiation band. 5.2 Overshoot - The transient ekcursion of a stabilized output quantity which lies outside the transient recovery :band in the same direction as the subsequent steady-state change of the stabilized output quantity. A succeeding excursion in the opposite direction is called a negative overshoot ( see Fig. 2A and 2B on page 16 ). 5.2.1 Overshoot Amplitude - The absolute value of the difference between the peak value of the maximum overshoot and the centre of the transient recovery band or tolerance band. overshoot resulting from the 5.2.2 Turn-On ( Turn-Of) Overshoot -The application ( removal ) of the source power, or from the power supply source switch being turned-on (turned-off ). 5.2.3 Turn-On ( Turn-Of) Polarity Reversal - The transient reversal of output polarity following the application ( removal ) of the source power, or the turn-on (`turn-off) of the power supply source switch. 5.3 Undershoot - The transient excursion of a stabilized output quantity, outside the transient initiation band, in the opposite direction of the subsequent steady-state change of the stabilized output quantity ( see Fig. 2A and 2B ) . 5.4 Maximum Output Rate of Change - The mhximum rate of change of an output quantity with respect to zero time, due to a change in influence quantity and/or control quantity. 5.5 Transient Times 5.5.1 Recoczry `Time Y The time interval between a step change in one of the influence quantities or control quantities and the instant when the stabilized output quantity returns to and stays within the transient recovery band. 5.5.1.1 Transient delay time - The time interval between a step change in one of the influence quantities or coctrol quantities and the time when the stabilized output quantity leaves the transient initiation band. 11

53.15 Tm?lsicnt "8c0ucr~time- The time interval between the end of the transient delay time and the time when the stabilized output quantity returns to and stays within the transient recovery band. 53.2 Tam-On Delay Time - The time interval between the application d source power and the time when the stabilized output quantity first enters the output effect band. 5.5.3 Turn-On RecoveryTime -The time interval between the end of the turn-on delay time and the time when the stabilized output quantity returns to and stays within the transient recovery band. 5.5.4 Turn- OJ Decay Time - The time interval between the removal of the source power and the time when the output voltage falls below a specified value. 5.6 Output Impedance - The complex ratio of a sinusoidal voltage and a ainusoidal current at the output terminals, the one being caused by the other and being of external origin.
NOTE Thin ir a ibnction of the frequency.

5.6.1 Outprrt Re.~istanc~- The ratio of an incremental change of dc output voltage to an incremental change in dc output current, the one being caused by the other and being of external origin. 5.6.2 Output C'jacitancc - The capacitance when the power supply is not energized. 6. TERM6 RELATED TO COMJUNED MORE POWER SUPPLIES between the output terminals OPERATION OF TWO OR

6.1 Combined O~W&OP of Power Supplies - In order to extend the ourput capabilities of a single power supply, two or more power supplies may be connected for a combined mode of operation. Frequently, terminals other than the output terminals may be interconnected, for example, to provide a mode of operation where one power supply ( the master ) may serve to control the others ( the slaves ). 6.2 Slave Operation - A method of interconnecting two or more stabilized power supplies and achieving coordinated control of the assembly by means of controlling the master supply alone, such combinations being characterized by essentially proportional outputs from all units. 6.2.1 Slave Tracking Operation -An interconnection of two or more supplies ( involving one output terminal in common ) with one or more slaves with outputs always held equal or proportional to the output of the master unit.
NOTX - The slave may be of the ume or opposite polarity as the master wi& to the common output terminal; in the latter case, the con@ration b some&nreferred to as complementary tracking.

12

IS:7264(PartI)-1974 6.3 Parallel Operation - The operation of two or more power supplies with all positive output terminals connected together, and all negative output terminals connected together, so that the total load current equals the sum of output current of all power supplies.

6.3.1 Parallel Operation with Specified Load Sharing - A parallel connection of two or more power supplies. with the total load being shared between them in a prescribed ratio. 6.3.2 Slave Parallel Operation - A parallel connection supply, with one or more slaves with output current(s) proportional to the output current of the master unit. of one master always equal or

6.4 Series Operation - The operation of two or more power supplies with the positive output terminals of one connected to the negative output terminal of another, so that the output voltages of the supplies are additive. 6.4.1 Series Operation with Specified Load Sharing-A series connection of two or more power supplies, with the total voltage being shared between them in a prescribed ratio. 6.4.2 Slave Series Operation - A series connection of one master supply, with one or more slaves, with their output voltage(s) always equal or proportional to the output voltage of the master unit.
7. PROTECTION TERMS

protection circuit which rapidly 7;l Crowbar Protection Circuit -A places a low resistance shunt across the output terminals of the power supply, thereby initiating action to reduce output voltage to a low value. 7.1.1 Trip Protection Circuit - A protective circuit which interrupts the output on the occurrence of an overload. electronically

7.2 Reset-An action by which the power supply is brought back into operation after the malfunction has been corrected. Reset may be automatic or manual. 7.3 Overcurrent Protection -Protection of the power supply and/or connected equipment against excessive output current including the shortcircuit current. 7.4 Overvoltage Prodection - Protection of the power supply and/or connected equipment against excessive output voltage, including the open circuit voltage. 7.5 Undervoltage Protection - Protection of the power supply and/or connected equipment against excessively low output voltage. 7.6 Reverse Voltage Protection - Protection of the power supply against reverse voltage applied at the output terminals. 13

I8:7204(P8rt1)-1974 7.7 Reverse Cmrrent Protection - Protection of a power supply against current fed back into the power supply by the load. 7.9 Overtemperature ProtectionProtection of the power supply or parts of it against temperatures exceeding the specified values. 7.9 Clurtnt Limiting - The action of limiting the output current of a constant voltage supply to some predetermined maximum value ( fixed or adjustable ) and automatically restoring the output voltage to its normal value when the overload or short circuit is removed. There are three types of current limiting, namely ( see Fig. 5 on page 19 ): a) by constant voltage/constant current crossover, b) by decreasing output voltage as current increases known as automatic current limiting ), and c) ( otherswise

by decreasing both voltage and current as load resistance decreases ( otherwise known as foldback or cutback current limiting ).

The value of the output current at 7.9.1 CurrentLimiting T&&oldwhich the stabilized output quantity falls outside the load effect band or tolerance band ( whichever is specified ) as the load resistance decreases.
7.9.2 Maximwn Limit& Currsnt- The hugest steady-state value of output current which the power supply delivers while in the current limiting mode.
NOTEThb value may not nccusuily be allowed continuously.

7.9.3 Short-C&it Cwrant - The steady-state current delivered by constant voltage power supply when its output terminals are short-circuited.

a

7.10 Voltage Limiting - The action of limiting the output voltage of a constant current supply to some predetermined maximum value (fixed or od'ustable ), and automatically restoring the output current to its normal There are two types vai ue when the load conditions are restored to normal. of voltage limiting, namely ( se6 Fig. 6 on page 19 ): a) by constant voltage/constant current crossover, and increases ( otherwise b) by decreasing output current as voltage known as automatic voltage limiting ).

7.10.1 Voltage Limiting lkarirold -The value of the output voltage of a constant current power supply at which the stabilized out ut current falls outside the load-dependent effect band or tolerance band P whichever is specified ) as the load resistance increases. 7.10.2 Opsn Circuit Voltage- The voltage at the terminals of a constant current power supply when there is no load connected.

14

-4

I
I t;

I
I __-____+_~_
______ -_

OUTPUT EFFECT AND SETTLWGEFFECT

STEADY-STATE CHANGECAUGHO

Ls

_____

_^_

1s 7 t+ I

7;
I
tn S7. output efkct SCttling time

J

Settling effect

FIG. 1

SETTLING EFFECT

15

Is:7204(PartI)-1974
INFLUENCE QUANTITY * Tl e

2A

When

Transient

Initiation

Band and Transient

Recovery

Band are Specified

0 26 A Grr~rral cwtput When Tolerance

TIME Band is Specified

quantity

& 0 P

- Nomin;d value - Mkmum ovrdwot amplitude - Nrgativc ovwshoot amplitude

B

- `I'ransirnt

r(`<OVVI-y IIillld

c -- output

c-lht bard

time

IS t 7204 ( Part I ) - 1974

rlNTENOE0

VALUE

ROL OEVIATION ,

BAN0

Rl

I'
n -

CONTROL

QUANTITY

(RI

RI a - Control coefficient = Control deviation

Al = At - Al AA = AK

$b. - Incremental

control coefficient

FIG.3

RELATIONSHIP OF CONTROL TO OUTPUT QUANTITIES

17

lOTAL

v4RIAlION

0ANO

1OLERANCP

BAN0

Fro. 4

THE

RELATION

OF

EPP~CTBANDS TO TOLERANCE BAND 18

IS:7204(PatiI)-1974

CROSSOVER

PCW

OUTPUl

cllt7RENi-

CVCCFCL `r-

Constant voltage/constant current limiting Foldback current limiting Current limit threshold Maximum limited current Short circuit current

current

ACL -Automatic

M S-

FIG. 5

TYPES OF CURRENT LIMITXNO

lHRESHOL0

OUTPUT

CURRENl----_,

Fro. 6

VOLTAQE L~~TINO IN A CONSTANTCURRENT SUPPLY 19

8UREAU
Headquarters

OF :

INDIAN

STANDARDS

l

t

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams : Manaksansthb Telephones : 331 01 31 (Common to all Offices) 331 13 75 Telephone Regional Offices : 331 01 31 Central : Manak Bhavan, 9, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. i 331 13 75 NEW DELHI 110002 37 88 62 Eastern * 1114 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, ' V.I.P. Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 21843 Northorn : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 41 29 18 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 6 32 92 95 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol. Andheri (East), Western BOMBAY 400093 Branch Offices : 2 63 48 39 49 55 55 40 21 5 36 2 67 8-71 19 3 31 27 05 98 77

.

`Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 t Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82183, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 Kalai Kathir Building, 6/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Quality Marking Centre, N.H. IV, N.I.T., FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-856C L. N. Gupta Marg, ( Nampally Station Road ) HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Nagar. Kanpur Roaa. Plot No. A-9, House LUCKNQW 226005 Patliputra Industrial No. 561/63. Estate, PATNA Sindhu 800013 Bagh-e-Ah Maidan.

231083 6 34 71 21 68 76 5 55 07 62305 6 21 04

Distract Industries Centre Complex, SRINAGAR 190011 T. C. No. 14/1421, University THIRUVANANTHAPURAM fnspection qffices (With

P. O., Palayam. 695034

Sale Point)

:
52 51 71 5 24 35

Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 lnsriturion of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 411005 -_ `Sales Office Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P. 0. Princep Street, CALCUTTA t Sales Office is at Novelty iS at Unity Chambers, Building, Grant Road, BOMBAY Square, $ Sales Office RANGALORE Narasimharaja

27 68 00 89 65 28 22 39 71

Xeprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

