**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8593-1 (1977) : Recommendations for centralized 
lubrication as applied to plant and machinery, Part I: Oil 
lubrication [PGD 19: Lubricating Equipments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



First Reprint APRIL 1986 
UOC ttl-712 I incorporating Amendment No. \ ) |S : 8583 ( Part I ) - 1 977 



S3 
u 

8 

I 
3 

8 

I 
J 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CENTRALISED LUBRICATION 
AS APPLIED TO PLANT AND MACHINERY 

PARTI OIL LUBRICATION 



1. Scope — Lays down the recommendations for centralised oil lubrication system for plant and 
machinery with respect to installation practice, system pipe work and ancillary equipment for light 
and heavy industries. 

2. Terminology 

2.1 Centralised Lubrication System — A system in which two or more lubrication points on a 
machine or group of machines are served with the same lubricant from a common source. 

2.2 Total Equivalent Length of Pipe — The total lengths of straight pipe plus the total of the pipe 
length equivalent of associated fittings in the relevant part of the system. This term is used in the 
calculation of pressure drop. 

2.3 Pressure Drop — The difference in pressure of a medium before and after an event, that is, the 
medium having flowed through a length of pipe valve etc 

2.4 Laminar Flow ( Stream Line, Viscous or Straight Line Flow ) — A type of flow In which there is a 
continuous steady motion of the particles, the motion at a fixed point always remaining constant. 

2.5 Turbulent Flow — A type of fluid flow in which there is unsteady motion of the particles, the 
motion at a fixed point varying in no definite manner. 

2.8 Rheologlcal Properties — Properties relating to rheology, the science of the deformation and 
flow of matter. 

2.9.1 Newtonian behaviour — The property of simple liquids by which the rate of shear Is 
proportional to the shearing stress. This constant of proportion Is called the viscosity of the liquid. 

2.0.2 Non-Newtonian behaviour — The property assessed by some fluids of having a variable 
relatloshlp between shear stress and rate of shear. 

2.7 Strainer — A device for removing coarse and Impure particles from a lubricant. 

2.8 Filter — A device for fine Alteration of a lubricant In order to obtain the required degree of 
cleanliness in the system. 

3. Classification of Oil Lubrication Systems 

3.1 Circulating Oil System — System in which lubricant medium, after use Is collected and returned 
to the reservoir. 

3.1.1 Circulating oil system is a continuous type of system and can be either volumetric or 
proportionate. The volumetric systems are applicable to only small capacity systems. 

3.2 Total Loss Oil System — System \n which the lubricant once fed to lubrication point is not 
returned to the system. 

3.2.1 Total loss oil systems can be sub-classified intp intermittent and continuous type of 
systems. Intermittent type of system can be either volumetric or proportionate while continuous 
type of system can be proportionate only. 



Adopted 27 September 1977 



© April 19**, ISI 



Gr 5 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



18:8993 (Part I) -1977 



S.S.1 A simple baffle plate shall consist of a vertical plate dividing the reservoir into the two 
compartments. Its height shall be about two-thirds the normal oil level. A small opening in the 
bottom of the baffle plate shall be kept to equalize oil levels and to provide compartment drainage. 

5.8 Pump suction opening shall be placed above tank bottom to prevent dirt or water pick-up. 
Lowest level of the oil level shall be well above the suction opening so as to prevent sucking of air. 
in systems which are subjected to gross contamination from outside sources, floating suction shall 
be incorporated. These shall be arranged to draw oil from approximately 300 mm below the oil level 
in tank. 

9.7 The discharge end of the return pipe shall be placed below the normal oil level of the reservoir 
to minimize aeration and shall be sited as far away as possible from the suction point of the Dumo 
to minimize the risk of drawing aerated oil into the system. 

5.8 The reservoir shall be designed and constructed to prevent entry of foreign matter including 
water and shall be adequately protected against Internal corrosion. Such protection shall be imcer- 
vious to the action of lubricant. K 

5.9 The reservoir shall have a strainer of adequate size to permit free filling consistent with the 
viscosity of the lubricant. Precautions shall be taken to ensure that the strainer remains in use at 
all times. Strainers shall be removable for cleaning. 

5.10 All the reservoirs shall have means of eliminating pressure build-up with filling. If a vent Is 
provided, it shall be protected by an air cleaner of sufficient capacity to maintain approximate 
atmospheric pressure at all times. 

5.11 The reservoirs shall be equipped with a protected sight glass or other fluid level indicator. 

5.12 A well protected and accessible means shall be provided to drain off water and sludge and to 
empty the reservoir without spillage. The reservoir interior shall be designed to facilitate emptying 
and cleaning with adequate means of access. 

9. Heaters and Coolers 

9.1 Heaters — If necessary heaters shall be provided in the tank for heating the oil to designed 
temperature conditions in order to maintain proper flow conditions in the system and to aid initial 
circulation under cold start up conditions. 

9.1.1 If necessary heaters shall be provided in the tank for heating the oil either by steam heating 
or by electric heating or by high pressure hot water heating. Depending on the requirement and 
available facilities, particular heating method shall be chosen. 

9.1.1.1 While selecting the method of heating following points shall be taken into 
consideration: 

a) Heat transfer is relatively low with viscous oils. 

b) Although oil layer immediately around the heater coils will quickly reach the steam tempe- 
rature, it will not attain a temperature higher than the steam temperature. 

c) As the oil begins to rise in temperature, it becomes less viscous, convection currents 
become faster and heat dissipation will proceed at a faster rate until equilibrium conditions 
are reached. 

d) When electric heaters are used, excessive heating shall be avoided for additive oils. 

Nets — Durlno equipment breakdown period, as the convection currents are hampered, it Is possible for higher 
temperature to be built-up around the heaters than that indicated at the thermostat. This high localized heating of 
oil will give rise to the cracking of oil. 

8.1.2 The oil temperature in the reservoir shall be limited to 70°C In any case the oil temperature 
shall be maintained at least 20°C below the flash point of the oil. 

9.1.3 If electric heating is adopted heating intensity shall be limited to the values specified in 
table below depending on the viscosity and the type of the oils. 



Viscosity at 20'C 


Maximum Rating of Heating Surface 


Mineral Oils With- 


Mineral Oils With 




out E. P. Additives 


E. P. Additives 


cSt 


kW/m* 


kW/m* 


Up to 155 


15 


11 


155 to 800 


11 ' 3 


Over 800 


8 


5 I 



IS:8593(Partl)-1977 



8.2 Coolers 



6.2.1 Bearing performance, oil life, rate of oil flow, ease of purification and deaerations are several 
factors which are directly depending on oil temperature. In order to maintain correct temperature, 
coolers are arranged in the oil circulation system to remove heat from the oil. Heat is picked up 
from bearings, pumps, scales, gears, etc. 

8.2.2 While plate, fin and tube cooling arrangements are recommended for small circulating 
systems, tubular heat exchangers are recommended for larger systems. 

7. Filtration 

7.1 Three basic forms of removing ' foreign bodies ' shall be generally used in lubrication systems. 

a) Coarse strainers — Coarse strainers are used to prevent large pieces of debris from getting 
into the system. In the larger oil storage tanks, coarse strainers shall usually be positioned 
below the filler connection. 

b) Magnetic flow strainers — The use of these strainers is independent of system design. 
Strainers shall befitted in the return line to the tank and in some cases In supply line, in 
order to remove ferrous particles. These are especially used in systems feeding large gear 
boxes. 

c) Line filters — In oil circulation systems a Alter comprises a major component. Following 
three basic types of filters are recommended. 

1) Manually operated self cleaning filters — This type of filter is recommended for use on 
smaller systems. The pipework shall normally be fitted with a bypass, so that the 
filter can be removed for maintenance. 

2) Duplex filters — This type of filter allow each element to be manually cleaned in turn. 
No bypass is necessary. 

3) Automatic self cleaning filters — This type will clean themselves wnen the pressure drop 
across the element reaches a predesigned value. For maintenance purposes, a full flow 
bypass arrangement shall be provided. 

•8. Pressure Tanks — Pressure tanks may be incorporated in the systems to take care of following 
events: 

a) Pressure surges In the system, and 

b) To protect the equipment by supplying oil for a certain period, for example, 3 to 4 minutes, in 
the case of power failures or sudden pressure drops. 

8. Oil Purifiers — Purification of oil is needed as it picks up contaminants while in circulation. 
Contaminant which are commonly arising in industrial oil circulation systems are as follows: 

a) Water which may ingress into the system from the equipment being lubricated or occur due 
to condensation, etc. 

b) Dirt, dust and solid contaminants which find their way from surrounding atmosphere into the 
system as well as rust and wear products from bearings and gears. 

c) Oxidation products which form sludge especially if oil is operating at higher temperatures. 

8.1 For purification of the above mentioned contaminants arrangements for centrifuging shall be 
provided in the system to recondition the oil by separating the water and solid impurities. 

10. Pipes and Fittings 

10.1 Pipes used in the system shall comply with required pressure ranges and shall conform to 
IS : 1230 ( Part I )-1973 ' Mild steel tubes, tubulars and other wrought steel fittings: Part I Mild steel 
tubes ( third revision ) \ 

10.2 Fittings — Care shall be taken in the selection of the fittings to be used with pipes specified 
in 10.1 and shall conform to IS : 1239 ( Part II )-1969 * Mild steel tubes, tubulars and other wrought 
steel fittings: Part II Mild steel tubulars and other wrought steel pipe fittings ( second revision ) \ 

10.3 Suction Pipe Work— Suction pipes shall be so designed that the summation of the frictional and 
static suction lift losses Is kept within the guaranteed lift capability of the selected pump. Once the 
total losses have been established and a pipe size selected, the oil velocity shall be checked to ensure 
a laminar flow condition. 



IS: 8593 (Part I)- 1977 

10.3.1 In order to keep pressure losses low, the pipe run shall be as short and direct as possible, 
tight right-angle bends and T-pieces being kept to a minimum. The use of plain branch T-pieces 
directly before the pump inlet shall, when possible, be avoided. The suction pipe bore shall generally 
be larger than the pump inlet connection. 

10.4 Pressure Pipe Work — Size selection shall have a compromise between economy ( size and cost ) 
and pressure losses demanding adequate bores. Velocity of oil in feed pipe line shall be in the- 
range of 1 '6 m/s to 35 m/s. 

10.5 Return Pipe Work — The overall available head between the machinery drain connections and 
oil reservoir is the deciding factor in designing gravity return oil pipe lines. 

10.5.1 It is recommended that the return pipes are sized to run not more than half full so as to 
encourage the escape of entrained air, provide space for any foam and to give a margin of safety. 
Flow rate, slope and the greatest viscosity envisaged govern their size. A slope of 1 in 40 is a good 
starting point for design. However, where practicable, use shall be made of maximum slope which 
can be obtained. 

10.5.2 In return pipe lines the velocity of oil shall be maintained In the range of 0*2 m/s. 
to 0'65 m/s. 

10.6 Metering Elements— Metering elements shall be provided In oil pipes for the following reasons 
and shall be located at Inlets to the bearings. 

a) To control the feed rate to Individual bearings and other lubrication points. 

b) To prevent pressure loss and subsequent starvation of all bearings If a single component 
falls. 

10.9.1 Selection of metering elements depends on upstream and downstream pressure and required 
flow. Orifices are usually circular In shape but other shapes may also be adopted depending on 
advantages that can be utilized. 

11. Compatibility of Equipment 

11.1 With Lubricants — Due to ever increasing use of lubrication dispensing equipment, the suitabi- 
lity of lubricant for use in such equipment shall also be taken into consideration. This applies 
particularly to non-Newtonian lubricants where pumpability and resistance to flow are prim* 
considerations. Further the temperature conditions under which lubrication system will be operating 
shall also be taken into account and oil viscosities shall always be related to working temperature. 

11.2 Materials — The material used in the manufacture of the equipment for use in centralised 
lubrication system shall be compatible with lubricant to be used. In this respect following precau- 
tions shall be taken: 

a) Galvanized component shall be avoided in case of lubricants which react with zinc when 
heated. 

b) Metal combinations giving size to galvanic currents shall be avoided. 

c) Special paint shall be used for reservoirs In case of certain synthetic lubricants. 

d) Special rubber seals, sealing compounds and gaskets shall be used when synthetic 
lubricants are to be dispersed. Appropriate manufacturer shall be consulted for guidance* 
in this respect. 

11.3 Environment 

11.3.1 Piping shall not be run in places where local high temperatures are likely to be encountered 
as this may cause the lubricant to deteriorate and result eventually In the pipework becoming 
blocked. 

11.3.2 Where pipework comes into contact with other lubricants or with process material, care 
shall be taken to ensure that no adverse interaction can occur. For example piping on machine tool 
lubrication systems frequently comes into contact with cutting oils and where these are likely to 
contain ' active ' or uncombined sulphur, copper pipe shall not be used. 

12. Instrumentation and Control — If agreed between the user and the manufacturer Instruments 
as required by 12.1. 12.2 and 12.3 shall be installed on the system. 

12.1 Different instruments, such as thermometers, pressure gauges, level indicators, thermostats, 
contact gauges, pressure switches, flow switches, etc, shall be used for Indicating the system 
conditions and also for controlling the conditions within the required limits. 



IS: 8593 (Part I). 1977 

12.2. Methods of Warning of System Failure — Lights and audible alarms shall be installed on the 
system to indicate the failure of the lubrication system. 

12.2.1 Initiation of warning — Flow switches, level switches, pressure switches, etc, shall be used 
to initiate the warning of the system failure. 

12.2.2 The use of audible alarms is recommended to indicate the following: 

a) Lubricant levels in reservoir and tanks; 

b) High and low pressures in system; 

c) High and low flow rate; 

d) High and low temperature; and 

e) Special warning requirements, such as the pressure drop across an automatic filter. 

12.3 Interlocks shall be provided In systems so that any variation in the system condition will bring 
the running equipment to a standstill in order to save the equipment from severe damages. 

13. Installation Methods and Safety 

13.1 Equipment 

13.1.1 All items of functional equipment shall be positioned to give adequate and safe access for 
Inspection and maintenance. 

13.1.2 Serious consideration shall be given to the fire hazard involved with the storage of 
lubricants. 

13.1.3 Lubrication equipment shall be sited so that to lubricate a component, personnel are not 
required to reach past control equipment or moving parts of machinery, such as revolving spindles, 
moving tools, etc. 

13.1.4 Identification numbers and name plates likely to be of use in obtaining spares and carrying 
out servicing shall not be removed. Alternatively identification numbers or the information contained 
in name plates may be punched or embossed on the equipment. 

13.2 Pipework 

13.2.1 Large bore main pipework shall be securely bracketed at suitable intervals and small bore 
feeder pipe or tube work shall be clipped. 

13.2.2 Suction pipework connections shall be airtight. Pipelines shall be run in protected 
positions or if this is not possible, they shall be adequately guarded. 

13.2.3 Pipes shall not be buried in concrete or cemented into position when passing through walls. 
Trenches shall be provided with lifting covers or proper openings to facilitate inspection and, if 
necessary, replacement of pipe runs. 

13.2.4 Pipework for oil circulation systems shall be designed so as to effect drainage to a given 
point for maintenance purposes. Means shall be provided to present inadvertent drainage of supply 
or feed lines between operations. 

14. Commissioning — To ensure the proper commissioning of system, following operations shall 
be carried out: 

a) Cleaning of pipes — Pipes and tubes shall be internally cleaned and made free from scale. 
If conditions like corrosive atmosphere exists, pipes shall be suitably protected on the 
exterior. For oil circulation systems where fabricated pipework is to be used, pipes shall 
be shot-blasted or pickled in random lengths before fabrication is recommended. After 
fabrication, the prepared pipes shall be pickled or cleaned again. 

b) Checking the main items of equipment and control devices, 

c) Flushing as required, 

d) Filling of system, 

e) Setting of operating conditions, 

f ) Running tests to prove the system, 

g) Checking for leaks, 

h) All filter elements shall be finally cleaned where required before final handling over to the 
purchaser of the system. 



IS :8S93( Part l)-1977 

14.1 Flushing of Circulating Oil Systems 

14.1.1 Initial Flushing— -The system shall be thoroughly flushed through for approximately 
24 hours with appropriate grade of flushing oil as recommended by the lubricant supplier. The oil 
used for flushing shall be at a temperature of approximately 70 to 80°C and shall have viscosity of 
65 cSt approximately. 

14.1.1.1 Throughout this period, all bearings and any other items included in the system or 
serving equipment that may be damaged by loosened abrasive matter, shall be temporarily 
isolated. 

14.1.1.2 Where basket type filters and/or line strainers are fitted, the basket and elements shall 
be removed. 

14.1.1.3 Ferrous pipework shall be lightly hammered to remove internal scale during this, 
initial flushing period. 

14.1.1.4 The pipings in the gearings, roller table, etc, shall be disconnected by means of a by- 
pass piping during the initial flushing period to prevent the coarse dirt coming from the delivery 
piping from entering the already cleaned pipes. 

14.1.2 Final flushing — This stage of flushing shall continue for at least 24 hours, using only 
intermittent heating and with filter baskets and line strainer elements replaced. After flushing, the 
system shall be completely emptied of flushing oil and reservoir drained and thoroughly cleaned 
Internally. Filters and the strainers shall be inspected and cleaned as necessary. 

14.1.3 After final flushing bearing and any other items previously isolated shall be reconnected. 
Finally, a check shall be made to ascertain that, with the system fully operational, the discharge of 
lubricant to the points of applications Is as specified. 

14.2 The flushing procedure as specified in 14.1 shall not apply to Morgoil systems where procedure 
recommended by supplier shall be followed strictly. 



SECTION II TOTAL LOSS OIL SYSTEM 

13. Types 

111 Two Line (Intermittent Volumetric) System — Consisting of two supply lines connected to a 
pumping unit through which a manually or automatically operated reversing valve pressurizes and 
relieves each line in turn. Piston type metering valves connected across the supply lines are actuated 
by the difference of pressure In the two lines. 

19.2 Single Una Progressive ( Intermittent Volumetric ) System — Consisting of a single supply line 
from a pumping unit through which a series of piston type metering valves are pressure actuated 
consecutively. 

15.3 Single Line Spring Reset ( Intermittent Volumetric) System — Consisting of a single line from 
a pumping unit connected to injectors which are operated by line pressure whenever the line is 
pressurized. After each operation, the line is relieved of pressure and a spring in the injector resets 
the measuring piston ready for next cycle. 

15.4 Single Line Spring Actuated (Intermittent Volumetric ) System — Consisting of a single line 
from pumping unit supplying lubricant under pressure. When the pressure is relieved from the line 
the spring pressure injects lubricant into the bearing. 

15.5 Single Line Incorporating Restrfcters (Continuous or Intermittent Proportionate ) System — 
Consisting of a single line connected to calibrated or adjustable restrictors which become 
proportionately effective when the line is pressurized by a given volume of lubricant. 

15.6 Direct Feed (Intermittent Volumetric) — Consisting of a pumping unit having one or more 
pumping elements from which a separate line is run to individual bearings. Sequential or semicon- 
tinuous feed can be obtained by this system. 

8 



IS: 8593 (Part I) -1977 

It Pipe Siting 

lf.1 System pipework shall bo such that a lubricant is supplied to the lubrication points with 
HifAcient injection pressure after overcoming the pressure drop due to frictional losses in the 
felines. 

If. 2 In the single line ( intermittent volumetric ) systems, the size of the pipes shall be such that 
esidual pressure during the relief phase will permit metering elements to reset or inject. 

II. Bleeding of Total Loss Oil Systems— Normally, total loss systems are bled whereas clrcula- 
ffig oil systems are flushed. 

lf.1 Before bleeding operation is started, the pipework shall be cleaned by blowing clean and dry 
impressed air. The pipework shall then be bled by pumping the lubricant under pressure either with 
the systems pump unit or with any other suitable pump. During this process all dead points in the 
system shall be left open and connections to bearings, gears, etc, shall be disconnected until clean 
lubricant comes out. Ensuring the flow of clean lubricant from the systems pipework, all the dead 
points shall be sealed and lines feeding the bearings, gears, etc, shall be reconnected. 

11.2 After the system Is put in operation, the pipework shall be checked periodically for leaks. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This Indian standard on centralised lubrication is being Issued in the following parts based on 
the type of lubrication used: 

Part I Oil lubrication 
Part II Oil mist lubrication 
Part III Grease lubrication 

This standard Is only a general guide and do not lay down the specific design requirements. It 
Is, therefore, recommended that while designing new system consultation shall take place between 
user, equipment designer and lubricant supplier. 

While preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived from BS 4807 : 1972 
1 Recommendation for centralized lubrication as applied to plant and machinery ' issued by the British 
Standards Institution. 



>rlnt»d at Slmco Printing Prtt», 0«*h». India 



