**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11183 (1984): Portable Pneumatic Rammers [PGD 8: 
Pneumatic Tools] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621 ■744-362 -85 



IS: 11183-1984 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 
PORTABLE PNEUMATIC RAMMERS 



1. Scope — Covers requirements for portable pneumatic rammers weighing up to 12'5 l<g. 

2. Type 

2.1 Type F — Floor type rammers. 





2.2 Type B — Bench type rammers. 




\m^ 



3. Terminology 

3.1 Portable Pneumatic Rammer — A pneumatic tool having a reciprocating piston extended to carry 
a butt or pein which is used for beating down sand, soil or equivalent material; and designed to be 
held in operator's hand during working. 



3.2 Gauge Pressure 
rammer. 



Steady pressure of compressed air measured within 3 metres from inlet of the 



3,3 Air Consumption — \lo\ume of air corrected to standard atmospheric conditions of temperature 
and pressure according to IS : 196-1966 'Atmospheric conditions for testing (revised)' consumed by 
rammer during test without fluctuation of pressure during test. 



4. Mass of Rammer 



Type 


Mass, kg 

Max 


B 
F 


45 
125 



5. General Requirements 

5.1 Lubrication — Parts which require lubrication shall be properly enclosed so as to prevent entry of 
foreign particles and leakage of lubricant. 

5.2 Air Inlet Connection — Air inlet connection for pneumatic rammers shall have pipe thread 
designation Re i conforming to IS: 554-1975 'Dimensions for pipe threads where pressure tight 
joints are required on the threads ( second revision)'. 

5.3 Handles — The rammers shall have straight handles. The handle and cylinder band shall be 
locked together in such a manner that they will not become loose in service. 

5.4 Throttle — The rammer shall be provided with a lever type throttling mechanism for admitting and 
shutting off the supply of air. Provision may be made for locking the throttle while rammers are in 
operation. 



Adopted 14 December 1984 



©July 1985, ISI 



Gr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 11183-1984 

5.5 Piston and Piston Rod Assembly 

5.5.1 The piston and piston rod shall be either integral or b^ firmly secured to each other by proper fit. 

5.5.2 Piston rod shall have mininnunri hardness of 600 /yi/ to ensure proper service and long life. 
Piston rod is further recommended to be given hard-chrome or equivalent plating to avoid wear due to 
abrasion. 

5.5.3 Gland packings shall be provided for the piston rod to prevent any soil, sand, etc, entering into 
the cylinder and also to prevent air leakage from cylinder. 

5.6 Each tool shall be supplied with an instruction manual. Data to be supplied in the manual shall 
be in accordance with Indian Standard Technical supply conditions for pneumatic tools {under 
preparation), 

6. Workmanship and Finish — The rammers shall be free from harmful flaws, cracks, burrs and other 
imperfections and shall be finished satisfactorily. 

7. Designation — A portable bench type rammer; (Type B ) shall be designated as: 

Rammer B IS : 11183 
A portable floor type rammer ( Type F ) shall be designated as: 
Rammer F IS -.11183 



HEIGHT 

OF 
BRACKET 



(J>12.Smm HOSE 



AIR CONTROL LEVER 



CLAM PING BOLT 

CLAMP 

COLLET (ALUMINIUM) 

BRACKET 




FIXTURE 



H(STEEL) 

ERMEDIATE PIECE 
LOY STEEL) 



EST PIECE (COPPER) 



MOUNTING BASE 



FIG, 1 TEST RIG FOR PELLET TEST 
2 



18:11183-1984 



8. Tests 



8.1 Pe//et Test — \nX\a\\y place the rammer in the test rig as given in Fig. 1 and operate it without 
l<eeping the pellet In the rig for two minutes. Finally, the rammer shall be operated in test rig for a 
specified period to beat down a cylindrical pellet of the dimensions given in Table 1 and of the material 
specified in 8.1.1. The compression of the pellet shall be measured and the same shall be within 
— 5 percent of the declared values of the manufacturers. 

8.1.1 Material for the pellet shall be annealed copper. It shall have hardness between 48-62 HV, 



TABLE 1 DIMENSIONS OF PELLETS AND TEST DURATION 



Type of 
Rammers 


Pellet 


Test Duration 
S 


Diameter, mm 
±0-1 


Length, mm 
±0-1 


B 

F 


9*5 
285 


9 
25*4 


10 
15 



8.2 Air Consumption Test — Water displacement meter or any other equally suitable instrument shall 
be used to determine the quantity of air consumed per minute at 60 ± 0'5 bar prsssure measured at a 
distance of not more that three metres from the inlet of the tool while the pellet test is being conducted 
as described in 8.1. The air consumption reading shall be corrected to standatd atmospheric condi- 
tions of temperature and pressure conforming to IS : 196-1966. The air consumption shall be within 
+ 5 percent of the values declared by the manufacturer. 

8.2.1 Measurement of pressure — For measurement of air pressure, gauges of any suitable type shall 
be used. The pressures to be read shall fall between one-fourth and three fourths of full scale reading. 
The pressure gauges shall be located within three metres from the rammer. The pressure shall remain 
constant within 6 ± 0'5 bars durmg testing. 

8.3 Operation Test — Each rammer shall be tested for easy starting and stopping. During testing there 
shall be no abnormal noise or excessive temperature rise. Also the rammer shall show no flaws which 
may have been developed during testing. 

8.4 Endurance Test 

8.4.1 For type approvai — Each sample conforming to pellet test shall be run In the test rig to 
disseminate energy for 100 h in the manufacturers test room (100 h run need not be at a stretch and 
may be done over a period), after which the tool shall be dismantled and all the parts shall be 
examined. No part shall either break during testing or shall be found broken, cracked or deformed on 
examination. 

8.4.2 For routine testing — One percent, the minimum being one, of the tools on order, if the order 
is for 50 pieces or more, shall be run for the test rig to disseminate energy in the manufacturers' test 
room for 15 h ( 15 h run need not be at a streach and may be done over a period ), after which the 
tools shall be dismantled and all parts shall be examined. No part shall either break during testing or 
be found broken, cracked or deformed on examination. 

9. Marking — The rammer shall be marked with type, maximum working pressure and manufacturer's 
name or trade-mark at a suitable place so that In the course of normal use the markings shall not get 
damaged. They may also be marked with serial number and the year of manufacture. 



9.1 IS I Certification i\4arking — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

3 



18:11183-1984 

10. Packing and Packaging — Before packing, the inlet, exhaust and other openings af each tool 
shall be adequately protected/covered against entry of dust and other harmful material. Packing shall 
be done in accordance with Indian Standard Technical supply conditions for pneumatic tools 
{ under preparation). 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Rammers are used in the foundary for ramming the foundary sand. Bench type rammers have 
short overalllength andaresuitableforberich moulding work whereas floor type rammers have long 
overall length and are suitable for floor rnouldjng work. 

While preparing this specification, considerable assistance has been taken from the details 
supplied by the manufacturers of the pr(i|iiiet^ 

4 • <;:■::--.. ■ • - 

Pfiljltd «t Pfmtrade, New Oelhuindia 



