IS 7028 (Part

1) :2002

Indian Standard PERFORMANCE TESTS FOR COMPLETE, FILLED TRANSPORT PACKAGES
PART 1 STACKING TESTS USING STATIC LOAD

(Second Revision)

lCS 55.180.40

0

BIS 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Fehruaty

2002

Price Group 2

Transport

Packages

And Packaging

Codes Sectional Committee,

TED 24

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Transport Packages and Packaging Codes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. Subsequent to the revision of 1S0 2234 : 1985 `Packaging -- Complete, filled transport packages and unit loads -- Stacking tests using static load' in 1999, this standard has also been revised to bring it in line with the revised 1S0 standard. In this revision the following technical changes have been incorporated: a) b) c) Terminology Procedure and of test item had been given;

had been laid out in detail with specific reference to test items stored on pallets or in stacks;

The unit load is also introduced.

This test may be performed as a single test to investigate the effects (deformation, creep, collapse or failure) of stacking or as part of a sequence of test designed to measure the ability of a package to withstand a distribution system that includes a stacking hazard. The test may also be used to investigate performance under particular conditions of when the bottom package in a stack rests on an open-decked pallet; or when the profile is eccentric, when it is supported on the bearers of a single decked pallet which rests purposes, one of the three methods of carrying out the test maybe more suitable than loading, as for example, of the superimposed load on a container, For such the others.

A method of carrying out a stacking test using a compression tester is given in IS 7028 (Part 9) :1987 `Performance tests for complete, filled transport packages: Part 9 Stacking test using compression tester'. The composition of the Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given in Annex A.

IS 7028(Partl)

:2002

Indian Standard PERFORMANCE TESTS FOR COMPLETE, FILLED TRANSPORT PACKAGES
PART 1 STACKING TESTS USING STATIC LOAD

(Second Revision)
1 SCOPE This standard carrying transport method (Part 1) specifies three methods of 4.1 Test Item A complete filled transport package or unit load.

out a stacking test on a complete, filled package using a static load. Whichever is employed, the test may be used to assess of a package in terms of its strength

5 APPARATUS 5.1 Horizontal Surface

the performance

or the protection that it offers to its contents when it is subjected to stacking. 2 PRINCIPLE In simple testing, placing of the test package on a flat, horizontal surface and subjecting the test package to an evenly distributed conditions, load applied from above, using The load, atmospheric The top-to-bottom or

Which is flat (the difference in height between the highest and lowest points not exceeding 2 mm) and rigid. A concrete floor at least 150 mm thick is suitable. 5.2 Means of Loading Which according to the method chosen (1, 2 or 3) is as described in 5.2.1 to 5.2.3. 5.2.1 Method 1

one of the three methods. the package for predetermined, the side-to-side deflection test may be measured, 3 REFERENCES The following this standard. indicated revision, standards

period of time under load and attitude of of the package during the

Stack of test items, each item being identical with the item under test. The number of test items is such that their total mass forms an appropriate load. 5.2.2 Method 2 Loading platform, free to tilt to an equilibrium position on the test item, together with an appropriate load. The loading platform, when placed centrally on top of the test item, shall be large enough to extend at least 100 mm over all sides of the top surface of the test item and rigid enough to support the load completely without deformation.
NOTE --This type of load is sometimes referred to as `free load'.

if appropriate.

contain

provisions

which of to

through reference

in this text, constitute All standards to agreements

provision

At the time of publication,

the editions on this

were valid. and parties

are subject based

standard are encouraged

to investigate the possibility

of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 7030:1988 Identification filled 7031:1987 transport Title of parts for complete, packages when

5,2.3

Method 3

testing (first revision) Method of conditioning of complete, filled packages 4 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the following term @st revision) for testing transport

Loading platform, such that the lower surface of the platform is constrained to remain horizontal, together with an appropriate load. The loading platform, when placed centrally on top of the test item, shall be large enough to extend at least 100 mm over all sides of the top surface of the test item and rigid enough to support the load completely without deformation.
NOTES 1 This type of load is sometimes referred to as a `guided load'. 2 If guides are used to ensure that the loading platform remains horizontal, they should not cause friction that could affect the test results.

and defm ition shall apply.

5.3 Means of Measuring Deflection (if necessary), accurate to + 1 mm and capable of indicating either an increase or a decrease in dimensions. In addition, 1

IS 7028 (Part l) :2002 the apparatus shall tolerances of 8. meet the requirements and pre-load sufficient to assure a good contact between the loading platform and the test item. 8.3 Apply the load for the required period of time (usually 24 h, according to the material) or until collapse. 8.4 Remove the load and examine the test item.
NOTES 1 At any time during the test it may be necessary dimensions. to measure

NOTE---Stable and safe loading duringtbe testis dependent on
the friction between the top surface of the test item and the bottom surface olthe loading platform. as well as the ability of the test item to resist defomlation. Means should be provided to produce a stable test assembly and to ensure that, if failure occurs, the load is restrained and does not cause danger to personnel in the vicinity, 6

TEST ITEM PREPARATION

6.1 The test item shall normally be filled with its intended contents. However, simulated or dummy contents may be used, on condition that the dimensions and physical properties of such contents shall be as close as possible to those of the intended contents. 6.1.1 Ensure that the test item is closed normally as if ready for distribution. [f simulated or dummy contents are used, ensure that the normal method of closure is still employed. 7 CONDITIONING The package shal I be conditioned in accordance one of the conditions described in IS 7031. 8 PROCEDURE 8.1 W!lerever possible the test shall be carried out in atmospheric conditions identical to those used for conditioning, and particularly where this is critical to the materials or application of the test item. In other circumstances, the test shall be carried out in atmospheric conditions which approximate those used for conditioning, as closely as is practicable. 8.2 Position the stack of test item (see 5.2.1) or, alternatively, the loading platform (see 5.2.2 or 5.2.3) centrally over the test item which has been placed on the flat, horizontal surface (see 5.1). 8.2.1 [f tnethods 2 and 3 are being used, place the masses making up the load on the loading platform without impact, ensuring that they are in full contact with the loading platform before being released. The masses shall be distributed uniformly over that portion of the surface of the loading platform in direct contact with the test item to ensure that the centre of gravity of the load is immediately above the centre of the top surface of the test item. The mass of the total load, including the mass of the loading platform, shall be within 2 percent of the predetermined value. The distance of the centre of gravity of the load above the loading platform shall not exceed 50 percent of the height of the test item. 8.2.2 In methods 2 and 3, if measurements are taken, this shall be done between the two surfaces exerting compression on the test item after the application of a ~ with

2 Appropriately profiled inserts to represent particular loading conditions may be placed above or below the test item or both above and below, as required. 3 In the case of test items stored on pallets or in stacks, the test should be carried out on several test items side by side or using an actual stacking pattern.

9 TEST REPORT 9.1 The test report particulars: a) b) c) d) e) shall include the following

a reference to this standard; the name and address of testing laboratory and name and address of customer; a unique identification of the report; the date of receipt of the test items and the date(s) of performance of the test; the name, title and signature accepting test responsibility report; of persons for the test

9

a statement to the effect that the test results relate only to the items tested;

that the report shall not be $3) a statement reproduced except in full without the written approval of the laboratory; h) j) the number of replicate test items tested; a full description, including dimensions, structural and material specifications of the test item and its fittings cushioning, blocking, closure or reinforcing arrangements, gross mass of the test item and mass of the contents in kilograms; a description of contents, if simulated or substituted contents were used, full details shall be given;

k)

m) the relative humidity, temperature and the time of conditioning; temperature and relative humidity of test area at the time of test; whether these values comply with the requirements of IS 703 1; n) the attitudes in which the test item was tested, using the method of identification given in Is 7030; the mass, in kilograms, of total load, including mass of loading platform, and the

P)

IS 7028 (Part l) :2002 period of time during which the test item was under load, the means of loading used, that is, Imethod 1, 2 or 3, whether guides were used and if so, their design; the test item pattern under test; r) s) t) u) the design and dimensions used; the type of apparatus used; any deviations described in this from the test Standard; and methods of any protiles

q) the location of deflection measurement points
on the test item and the stage of test at which deflection measurements were made;

a record of the results, including observations which assist in the correct interpretation of the results.

ANNEX

A

(Foreword)
COMMITTEE Transport Packages and Packaging COMPOSITION Codes Sectional Committee, TED 24

Or,qmiwfim In Persona] Capacity (P1o[ /C Sec(or V, Akmd, Navi A4mrrbai 400706) Advance Packaging Pvt Ltd, Murnbai Association ot%nall Tool Mfrs, Cbcxrnai Association of State Road Transport Undertaking, New Delhi Bayer India Ltd. Mumbai Bharat [Xxtronim Ltd, Baogalore Et[{EL. t lydcrahad BASF India ltd. Motilhai Babncr L,awrie Van Leer Ltd, New Momhai Containers Corp ot'hrdia Ltd, New Delhi Department ot'Explosives, Nagpur Dcpwtment c)t'['ele-c(]llllmllnicatioll, New Delhi Directorate of PPQ & S, Faridabad Dimple Drums & Barrels L,td, Mumbai Electronics Corp otlndia Ltd. Hyderabad Federation ofc'orrugated Box Manufactures ot'lndi~ Mumbai

Representative(s) (Chairman) SmwP. V, NARAYANAN War DAMODAR SOMANI Sm S. tiAGOPALAN SHRIM. S. BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) DrRECTOR (ENGG) ASSITANT DULECTOR (TECHNICAL) (Afterrrate) DRN. K. Poiwstm DR A. S. NADKARNI (Alternate) Smu S. A. RAO
sHRrRAW CHANDER

Fibre Foils Ltd, Mombai Guardian Pkmticots Ltd. Mumbai Grindwell Norton Ltd, Mumbai Gujamt Ambuja Cement Ltd, Mumbai Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Mumbai Indian Federation ofTransporl Operators, Mumbai

Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai India Foils Ltd. Koikata [TC Ltd, Kolkata

Smu M. S. SLNGEWAD (Alternate) SW B, Josril SW ~ SHAH Sma S. C. GIJTA SHRIA. S. GHOSHAL SrmI G. M. SARMA (Alternate) Asrr DIRECTOR GENERAL (SL) Asrr DtRECTOR GENERAL (S'n (Alternate) Sruu V. C. BXARGAVA SHRIS. H. GHOSE(Alternate) H. ~P.mu .%uu RAJESH SHFJG. V. DEB-+ADAYAL SHRIP. P. StNGH(Alternate) Smt A. K. GOEL SsrruA. L. hNmmur (Alternate) Smr (%WNATH A. Swmm %rra G, R. RAMACHANDRAN Srrru Asrrrs ROY (Alternate) SW F'.K. GUJRAL Wuu V. J. BARDANLJKAR (Alternate) Smu C. M. Drmm SmT K. M. IQv.mA (Akerrrafe) Smt M. S. VEW Ssau B. BALAWPAL (Alternate) Ssnu T. M. @HAN SHRIHARMAT SINGH Kow (Alternate) DRN. G. MOKASHI %u B. MALLtCK Smu M. K. CwuwaoR'rv (Alternate) DRP. P. Smrm %au C. T. DHRWA KRtSHNAN (Alterrurfe) (Continued on page 4)

3

IS 7028 (Part 1) :2002
(Corrlinued,from page 3) Representative(s)
Wuw A. K. GOEL SW G. SUD~ Srmr H. H. DOSSD Smu P.N. DESAt(Alternate) -OR Sm S. GURUPRASAD StawAtWLTALWAR SW A. K. BHATI (Alternate 1) Wru H. L. CHOPRA(Alternate 11)

Organization ITI Ltd, Gonda (( I.P.) Jumbo Bag Ltd, Chennai Larsen & Tourbo Ltd, Mumbai Lemuir Packers, Mumbai Ministry of Detknce, Dte ot'Stdn, DRDO, Bangalore Paper Products Ltd, New Delhi

Ranbaxy I,aboratories Ltd, Gurgaon Research Designs & Standards Organization, Lucknow The Shipping Corporation of India, Mumbai The Supreme [rids Ltd, Mumbai WI PRO Ltd. Mombai BIS Directorate General

ASSISTANT DIRECTOR

Jomr DIRECTOR STANDARD#CARiOAGE I
ASSISTANT DESIGN ENGMIER/CARRIA@ 1(Alternate) GENERAL MANAGER TECHNICAL SERVICES (Alternate) SrrraV. SHAW SsrrrrMWSH SW (Alternate) sHRIP.s.PAr SHRIA. R. Gwm, DIRECTOR & limo (Transport Engg) [Representing Director General (Ex-oficio)]

Member-Secretary SrrroP. K SHARMA Jomr Director (Transport Engineering), BIS

4

Bureau of Indian Standards
institution established under the Bureau BIS is a statutory harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country.

qf Indian Standards .4c[, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of

from Doc : No. TED 24 (322)

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone (3237617 X323 3841 3378499, 3378626, { 3378561 33791 20 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295, { 8327891, 8327858 8327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131, 3233375, 3239402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 I 3

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AH MEDABAD. BAN GALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FAR IDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDE RABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PLJNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 1'[1[11;([ ~itI%lilh,l( (J(~sttPWSS,
l~eW Delhl-2

