**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8946 (1978) : General requirements for rotating 
electrical machinery for aircraft [TED 14: Aircraft and 
Space Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



^OR OF*-tC*AL USE I 



■ "1 I BIJ 



( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
ROTATING ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 

FOR AIRCRAFT 



UDC 621'313-13 5 629-U3-066 




(D Cofif right 1979 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BlUVAN, 9 EAJIADUR SHAH ZAfAB liARQ 

HEW DELHI nOOOS 

^iM JI/ 5v^ ii^^rfA 1979 



IS : 8946 - 1978 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 

ROTATING ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 

FOR AIRCRAFT 

Aircraft Electrical Equipment Sectional Committee, ETDC 55 

Chairman Representing 

Gp Capt p. Gopalan Aeronautical Development Establishment (R&D), 

Ministry of Defence, Bangalore 

Members 

Wg Cdr G. B. Singh ( Alternate to 
Gp Capt P. Gopalan ) 
Shri M. N. Arora Indian Airlines, New Delhi 

Shri M. S. Ekbote ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. V. Badrinath Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing, Ministry 

of Communications, New Delhi 
Shri S. Balakrishna National Aeronautical Laboratory (GSIR), 

Bangalore 
Shri M. K, Basu Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 

Wg Cdr H. R. Seetharam ( Alternate ) 
Gp Capt H. S. Bhatia Directorate of Technical Development and 

Production ( Air ), Ministry of Defence, New 
Delhi 
Shri H. C. Pande { Alternate ) 
Shri M. Dey Indian Gable Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri K. V. R. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Ghosh Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Shri Ram Kumar Gupta Delton Cable Industries Pvt Ltd, Delhi 

Shri P. Mukundan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Narasimhan Civil Aviation Department ( Ministry of Tourism & 

Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 
Shri A, Purshotam Internationa! Airports Authority of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri K. S. Jayram ( Alternate) 
Dr Vepa Narayana Murthy Indian Space Research Organization ( Vikram 

Sarabhai Space Centre ), Trivandrum 
Shri K. Sankaranarayanan Directorate General of Technical Development 

(DGTD), New Delhi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1979 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 8946 -1978 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Shri G. SiTAPATi Rao 

Shri M. N. Somasundaram 

Shri A. I. Hyder ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P, Sachdev, 
Director ( Elec tech ) 



Representing 

& Development Centre, 



Electronics Testing 

Hyderabad 
Air India, New Delhi 



Director Generalj ISI ( Ex-offieio Member ) 



Secretary 
Shri H, C, Duneja 
Assistant Director ( Elec tech), ISI 



IS: 8946. 1978 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 

ROTATING ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 

FOR AIRCRAFT 

0. FOREWORD 

).l This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 28 September 1978, after the draft finalized by the Aircraft Electrical 
Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechni- 
cal Division Council. 

0,2 This standard is based on BS G102 ' General requirements for rotating 
electrical machinery ' issued by the British Standards Institution. 



1. SCOPE 

!•! This standard specifies general requirements applicable to rotating 
electrical machines for aircraft. This standard is to be used in conjunction 
with individual equipment specifications. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in the individual 

specifications for the rotating electrical equipment shall apply. 

3. DECLARATION OF DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE 

3.1 The equipment manufacturer shall furnish information on the design 
and performance of the equipment and any limitations v/hich are appli- 
cable in the standard form of declaration as specified in IS : 7855-1975*. 
Technical information on the installation, testing, calibration, maintenance, 
overhaul and repair shall also be furnished, indicating the recommended 
fife or overhaul period. 

4. GENERAL REQ^UIREMENTS 

4-1 Materials — All materials used shall be suitable for their intended 
purposes. They shall have lov/ flammability and shall be capable of 
maintaining their essential properties during service and storage. The 



♦i'orms for declaration of perforTOance of aircraft electrical equipment, 

3 



IS: 8946-1998 

structural and consumable materials ( for example lubricants ) used shall 
be according to relevant Indian Standards. Material liable to rapid 
deterioration in service shall not be used. All metallic materials shall be 
resistant to corrosion or suitably treated to resist corrosion. 

4.2 Construction 

4.2.1 All items of equipment shall be designed for minimum mass and 
bulk consistent with reliability in aircraft service and shall be sound and 
suitable for the declared purposes, 

4.2.2 Bearings and methods of lubrication shall be selected for conform- 
ing to the declaration of life. The design of the bearings shall be such that 
they are not likely to be affected deleteriously by foreign matter such as 
brush -dust. Ball and roller bearings shall be so selected that there is a 
radial internal clearance within the bearing under all operating conditions. 

4.2.3 Allowance for differential expansion shall be made in machine, 

4.2.4 Spinning of the bearings in their housing shall be prevented but 
slight rotational creep shall be permissible if it has no deleterious effect, 

4.2.5 The quantity, type and method of lubrication of fluid lubricated 
bearings shall be as required by the individual equipment specification. 
Provision shall be made for preventing undue loss of the grease contained 
in grease-lubricated bearings. 

4.3 Brash-Gear 

4.3.1 Brush-gear shall be of rigid construction and dimensionally stable 
throughout its life. The creepage path between live parts of different 
polarity, and between live parts and the frame, shall be such as to ensure 
that leakage currents due to the accumulation of brush or other contami- 
nants will not give rise to a dangerous condition. A suitable coating of 
insulation shall be applied to the surface of all earthed metal in the vicinity 
of the brush-gear. 

4.3.2 The design of the brush-gear shall be such that the brush is 
adequately supported under all conditions of wear of brush or commutator, - 
and that adequate spring pressure is maintained throughout the life of the 
brush. The internal surface finish of the brush-holders shall be such that 
the brushes slide freely under all operational conditions. Springs and 
triggers shall not jam or foul the brush-holders due to wear over the declar- 
ed wearing length of the brush. Brush-flexibles shall not restrict the 
travel of the brushes and shall not foul the springs. 

4.3.3 Brushes shall be replaceable without dismantling the machine, and 
shall be insertable in one way only. They shall be marked to indicate how 
much of the usable length is left. Flexibles shall be provided on th^ 



18:8946-1978 

brushes that are rated to carry more than 200 mA continuously or corres- 
pondingly higher limiting current intermittently. The flexible shall be 
insulated, where necessary. 

4.3.4 Provision shall be made for adjustment of the brush position for the 
best performance, unless the relative location of commutator segments, 
armature slots and brush-gear, etc, is adequately controlled in production 
to achieve the same result. 

4.3.5 The dimensions of the brushes and brush-holders shall comply with 
the individual equipment specification. 

4.4 Rotor Balance — The dynamic unbalance of rotors shall not exceed 
2*5 mm/kg. 

4.5 Commutators and Slip Rings 

4.5.1 Care shall be taken during manufacture to ensure that the commu- 
tator or slip ring working surfaces are concentric with the bearing journals. 
With the armature supported at its journals on vee-blocks, the maximum 
variation in reading on a dial gauge resting on the commutator or slip-ring 
surface shall not exceed 25 Mm for peripheral speeds up to 1 800 m/min or 
12 ^m for higher speeds. The maximum variation in reading between any 
two adjacent segments of commutator shall not exceed 2*5 Km. 

4.5.2 When commutator micas are recessed, care shall be taken in 
recessing operation to ensure that the recess is in line with the inter-segmen- 
tal slot and that no fragment of mica is left standing above the bottom of 
the slot. Each recess shall be sufficiently deep to allow for commutator 
wear between overhauls. 

4.5.3 The quality of commutator shall be assessed visually under extreme 
conditions of load and speed according to IS : 4722-1968*. 

5. SAMPLING 

5.1 The sampling scheme and criterion for conformity shall be given in the 
individual equipment specifications. 



♦Specification for rotating electrical machines. 

5 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 

IS: 

2032 ( Part XV )-1976 Graphical symbols used in elcctrotechnology: Part XV Aircraft 
electrical symbols 

7854-1975 Voltages and frequency for aircraft electrical systems 

7855-1975 Form of declaration of performance of aircraft electrical equipment 

7856-1975 Safety features for ground power units for direct current aircraft servicing and 

engine starting 
7857-1975 Aircraft-fuel nozzle grounding plugs and sockets 
7915-1976 Dimensions for connections for aircraft ground electrical supplies 

8252 ( Part XVIII )-l978 Environmental tests for aircraft equipment: Part XVII 
Magnetic influence 

8705-1978 Static invertors for aircraft 

8706-1978 Safety features for ground power units for alternating current aircraft servicing 

8834-1978 Dimensions for general purpose push-pull three-pole circuit breakers for aircraft 

8946-1978 General requirements for rotating electrical machinery for aircraft 

8980-1978 Dimensions for general purpose push-pull single-pole circuit breakers for 
aircraft 



