NAT AWA IS 17512 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Rafar ariei caraat N feeds 
rarai cht STAT 


Requirements for Electrical 
Installations in Medical Locations 


ICS 29.020 


© BIS 2021 


anda HM et 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2021 Price Group 7 


Electrical Installations Sectional Committee, ETD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the Electrical 
Installations Sectional Committee and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


In medical locations it is necessary to ensure the safety of patients likely to be subjected to the application of 
medical electrical equipment. For every activity and function in a medical location, the particular requirements 
for safety have to be considered. Safety can be achieved by ensuring the safety of the installation and the safe 
operation and maintenance of medical electrical equipment connected to it. 


The use of medical electrical equipment on patients undergoing intensive care (of critical importance) has called 
for enhanced reliability and safety of electrical installations in hospitals so as to improve the safety and continuity 
of supplies which is met by application of this standard. Variations of the standard to further enhance safety and 
reliability are acceptable. 


IS 732 : 2019 ‘Code of practice for electrical wiring installations’ is a necessary adjunct to this standard. In 
preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from IEC 60364-7-710 : 2002 ‘Electrical 
installations of buildings - Part 7-710 : Requirements for special installations or locations-Medical locations. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex C. 


IS 17512 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS 
IN MEDICAL LOCATIONS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 The particular requirements of this standard apply 
to electrical installations in medical locations so as 
to ensure safety of patients and medical staff. These 
requirements, mainly, refer to hospitals, private clinics, 
medical and dental practices, health care centers and 
dedicated medical rooms in the workplace. 


NOTES 

1 It may be necessary to modify the existing electrical 
installation, in accordance with this standard, when a change 
of utilization of the location occurs. Special care should be 
taken where intracardiac procedures are performed in existing 
installations. 

2 Where applicable this standard can also be used in veterinary 
clinics. The requirements of this part do not apply to medical 
electrical equipment. 

3 For medical electrical equipment; refer to the IS 13450 
series. 


2 REFERENCES 


2.1 The standards listed in below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed below. In case the standards are to be 
referred in this clause they are to be listed as follows: 


Indian/International Title 
Standard No. 
IS 732 : 2019 Code of practice for 


electrical wiring installations 
(fourth revision) 


IS 12032 (Part 1): Graphical symbols for 
1987 diagrams in the field of 
electrotechnology: Part 1 


General information 


IS 12032 (Part 11): Graphical symbols for 
1987 diagrams in the field 
of electrotechnology: 

Part 11 Architectural and 

topographical installation 


plans and diagrams 


Indian/International Title 


Standard No. 


1S13450 (Part 1): 
2018 


Medical electrical equipment: 
Part 1 General requirements 
for basic safety and essential 
performance (second revision) 
IS 14700 (Part 3) 

(all sections) 
IEC 61000-2 

(all sections) 


IEC 61082-1 : 2014 


Electromagnetic compatibility 
(EMC): Part 3 Limits 


Electromagnetic compatibility 
(EMC) — Part 2: Environment 


Preparation of documents used 
in electrotechnology — Part 1: 
General requirements 


IEC 61557-8 : 2014 Electrical safety in low voltage 
distribution systems up to 
1000 Vac. and 1500 Vdc. — 
Equipment for testing, 
measuring or monitoring of 
protective measures — Part 8: 
Insulation monitoring devices 


for IT systems 


IEC 61557-9 : 2014 Electrical safety in low voltage 
distribution systems up to 
1 000 V a.c. and 1 500 V d.c. — 
Equipment for testing, 
measuring or monitoring of 
protective measures — Part 9: 
Equipment for insulation fault 


location in IT systems 


IEC 61558-2-15 : Safety of power 
2011 transformers, power 
supply units and similar — 
Part 2-15: Particular 
requirements for isolating 
transformers for the supply of 

medical locations 

3 TERMINILOGY 


3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Medical Location 


Location intended for purposes of diagnosis, treatment 
(including cosmetic treatment), monitoring and care of 
patients. 


IS 17512 : 2021 


NOTE — to ensure protection of patients from possible 
electrical hazards, additional protective measures need to be 
applied in medical locations. The type and description of these 
hazards can vary according to the treatment being administered. 
The manner in which a room is to be used necessitates some 
division into different areas for differing medical procedures. 


3.2 Patient 


Living being (person or animal) undergoing medical or 
dental investigation or treatment. 
NOTE — The person under treatment for cosmetic purposes 


may be considered, as far as this standard is concerned, as a 
patient. 


3.3 Medical Electrical Equipment 


Electrical equipment provided with not more than one 
connection to particular supply mains and intended to 
diagnose, treat or monitor the patient under medical 
supervision and which: 


— makes physical or electrical contact with the 
patient, and/or 
— transfers energy to or from the patient, and/or 


— detects such energy transfer to or from the 
patient. 
NOTE — The equipment includes those accessories defined 


by the manufacturer as being necessary to enable normal use 
of the equipment. 


3.4 Applied Part 


Part of the medical electrical equipment which in 
normal use: 

— Necessarily comes into physical contact with 
the patient for the equipment to perform its 
function, or 

— can be brought into contact with the patient, or 

— needs to be touched by the patient 


3.5 Group 0 


Medical location where no applied parts are intended 
to be used. 


3.6 Group 1 


Medical location where applied parts are intended to be 
used as follows: 


— Externally; 


— Invasively to any part of the body, except 
where Group 2 applies 


3.7 Group 2 


Medical location where applied parts are intended to 
be used in applications such as intracardiac procedures, 
operating theatres and vital treatment where 
discontinuity (failure) of the supply can cause danger 
to life. 
NOTE— An intracardiac procedure is a procedure whereby an 
electrical conductor is placed within the heart of a patient or 


is likely to come into contact with the heart, such conductor 
being accessible outside the patient’s body. 


In this context, an electrical conductor includes 
insulated wires such as cardiac pacing electrodes or 
intracardiac ECG electrodes, or insulated tubes filled 
with conducting fluids. 


3.8 Medical Electrical System 


Combination of items of equipment, at least one of 
which, is an item of medical electrical equipment and 
inter-connected by functional connection or use of a 
multiple portable socket-outlet. 

NOTE — The system includes those accessories which are 


needed for operating the system and are specified by the 
manufacturer. 


3.9 Patient Environment 


Any volume/space in which, intentional or unintentional 
contact can occur between patient and parts of the 
system or between patient and other persons touching 
parts of the system. 

NOTE — This applies when the patient’s position is 


pre-determined, if not, all possible patient positions should be 
considered. 


3.10 Main Distribution Board 


Board in the building which fulfils all the functions of a 
main electrical distribution for the supply building are 
aassigned to it and where the voltage drop is measured 
for operating the safety services. 


3.11 Medical IT Earthing System 


IT earthing system having specific requirements for 
medical applications. 


3.12 Safety Extra Low Voltage (SELV) 


Voltage not exceeding 42 V between conductor and 
earth, no load voltage not exceeding 50 V. When safety 
extra voltage is obtained from supply mains, it is to be 
through a safety isolating transformer or a convertor 
with separate winding, the insulation of which complies 
with the double insulation or reinforced insulation 
requirement. 


3.13 Protective Extra Low Voltage (PELV) 


Earthed circuit operating at safety extra low voltage 
which is separated from other circuits by basic 
insulation and protective screening, double insulation 
or reinforce insulation. 


NOTES 


a) Protective screening is the separation of circuits from live 
parts by means of earth screen. 


b) A protective extra low voltage circuit is also known as 
PELV circuit. 


4 ASSESSMENT 
CHARACTERISTICS 


OF GENERAL 


The classification of a medical location shall be made 
in agreement with the medical staff, health organization 
concerned or body responsible for the safety of workers 


in accordance with national regulations. In order to 
determine the classification of a medical location, it is 
necessary that the medical staff indicate which medical 
procedures will take place within the location. Based 
on the intended use, the appropriate classification for 
the location shall be determined (the possibility that 
certain medical locations may be used for different 
purposes which necessitate a higher group should be 
addressed by risk management). 


NOTES 


1 Classification of a medical location should be related to the 
type of contact between applied parts and the patient, as well 
as the purpose for which the location is used (see Annex B). 


2 Applied parts are defined by the particular standards for 
medical electrical equipment. 


5 PURPOSES, SUPPLIES ANDSTRUCTURE 


5.1 Types of System Earthing 


The TN-C system is not allowed in medical locations 
and medical buildings downstream of the main 
distribution board. 


5.2 Power Supply 


5.2.1 General 


In medical locations the distribution system should 
be designed and installed to facilitate the automatic 
change-over from the main distribution network to 
the electrical safety source feeding essential loads 
(according to 5.6 of IS 732). 


6 PROTECTION FORSAFETY 


6.1 Protection Against Electric Shock 


6.1.1 Protection Against both Direct and Indirect 
Contact 


IS 17512 : 2021 


6.1.1.1 SELV and PELV 


When using SELV and/or PELV circuits in medical 
locations of group! and group 2, the nominal voltage 
applied to current-using equipment shall not exceed 
25 V rm.s.a.c.or 60 V ripple free d.c. Protection by 
insulation of live parts according to 4.2.12.1 of IS 732 
and by barriers or enclosures according to 4.2.12.2 of 
IS 732 is essential. 


In medical locations of group 2, exposed-conductive- 
parts of equipment (for example, operating theatre 
luminaries), shall be connected to the equipotential 
bonding conductor. 


6.1.2 Protection Against Direct Contact 


6.1.2.1 Obstacles 


Protection by obstacles is not permitted. 


6.1.2.2 Placing out of reach 

Protection by placing out of reach is not permitted. 
Only protection by insulation of live parts or protection 
by barriers or enclosures is permitted. 

6.1.3 Protection Against Indirect Contact 

6.1.3.1 Automatic disconnection of supply 

6.1.3.1.1 General 


6.1.3.1.1.1 Disconnection of supply 


In medical locations of group 1 and group 2, the 
following shall apply: 


— For IT, TN and TT systems, the conventional 
touch voltage U, shall not exceed 25 V 
(U, <25 V); 


— For TN and IT systems, table 1 shall apply. 


Table 1 Maximum Disconnecting Times 
( Clause 6.1.3.1.1 ) 


TN System IT System 
Installation Disconnecting A aA N 
Nominal Voltage Time Nominal Voltage s 

U` U/U Neutral not distributed Neutral distributed 
V s V 
120 0.35 120-240 0.4 1 
230 0.2 230/400 0.2 0.5 
277 0.2 277/480 0.2 0.5 

400, 480 0.05 400/690 0.06 0.2 
580 0.02? 580/1 000 0.02} 0.08 


* U is the voltage between phase and neutral. 


> If such disconnecting time cannot be guaranteed, it is necessary to take other protective measures, such as supplementary equipotential 


bonding. 


NOTE — Disconnection of supply when overload or short-circuit conditions occur ,can be achieved by different design methods within the procedures 


of the general rules in order to satisfy the required safety level. 


IS 17512 : 2021 


6.1.3.1.2 TN systems 


In medical locations of group 1, in final circuits 
with overcurrent protective devices rated upto 32 A, 
residual current protective devices with a rated residual 
operating current not exceeding 30 mA shall be used. 


In medical locations of group 2, protection by automatic 
disconnection of supply by means of residual current 
protective devices with a rated residual-operating 
current not exceeding 30 mA shall only be used on the 
circuits that are supplying only one single equipment: 


Final circuits of ME equipment and ME systems shall 
be for the exclusive use of such equipment. 


Except those of the medical IT system, additional 
protection by residual current protective devices with 
a rated residual operating current not exceeding 30 mA 
shall be used in all final circuits as follows: 


— medical locations of group | with overcurrent 
protective devices rated 32 A and below; 


— medical locations of group 2. 


6.1.3.1.3 TT systems 


In medical locations of group 1 and group 2, the 
requirements of TN systems (see 6.1.3.1.2) apply and 
in all cases residual current protective devices shall be 
used. 


6.1.3.1.4 Medical IT system 


In Group 2 medical locations, an IT system shall be 
used for final circuits and where the same final circuit 
is connected to more than one ME equipment or 
ME system, located within the patient environment, 
excluding: 
— equipment with a rated power greater than 
5k VA; 
— X-ray equipment; 
— the supply of movements of fixed operating 
tables. 
For each group of rooms serving the same function, at 
least one separate medical IT system is necessary. The 
medical IT system shall be equipped with an insulation 


monitoring device in accordance with IEC 61557-8 
with the following specific requirements: 


— The a.c. internal impedance shall be at least 


100 KQ; 

— The test voltage shall not be greater than 
25 Vde: 

— The injected current, even under fault 


conditions, shall not be greater than 1m 
A peak; 
— Indication shall take place at the latest when 


the insulation resistance has decreased to 
50 KQ. A test device shall be provided; 


NOTE — The necessary additional requirements on IMDs 
given above are at this time not covered in the equipment 
standard IEC 61557-8. They will be removed from this 
publication as soon as they have been treated in the relevant 
equipment standard. 
For each medical IT system, an acoustic and visual 
alarm system incorporating the following components 
shall be arranged at a suitable place so that it can be 
permanently monitored (audible and visual signals) by 
the medical staff: 


— A green signal lamp to indicate normal 
operation; 

— A yellow signal lamp which lights when the 
minimum value set for the insulation resistance 
is reached. It shall not be possible for this light 
to be cancelled or disconnected; 


— An audible alarm which sounds when the 
minimum value set for the insulation resistance 
is reached. This audible alarm may be silenced. 


— The yellow signal shall go out on removal of 
the fault and when the normal condition is 
restored. 


Monitoring of overload and high temperature for the 
medical IT transformer is required. 


6.1.3.1.5 Supplementary equipotential bonding 


In each medical location of group 1 and group 2, 
supplementary equipotential bonding conductors 
shall be in stalled and connected to the equipotential 
bonding busbar for the purpose of equalizing potential 
differences between the following parts, located in the 
“patient environment”: 


— Protective conductors; 
— Extraneous-conductive-parts; 


— Screening against electrical interference fields, 
if installed; 


— Connection to conductive floor grids, if 
installed; 


— Metal screen of the isolating transformer, if 
any. 

NOTE — Fixed conductive non-electrical patient supports 

such as operating theatre tables, physiotherapy couches and 

dental chairs should be connected to the equipotential bonding 

conductor unless they are intended to be isolated from earth. 
In medical locations of group 2, the resistance of the 
conductors, including the resistance of the connections, 
between the terminals for the protective conductor 
of socket-outlets and of fixed equipment or any 
extraneous-conductive-parts and the equipotential 
bonding bus bar shall not exceed 0.2 Q. 

NOTE — This resistive value can also be determined by the 

use of a suitable cross-sectional area of the conductor. 
The equipotential bonding bus bar shall be located in 
or near the medical location. In each distribution board 


or in its proximity, an additional equipotential bonding 
bar shall be provided to which the supplementary 
equipotential bonding conductor and protective earth 
conductor shall be connected. Connections shall be 
so arranged that they are clearly visible and easily 
disconnected individually. 


6.1.4 Fire Protection 


National Building Code of India part 4 Fire and Life 
safety applies. 


7 SELECTION AND ERECTION OF 
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 


7.1 Common Rules 
7.1.1 Operational Conditions and External Influences 
7.1.1.1 Operating conditions 


7.1.1.1.1 Transformers for medical IT systems 


It is recommended that the medical IT distribution 
board is located within 25 m of the point of use. The 
distribution board should be easily accessible for 
maintenance which will require it to be located on 
the same level and the same fire section as the load it 
serves. 


Distribution boards shall be installed outside the group 
2 medical locations and should be safely guarded 
against unauthorized persons. 


The rated voltage U, on the secondary side of 
transformers shall not exceed 250 V a.c. 


7.1.1.1.2 Medical IT systems for group 2 medical 
locations 


Transformers shall be in accordance with 
IEC 61558-2-15, with the following additional 
requirements: 


The leakage current of the output winding to earth and 
the leakage current of the enclosure, when measured in 
no-load condition and the transformer supplied at rated 
voltage and rated frequency shall not exceed 0.5 mA. 


Single-phase transformers shall be used to form the 
medical IT systems for portable and fixed equipment 
and the rated output shall not be less than 0.5 kVA and 
shall not exceed 10kVA. 


If the supply of three-phase loads via an IT system 
is also required, a separate three-phase isolation 
transformer shall be provided for this purpose without 
put line-to-line voltage not exceeding 250 V. 


7.1.1.2 External influences 


NOTE — Where appropriate, attention should be given to 
prevention of electromagnetic interference. 


IS 17512 : 2021 


7.2.1.2.1 Explosion risk 
NOTES 


1 Requirements for medical electrical equipment for use in 
conjunction with flammable gases and vapours are contained 
of IS 13450 (Part 1). 


2 Where hazardous conditions are likely to occur (for example, 
in the presence of flammable gases and vapours), special 
precautions may be required. 


3 Prevention of build-up of static electricity is recommended. 
Electrical devices (for example, socket-outlets and 
switches) shall be installed at a distance of at least 
0.2 m horizontally (centre to centre) from any medical 
gas-outlets, so as to minimize the risk of ignition of 
flammable gases. 


7.1.1.3 Diagrams, 
instructions 


documentation and operating 


Plans of the electrical installation together with 
records, drawings, wiring diagrams and modifications 
thereto, as well as instructions for operation and 
maintenance, shall be provided for the user. 


NOTE — Drawings and wiring diagrams should be in 
accordance with IS 12032 and IEC 61082-1. 


The relevant documents are in particular: 


— Block diagrams showing the distribution 
system of the normal power supply and 
power supply for safety services in a 
single-line representation. These diagrams 
shall contain information on the location 
of the sub-distribution boards within the 
building; 

— Main and sub-distribution board block 
diagrams showing switchgear and control 
gear and distribution boards in a single-line 
representation; 


— Architectural diagrams 
IS 12032 (Part 11); 


— Schematic diagrams of controls; 


according to 


— Instructions for operation, inspection, testing 
and maintenance of storage batteries and 
power sources for safety services; 


— Computational verification of compliance 
with the requirements of standards 
(for example, with Automatic disconnection 
of supply); 

— List of loads permanently connected to the 
power supply for safety services indicating 
the normal currents and, in the case of 
motor-operated loads, the starting currents; 


— A logbook containing a record of all tests and 
inspections which require to be completed 
prior to commissioning. 


IS 17512 : 2021 


7.2 Wiring Systems 


Any wiring system within group 2 medical locations 
shall be exclusive to the use of equipment and fittings 
in that location. 


7.3 Switchgear and Controlgear 


7.3.1 Protection of Wiring Systems in Medical 


Locations of Group 2 


Total selectivity shall be ensured for any prospective 
overcurrent: In case of a short-circuit in a final circuit, 
the incoming circuits of the upstream distribution board 
shall not be interrupted. 


Over current protection against short-circuitand 
over load current is necessary for each final circuit. 
Overload current protection is not allowed in the feeder 
circuits upstream and downstream of the transformer of 
medical IT-system. 


7.4 Other Equipment 
7.4.1 Lighting Circuits 


In medical locations of group | and group 2, at least 
two different sources of supply shall be provided for 
some of the luminaries by two circuits. One of the two 
circuits shall be connected to the safety service. 


In escape routes, alternate luminaries shall be connected 
to the safety service (see Safety services). 


7.4.2 Socket-outlet Circuits in the Medical IT System 
for Medical Locations of Group 2 


At each patient’s place of treatment, for example, 
bedheads, the configuration of socket-outlets shall be 
as follows: 


— Either a minimum of two separate circuits 
feeding socket-outlets shall be installed; or 


— Each socket-outlet shall be 
protected against overcurrent. 


individually 


Where circuits are supplied from other systems 
(TN-S or TT systems)in the same medical location, 
socket-outlets connected to the medical IT system shall 
either: 


— be of such construction that prevents their use 
in other systems, or 


— be clearly and permanently marked. 


7.4.3 Architecture of Special Safety Supply System in 
Operation Theatre 


Operating Rooms require impeccable availability 
and quality of Electric power to ensure maximum 
patient safety. There shall be dedicated UPS system 


to ensure the back-up power for at least 3 hours 
(refer Table 1). In group 2 locations, that is, Operating 
Rooms, an Isolated Power System panel shall be used 
for circuits powering medical electrical equipment 
and systems for survival and surgical applications. 
The system architecture (as shown below) shall be 
supplied as integrated solution comprising of electrical 
switchgear, insulation monitoring device, medical 
rated transformer (as per NABH and 7.1.1.1 this 
standard.) connected to building management system 
on non-proprietary or open protocol communication 
system. Medical Rated Transformer shall conform to 
IEC 61558-2-15 and need to be protected against 
overload and short circuit and temperature monitoring 
of transformer is needed. Insulation monitoring 
device shall conform to IEC 61557-8. An audible and 
visual alarm shall be provided to alert medical and 
facility personnel. For optimum operation of medical 
equipment, prevention of electromagnetic disturbance 
is necessary. The above system shall be tested to 
attenuate electromagnetic disturbances according to 
4.5 of IS 732, IEC 61000-2 and IS 14700 (Part 3). 


8 SAFETY SERVICES 


8.1 Sources 


Classification of safety services are given in Annex A. 


8.2 General Requirements for Safety Power Supply 
Sources of Group 1 and Group 2 


In medical locations, a power supply for safety services 
is required which, in case of a failure of the normal 
power supply source, shall be energized to feed the 
equipment stated in detailed requirements for safety 
power supply services with electrical energy for a 
defined period of time and within a pre-determined 
changeover period. 


If the voltage at the main distribution board drops in 
one or several line conductors by more than 10 percent 
of the nominal voltage, a safety power supply source 
shall assume the supply automatically. 


The supply transfer should be achieved with a delay in 
order to cater for autore-closure of circuit-breakers of 
incoming supplies (short-time interruptions). 


For interconnecting cables between the individual 
components and sub-assemblies of safety power supply 
sources, see wiring systems. 
NOTE — The circuit which connects the power supply source 
for safety services to the main distribution board should be 
considered a safety circuit. 
Where socket-outlets are supplied from the safety 
power supply source they shall be readily identifiable. 


IS 17512 : 2021 


Norma! Emergency 
sey = supply 
$ á 
l- 
lupes T 
I t [e | 
I Va Ea | 
H =a j 
Incoming & changeover f | Monitoring & insulation conwot j 
t 
Manae ao -- - - | > 
I 
al T 
l 
IPMA | 
' eF eee i i 
SS ee OES O = . 
TNS system fT system 
-aaj -os| 210 
yo 
|. 24vDC | insolating 
tS supply | transformer 
aL So 
at wt) 
l a a) api 


Fic. 1 ARCHITECTURE OF SPECIAL SAFETY SUPPLY SYSTEM IN OPERATION THEATRE 


8.3 Detailed Requirements for Safety Power Supply 
Services 


8.3.1 Power Supply Sources with a Change-Over 
Period less than or equal to 0.5 s 


In the event of a voltage failure on one or more line 
conductors at the distribution board, a electrical source 
for safety services shall be used which is capable of 
providing power supply for a period of at least 3 h for: 


— luminaries of operating theatre tables; 


— ME equipment containing light sources or 
equipment essential to the application. 


As an example, this equipment may include: 


— endoscopes and essential equipment such as 
monitor; 


— critical life-supporting ME equipment. 


The power supply shall be restored within a 
change-over period not exceeding 0.5 s. 


The duration of 3 h battery may be reduced to 1 h, if a 
power source as diesel generator is installed. 

8.3.2 Power Supply Sources with a Change-over Period 
less than or equal to 15 s 


Equipment according to Safety lighting and Other 
services shall be connected within 15 s to a safety 


power supply source capable of maintaining it for a 
minimum period of 24 h, when the voltage of one or 
more-line conductors at the main distribution board 
for the safety services has decreased by more than 
10 percent of the nominal value of supply voltage and 
of a duration greater than 3 s. 
NOTE — The duration of 24 h can be reduced to a minimum 
of 3h if the medical requirements and the use of the location, 
including any treatment, can be concluded and if the building 
can be Evacuated in a time which is well within 24 h. 


8.3.3 Power Supply Sources with a Changeover Period 
greater than 15 s 


Equipment other than those covered by 8.3.1 and 
8.3.2, which is required for the maintenance of hospital 
services, may be connected either automatically or 
manually to a safety power supply source capable 
of maintaining it for a minimum period of 24h. This 
equipment may include, for example: 


— Sterilization equipment; 


— Technical building installations, in particular 
air conditioning, heating and ventilation 
systems, building services and waste disposal 
systems; 

— cooling equipment; 

— cooking equipment 


IS 17512 : 2021 


8.4 Safety Lighting Circuits 
8.4.1 Safety Lighting 


In the event of mains power failure, the necessary 
minimum illuminance shall be provided from the 
safety services source for the following locations. 
The changeover period to the safety source shall not 
exceed 15 s: 


— escape routes; 

— Lighting of exit signs; 

— Locations for switchgear and controlgear 
for emergency generation sets and form a in 


distribution boards of the normal power supply 
and for power supply for safety services; 


— Rooms in which essential services are 
intended. In each room at least one luminary 
shall be supplied from the power source for 
safety services; 


— Rooms of group | medical locations. In each 
room at least one luminary shall be supplied 
from the power supply source for safety 
Services; 


— Rooms of group 2 medical locations. A 
minimum of 50 percent of the lighting shall 
be supplied from the power source for safety 
services. 


NOTE — The values for minimum illuminance, refer National 
Lighting Code. 


8.5 Other Services 

Services other than lighting which require a safety 
service supply with a changeover period not exceeding 
15 s may include, for example, the following: 

— selected lifts for firemen; 

— ventilating systems for smoke extraction; 

— paging systems; 

— Medical electrical equipment used in 
group 2 medical locations which serves for 
surgical or other measures of vital importance. 
Such equipment will be defined by responsible 
staff authorized by the management; 

— Electrical equipment of medical gas supply 
including compressed air, vacuum supply and 
narcosis (anesthetics) exhaustion as well as 
their monitoring devices; 


— Fire detection, fire alarms and fire extinguishing 
systems. 


9 VERIFICATION 


The dates and results of each verification shall be 
recorded. 


9.1 Initial Verification 


The tests specified below under items a) to e) in addition 
to the requirements of 6 of IS 732 shall be carried out, 
both prior to commissioning and after alterations or 
repairs and before re-commissioning. 


a) Functional test of insulation monitoring devices 
of medical IT systems and acoustical/visual alarm 
systems. 


b) Measurements to verify that the supplementary 
equipotential bonding is in accordance with 
Supplementary equipotential bonding. 


Cc 


ma 


Verification of the integrity of the facilities 
required with Supplementary equipotential 
bonding for equipotential bonding. 


d 


wm 


Verification of the integrity of the requirements of 
Safety services for safety services. 

e) Measurements of leakage current of the 
output circuit and of the enclosure of medical 
IT transformers in no-load condition. 


9.2 Periodic Verification 


Periodic verification of items a) to e) of Initial 
verification shall be carried out in accordance with 


local/national regulations. If no local/national 
regulations exist, the following intervals are 
recommended: 

a) Functional testing of changeover devices: 


12 months; 

b) Functional testing of insulation monitoring 
devices: 12 months; 

c) Checking, by visual inspection, 
protective devices: 12 months; 

d) Measurement verifying the 
equipotential bonding: 36 months; 


settings of 
supplementary 


e) Verifying integrity of facilities required for 
equipotential bonding: 36 months; 
f) Monthly functional testing of: 
— Safety services with batteries: 15 min; 
— Safety services with combustion engines: 
until rated running temperature is achieved: 
12 months for “endurance run”; 
— Safety services with batteries: capacity test; 
— Safety services with combustion engines: 
60 min; 
In all cases at least 50 percent to 100 percent of the 
rated power shall be taken over. 


g) Measurement of leakage currents of IT 


transformers: 36 months; 
h) Checking of the tripping of RCDs at JAN: not 
less than 12 months. 


25m 


awa--+— eee ee 


IEC 2513/2000 


NOTE Dimension shown are not prescriptive 


Figure 710A — Example of patient enviroment (IEC 60601—1-1) 


Fic. 2 EXAMPLE OF PATIENT ENVIRONMENT 


IS 17512 : 2021 


IS 17512 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 8.1 ) 


CLASSIFICATION OF SAFETY SERVICES FOR MEDICAL LOCATIONS 


Table A-1 — Classification of safety services 
necessary for medical locations 


(see also to 5.6 of IS 732) 


Class >15 
(long break) 


Automatic supply available in more than 15 s 


(medium break) 


Class 0 Automatic supply available at no-break 
(no-break) 

Class 0.15 Automatic supply available within 0.15 s 
(very short break) 

Class 0.5 Automatic supply available within 0.5 s 
(short break) 

Class 15 Automatic supply available within 15 s 


NOTES 


1 Generally it is unnecessary to provide a no-break power 
supply for medical electrical equipment. However, certain 
microprocessor-controlled equipment may require such 
supply. 

2 Safety services provided for locations having differing 
classifications should meet that classification which gives 
the highest security of supply. Refer to Annex B for guidance 
on the association of classification of safety services with 
medical locations. 


3 The notation “within” implies “<”. 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4 ) 


EXAMPLES FOR ALLOCATION OF GROUP NUMBERS AND CLASSIFICATION FOR SAFETY 


A definitive list of medical locations showing their 


SERVICES OF MEDICAL LOCATIONS 


The accompanying list of examples is provided as a 


assigned groups is impracticable, as the use to which guide only. 
locations (rooms) might be put will differ between 
countries and even within a country. 


Table B-1 — List of Examples 


Medical location Group Class 
0 1 2 <0.5s >0.5s<15s 

1. Massage room X X X 
2. Bedrooms X 

3. Delivery room X x? X 
4. ECG, EEG, EHG room X X 
5. Endoscopic room x? x? 
6. Examination or treatment room X X 
7. Urology room x’ Xb 
8. Radiological diagnostic and therapy room, other than mentioned under 21 X X 
9. Hydrotherapy room X X 
10. Physiotherapy room X X 
11. Anesthetic room X X’ X 
12. Operating theatre X X X 
13. Operating preparation room X X x? X 
14. Operating plaster room X X X X 
15. Operating recovery room X X xe X 
16. Heart catheterization room X x? X 
17. Intensive care room X x? X 


10 


IS 17512 : 2021 


Table B-1 (Concluded ) 


Medical location Group Class 
0 1 2 <0.5s >0.5s<15s 
18. Angiographic examination room X X’ X 
19. Hemodialysis room X X 
20. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) room X X 
21. Nuclear medicine X X 
22. Premature baby room X X° X 


> Not being an operating theatre. 


* Luminaries and life-support medical electrical equipment which needs power supply within 0.5 s or less. 


Explanations of terms listed in Table B-1: 
1. Massage room 
2. General ward (bedrooms) 


Medically used room or group of rooms in which 
patients are accommodated for the duration of their stay 
in a hospital, or in any other medical establishment. 


3. Delivery room 
Room in which the birth takes place 


4. (ECO), 


(EEG), 


Electrocardiography room 
electroencephalography room 
electrohystero-graphy room (EHG) 


5 
Room intended for application of endoscopic methods 


for the examination of organs through natural or 
artificial orifices. 


Endoscopic room 


Examples of endoscopic methods are bronchoscopic 
,laryngoscopic, cystoscopic, gastroscopic and similar 
methods, if necessary performed under anesthesia. 

6. Examination or treatment room 

7. Urology room (not being an operating Théâtre) 
Room in which diagnostic or therapeutic procedures 
are performed on the urogenitaltract using medical 
electrical equipment, suchas X-ray equipment, 


endoscopic equipment and high-frequency surgery 
equipment. 


8. Radiological diagnostic room (radiological 
diagnostic and therapy room) 


Room intended for the use of ionizing radiation for 
display of internal structures of the body by means of 
radiography or fluoroscopy or by the use of radio-active 
isotopes or for other diagnostic purposes. 


Therapy room 


Room intended for the use of ionizing radiation to 
obtain therapeutic effects. 


9. Hydrotherapy room 


Room in which patients are treated by hydrotherapeutic 
methods Examples of such methods are therapeutic 
treatments with water, brine, mud, slime, clay, steam, 
sand, water with gases, brine with gases, inhalation 


11 


therapy, electrotherapy in water (with or without 
additions), massage thermotherapy and thermotherapy 
in water (with or without additions). 


Swimming pools for general use and normal bathrooms 
are not considered as hydrotherapy rooms. 


10. Physiotherapy room 


Room in which patients 
physiotherapeutic methods. 


are treated by 


11. Anesthetic room 
Medically used room in which general inhalation 


anesthetics are administered. 


NOTE — The anesthetic room comprises for instance the 
actual operating theatre, the operating preparation room, the 
operating plaster room and treatment room. 


12. Operating Théâtre 
Room in which surgical operations are performed. 

13. Operating preparation room 
Room in which patients are prepared for an operation, 
for example, by administering anesthetics 

14. Operating plaster room 
Room in which plaster of Paris or similar dressings are 
applied while anesthesia is maintained. 


NOTE — Such a room belongs to the operating room group 
and is usually spatially connected to it. 


15. Operating recovery room 


Room in which the patient under observation recovers 
from the influence of anesthesia. 


NOTE — Such a room is usually very close to the operating 
room group but not necessarily part of it. 


16. Heart catheterization room 


Room intended for the examination or treatment 
of the heart using catheters. Examples of applied 
procedures are measurement of action potentials of the 
hemodynamic of the heart, drawing of blood samples, 
injection of contrast agents or application of stimulants. 


17. Intensive care room 
Room in which bed patients are monitored 
independently of an operation by means of medical 


electrical equipment Body actions may be stimulated 
if required. 


IS 17512 : 2021 


18. Angiographic examination room 


Room intended for displaying arteries or veins, etc 
with contrast media. 


19. Hemodialysis room 


Room in a medical establishment intended to connect 


12 


patients to medical electrical equipment in order to 
detoxicate their blood. 


20. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
21. Nuclear medicine 


22. Premature baby room 


IS 17512 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE 


COMPOSITION 


Electrical Installations Sectional Committee, ETD 20 


Organization 


Engineers India Limited 
Areva T and D India Limited, Noida 


Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply and Transport 
Undertaking, Mumbai 


BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, New Delhi 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Defence 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, Delhi 


Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Development Consultants Limited, Kolkata 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Electrical Contractors Association of Maharashtra, 
Pune 


Electrical Installation Engineers’ Welfare Association, 
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 
GETCO, Vadodara 


Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited, 
Kolkata 


Government of Kerala, Chief Electrical Inspectorate, 
Thiruvananthapuram 


Government of Madhya Pradesh, Chief Electrical 
Inspectorate, Sagar 


Government of Orissa, Chief Electrical Inspectorate, 
Bhubaneswar 


Government of Tamil Nadu, Chief Electrical 
Inspectorate, Chennai 


Havells India Limited, Noida 


Representative(s) 


Ms SUMITA ANAND (Chairman) 
SHRI SAHA BISWAJIT 


Suri H. V. VAGAL 
SHRI P. S. NAIK (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER KANT SOOD 
SHRI RAJIV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI UPENDRA KUMAR 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. TULANI (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH JOSHI 


SHRI ANAND KUMAR 
MR MANUJ SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI VINOD KUMAR HIRNA 
SHRI SAURABH CHATURVEDI (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP BANERJEE 
Suri Das RANJIT K. (Alternate) 


SHRI TANOJ TANDON 
Suri H. M. BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KOLHATKAR 
SHRI SUNIL BHURE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MANIVANNAN 
SHRI S. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Ms SHALINI VERMA 
MR ROHIT KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri A. S. SHAH 
SHRI M. A. PRAJAPATI (Alternate) 


SHRI SOUMITRA BHADURI 
Suri T. K. Guna Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR V. C. 
SHRI PREMACHANDRA VHAS E. R. (Alternate) 


SHRI MUJALDE S. S. 
Suri DUBEY A. K. (Alternate I) 
SHRI I. V. Cutsut (Alternate II) 


SHRI G. C. CHOUDHURY 
SHRI S. K. HABIBUR REHMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI P. MANOHAR 
SHRI M. SAKTHIVEL (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI RAKESH KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


13 


IS 17512 : 2021 


Organization 


Indian Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 
Jaipur Vidyut Vitaran Nigam Limited, Jaipur 
Schneider Electric India Private Limited, Mumbai 
Legrand India Private Limited, Mumbai 
Mazagon Dock Limited, Mumbai 

National Institute of Solar Energy, Gurugram 
National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, 


New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Rural Electrification Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Schneider Electric India Private Limited, Gurugram 
Siemens Limited, Mumbai 
Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai 


Tata Power Delhi Distribution Limited, New Delhi 
The Shipping Corporation of India, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SHRI J. PANDE 
SHRI S. GOPA Kumar (Alternate I) 
SHRI UTTAM Kumar (Alternate II) 


SHRI DEBDAS GOSWAMI 
SHRI HEMANT SALI (Alternate I) 
SHRI AMOL KALSEKAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI ARJUN SINGH 


SHRI C. S. KORE 
SHRI D. MAHESWARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH DEOTALU 
SHRI RAJKUMAR PANICKER (Alternate) 


SHRI A. M. JOGLEKAR 
SHRI PARAG PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI MANOJ MORAMPUDI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVISH CHANDRA JHA 


SHRI S. PANDARIGANTHAN 
Suri D. A. BHASKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI DASTIDAR SHANTANU GHOSH 


SHRI AMITABHA SARKAR 
SHRI SURESH RaJa (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH MANGTANI 
SHRI KISHOR YADAO (Alternate) 


SHRI G. V. CHANDRA SEKHAR 
SHRI HRISHIKESH ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI KAPIL KUMAR 


SHRI NITIN TAKPERE 
SHRI ABHISHEK KasHyaP (Alternate) 


Ms MEGHNA MUDGAL 
Ms NEHA AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Member Secretary 


SHRI RITWIK ANAND 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (ETD), BIS 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 20 (13655). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


