IS $251 ( Part 2 ) : 1992

(Reaffirmed 2003)
qTTdvm$

ASPHALT P&iBR `FINISHER - GENERAL REQUIREtiENTS
PART 2 HYDRAULIC

( First Revision)

UDC

625-85-089

Q BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAf,

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARO

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

Construction

Plant and Machinery

Sectional

Committee,

HMD 18

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. Rapid increase in volume of traffic, heavier axle loads and better riding quality, demand for improved road surfacings. This has necessitated improvements in the techniques of construction and laying of bitumen roads. Mechanization is playing an ever increasing role in the production of high quality bituminous mixes. This standard was first published in 1965. This revision is made in view of the experience gained during the use of this standard. The clauses with regard to capacity, mounting, feeding conveyor, performance, etc have been modified.

IS3251(Put2):1992

Indian Standard ASPHALT PAVER FINISHER REQUIREMENTS
PART 2 HYDRAULIC

GENERAL

( First Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the requirements regarding materials, construction, capacity and performance of asphalt paver finishers ( hydraulic ). 2TYPE 2.1 For the purpose of defining capacity and rating the pavers can be classified in,two types as Type A and Type B. 3MATERIALs 3.1 Materials used in construction of asphalt paver finisher and the power unit shall comply with the requirements of relevent Indian Standards. 4 CAPACITY AND RATING 4.1 The capacity and rating for paver shall be as given below. two types of 6 MWNTING 6.1 The paver finisher wheels or tracks. may be mounted on

6.2 If the paver. finisher is mounted on wheels, the front tyres shall be four in number and shall be of solid rubber type. Hydraulic steering arrangement shall be provided. 6.3 If the paver finisher is mounted on crawlers the crawler shall be independently operated to furnish full steering control. Crawlers shall be provided with a spring tension track tightener and all rollers, sprockets and idlers shall be designed with an adequate means for lubrication. The bearing pressure of the crawler assembly when the paver finisher is empty shall not be greater than 10 N/mm'. The bearing pressure of crawler assembly under loaded condition shall not be greater than 17 N/mm'. 6.3.1 Three Point Crawler Suspension Three point crawler suspension shaI1 be provided which allows position contact of crawler shoes and positive traction on undulated terrain like access road to paving areas. This will reduce strain to the tractor frame on corrugated surface. 6.4 If the paver finisher is mounted on wheels, the front wheels shall be with hydrostatic steering and the main (drive wheels shall be controlled through a differential drive. The recommended tyre pressure for pneumatic tyres shall be clearly indicated on the machine. 6.5 Whether mounted on wheels or tracks, sufficient traction shall be provided by the crawlers or pneumatic tyres, when working on a firm unyielding base, to push up a 10 percent grade, a fully loaded truck of 10 t. 7 PUSHING ROLLERS 7.1 The front paver finishers 1 end of the main frame of the shall be equipped with two

Twe A

Type B

200 mm 1. Maximum paving 250 mm thickness 2. Paving width a) with basic screed 2.0 to 2.5 to ( Hydraulically ) 4-O m 5.5m extendable ) b) with extensionsup to 4-5 m Up to 7*5 m c) with cut off 1.8 m 2-O m shoes 3. Maximum paving rate b 4. Engine rated out put ( minimum ) 5 TRANSMISSION 5.1 Transmission shall be fully hydrostatic capable of providing variable paving and travel speed and differential locking arrangements. 150 t/h 44kW 250 t/h 74 kW

IS 3251 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 rollers with adjustable height and oscillation properly spaced to contact the rear wheels or the material feeding truck when feeding premixed material into the paver finisher. 8 RECEIVING CONVEYOR HOPPER AND FEEDING 9.3 Limit switches shall be grovided at the auger ends of the screed which sense the presence of material and automatically start or stop the auger conveyor individually. 9.4 The spreading hydraulically. augers shall be operated shalI be

8.1 The paver finisher shall be provided with a steel hopper to receive material direct from trucks. The hopper for the paver finisher shall have two bar type conveyors with variable hydrostatic drive independent of traction transmission, and also capable of being operated individually.
8.1.1 The

9.5 The height of the auger adjustable.
10 SCREED

conveyor

10.1 Compaction The paver finisher shall be provided with a device for .obtaining preliminary compaction of the material by either of the method described in IO.l,l and 10.1.2. Compaction may be effected either by means of tamping device a head of the screed or by vibration applied to the screed or combination of the both. 10.1.1 Tutnper If compi&tion is obtained by means of tamper, the tamper shall operate at the rate of not less than 1 500 strokeslmin. The vertical strokes may be about 5 mm. The wearing parts of the tamper shall be manganese steel or equally wear resisting alloy steel and shall be renewable and adjustable to the optimum projection below the screed. The tamping action shall leave the material in proper condition for smoothening and finishing by the screed. The tamper shall be operated hydraulically. 10.1.2 Vibrating Screed If compaction is obtained by means of a vibrating screed, tbe intensity of vibration shall be capable of being controlled through,a range of 0 to 3 000 vibrations/gin so that the optimum intensity in relation to mat thickness density, working speed and material specification may be employed. 10.2 The paver finisher shall be equipped with a fully floating, heated screed. The screed shall slide over the compacted mat and smooth it out in preparation for rolling and shall be adjustable to give a crown of - 1 to +3 percent to the compacted mat. 10.3 The screed shall be hydraulically extendable so that the width of the mat is infinitely variable between that minimum and maximum specified width. The telescopic system shall preferably have separate guide cylinders to increase the stability of the adjustable screeds. Extension of screed also have either of the 2

floor of the hopper shall be co& tructed of abrasion resistant steel plate having a minirqum thickness of 6 mm. cgpacity ._ of the hopper

8.1.2 The minimum shall be as follows: Screed Width with Extension Up to 2.5 m 3 m and above

Minimum Capacity 8t 12 t

8.1.3 The sides of the hopper shall consist of wings so arranged that each hopper wing may be individually raised or lowered by hydraulic ram to a position within the paver's overall width for travel or to avoid accumulation of material in the corners of'the hopper. 8.2 The conveyor shall move the premixed material to the spreading screws, the volume of material moved being controlled by means of adjustable gates. Feed control limit switches shall be provided at the screed which automatically switches `on' or `off' the conveyors and augers on either side independently, to assure the even flow of material to the screed so that surging or waiting for material shall be avoided. 9 SPRRADING AUGERS

9.1 The paver finisher shall be provided with two spreading augershaving independent drives which may be extended hydraulically and capable of evenly distributing the material delivered by the bar type conveyor over the whole or either half of the width of the area to be surfaced. One auger shall have a right hand thread and the other a left hand thread, each moving the material from the centre to the side. 9.2 The auger conveyor anti-abrasion tips. shall have removable

Is 32Sl( Part 2 ) : 1992, arrangement for compaction vibration or both. such as tamper, 11.1.3 Leveling Cylinder This cylinder automatically moves up and down in accordance with electrical signals sent from the controllers, changes the attack angIe of the screed and maintains the thickness and cross slope of pavement at a fixed level. Il.14 Mobile Reference or Averaging .Beam

10.4 The screed shall be equipped with diesel propane LPG/electric heating system which will enable the screed to be uniformly heated before and during the operation of the paver finisher. An eIectronic safety-ignition system coupled with a thermostat shal1 be provided. 10.5 The screed shall be constructed abrasion resisting steel and the wearing shall be renewable. from Parts

10.6 The screed and the tamper, if employed, shall be so carried and drawn over the material that it will maintain a predetermined average thickness which will not be affected by sudden or minor changes in the level of the base on which the material is being applied. 10.7 The screed shall be equipped with turn buckle screws for adjusting.th8 angle of attack. The height of towpoiats to which 68~ aide arms are attached shall be hydraulically adjustable to enable the changes in the angle of attack during operation. 1O.g Means shall be provided for raising the screed and the tamper if employed, by a power operated hydraulic ram or similar device to a traveling position clear of the road surface. Locks or safety chains shall be provided for holding the screed in the raised position while the paver finisher is being moved frcna 088 working point to another. 10.9 Minimum paving speed shall vary from 0 to 15 m/min for crawler paver and 0 to 30m/min for wheeled paver. 11 OPTIONAL EQUIPMENT

This beam This can also be used with sensor. is towed along.the side of the machine and by averaging out the undulation on the surface over which it travels allows the sensor to maintain long uniform longitudinal profile. Beams takes several forms: a long skid with a length of 9.14 m or more, which averages over the high spots; wheeled models which follow all undulation; or one with random placement of sledges. 11.2 Auto+ie `Pave' Control

The screed may be locked in its position and the tamper vibrator drives are automatically shut off when the finisher stops moving ( traction level in neutral ), 113 Ihul Controls Dual controls shall be provided as an option so that the paver may be operated from each side of the machine. This may be achieved with a set of readily relocatable master panel and driver's seat. 114 Wide Crawler !%oet3 Wide crawler shoes shall be offered as an option which reduces the ground contact pressure -eliminating the damage to the unstable subgrade or sub-base course. 11.5 Rubber Pads for Crawler Rubber pads for crawIer shall .be offered as an option for crawler shoes, which ensures positive traction on steep hi11 climb job. This will avoid damages to the finished pavement surface when the paver has to travel on the pavement. 12 CONTROL CONSOLB

11.1 A8tomatlc Screed Controlhs Automatic screed controller shall be provided as a standard option with the pavers consisting of slope sensor, grade sensor and' tbe related system. 11.1.1 Grade Controller This controller detects the level in the traveling direction and maintains surface smoothness. 11.1.2 Slope Controller This controller detects the slop in the transvers direction and maintain the cross slope at the preset level. Setting can be made to a desired level. 3

12.1 Engine, tachometer, speedometer, water temperature gauge, fuel level gauge, hour meter and other warnin lamps on- the instrument SingIe panel shall be of L st quality design. control console for power steering, finger tip top control for hopper; feeders, screws, flowgates, screed hoist, tamper vibration, speed, differential lock, forward or reverse travel,

IS 3251( Part 2 ) : 1992 automatic level and grade. cbntrol, for all operations of paver. 13 CONSTRUCTION 13.1 The drives from the engine to crawlers or hopper convevors, Fcrew driving wheels spreaders, etc shall be of first,quality design in accordance with best engineering practice. Gears and sprockets shall be machine cut and properly hardened. Clutches and brakes shall be of simple design, of ample capacity and shall be accessible for quick adjustment. 13.2 Workmmship All parts, components and assemblies of the paver finisher including, castings, forgings, bearings, seals, moulded parts, stampings, machines surfaces and welded parts shall be clean and free from sand, dirt, fins, pits, sprues scale, flux and other harmful extraneous material. All .exposed edges shall be rounded or beveled. 14 `METHOD OF TI&N!%ORTING &tc needed and replacemint, without the removal of other major assemblies and installed attachments. Covers and plates which shall be removed for and component adjustments, replacements maintenance shall be equipped with quickdisconnect fasteners. 17 LUBRICATION 17.1 Means for lubrication shall be provided for all bearings, power transmitting gears, sprocket, chains and all other parts requiring Plain bearings on their shafts lubrication. shaI1 have oil or grease grooves. All lubricating nipples shall be of similar type and shall be readily accessible. Where access for lubrication is difficult, bearing shall be such that lubrication is required as infrequently as possible or facilities for lubrication from a remote position shall be provided. A lubrication chart indicating the points to be lubricated shall be permanently affixed in a conspicuous place on the machine describing the type of lubricant, t,he intervaf of greasing and the amount to be used. Chains shall be enclosed and provided with oil bath or drip feed lubrication. 17.2 Automatic pressure release devices shall be provided where pressure lubricating equipment may damage grease seals or other parts. 18 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS lg.1 All exposed parts which are subject to high operating temperatures or which are energised electrically shall be insulated, fully enclosed or guarded. All moving parts which are of such nature or so located as to be a hazard to operating or maintenance persosnnel shall be my enclosed or guarded. Protective devices shall not impair the operating functions. lg.2 Effective precautions minimize fire hazard. 19 FINISHING 19.1 All exposed parts of the paver finisher shall be cleaned, treated and painted with suitable anti-corrosive protective paint conforming to the relevant Indian Standards. Electric equipment, power units and parts subjecte-d to high temperature shall be painted with special paint suited for the purpose. 20 MAINTENANCE TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES 20.1 A strong tool box with lock and key and containing necessary tools and accessories for 4 shall be taken to

14.1 The maximum traveling speed of the paver shall not be ,Iess than 10 km/h for wheeled majrimum and 4 km/h for crawler paver. 15 PERFORMANCE 15.1 The paver finisher shall lay, compact and finish a mat of asphaltic material of thickness and widths specified in 4.1. The compacted mat shall be free from tearing and dragging and the surface shall be smooth laterally and longitudinally. The limits of tolerances for surface' irregularity on bituminous surfacings laid by a paver finisher is given below: Type of
Sutfac fng

L&~itudinal Profile ( mm*) 10 10 8

Cross ProJire (m**)

Bitminous mecadum Semidense asphaltic concrete Asphaltic concrete 16 MAINTENANCE

ACCESSIBILITY

16.1 Ease of Maintenance All major assemblies and installed attachments shall be accessible for maintenance, repair, *Measured with a 3m straight edge. *+Mcasured under a camber template.

_IS 3251( Part 2 ) : 1992 normal maintenance, adjustment and lubrication of the paver finisher together with instruction and inyentory of tools and accessories shall be provided. Provisions shall be made for suitably affixing the tool box on the paver finisher. 21 MARRING 21.1 Instruction Plates

8) Hopper width, mm;

9) Hopper 10)Screed 11)Screed
b) Engine

capacity, kg; plate width, mm; and plate length, mm.

The paver finisher shall be equipped with instruction plat.es including warnings and suitably located, describing any cautions, special for important procedure to.be followed in operating and servicing the machine. 21.2 Marking Plate
'

1) Model; 2) Rated speed, rev/min; 3) Rated output, kW. c) Pmfmance

and

1) Paving width, m;

-

2) Paving
3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) 9) 10) 11)

The paver finisher shall have an identification plate permanently affixed to it with the following particulars conspicuously marked on it: a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, b) Manufacturer's reference no, c) Capacity ( see 4.1 ), d) Type and rating of power unit, and e) Year of manufacture. 21.3 The following information ded by the manufacturer: a) Dimensions 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) Overall length, mm; Overall width, mm; Overall height, mm; Gross weight, kg' ( approx ); Distance between track centre, mm; Track length on ground, mm; Track shoe width, mm; shall be provL

thiakness, mm; Crown, percentage; Paving speed, m/min; Maximum paving rate t/h; Traveling speeds kmph; Minimum turning radius, m; Vibrator revolutions, vibrations/min; Tamper frequency, strokes/min; Tamper stroke, mm; and Screed, heater.

d) .Optional Equipments 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) Automatic screed controller, Automatic pavn controller, Dual controls, Crawler rubber pad, and Wider crawler shoes,

e) Accessories 1) List of tools, and 2) Special accessories, if any.

J

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Burcou of Indian Stmrdardr Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Rarean of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director be addressed to the Enquiries relating to copyright or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. HMD 18 ( 4354 )

Amendments hoed Amend No.

Sioce Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 311 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113 ( East )

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

: AHMADABAD,

BANGALORE, BHOPAL, F'ARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Prlotcd at Printwell Printers, Aliparh. India

