RAT AAF IS 14982 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


fag fera & fore 
Udt-feetan wart — fates 


(FAT TA) 


Anti-Stripping Agents for Bitumen 
Addition — Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 75.140 ; 93.080.20 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2022 Price Group 4 


Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and 
Related Product Division Council. 


The adhesion between bitumen and aggregate is an important factor for the stability and sustainable performance of 
bituminous pavements. It has been observed that very often the cause of distress and deterioration in a bituminous 
pavement is due to the water and moisture ingress into the pavement leading to the adhesion failure (stripping) of 
bitumen film from the aggregates Water has the ability to strip bitumen film from the aggregate surface and this is 
accelerated under traffic loading and constant climatic variations (wet and dry, freeze and thaw cycles). 


As it is known that most of the aggregates being siliceous in nature are easily wetted by water and are water loving 
(hydrophilic affinity) by nature. This accelerates the issue of stripping. Worldwide it is a common practice to use 
anti-stripping agents to resolve the issue of stripping in bituminous mixes. Anti-stripping agents significantly 
improve the bond between bitumen and aggregate. Use of anti-stripping agents will ensure that moisture/water 
does not interfere at the interface of aggregate and bitumen and the bituminous mixes do not see stripping and 
disintegration arising due to water ingress. 


The earlier standard was specific to one category of product (amines). However, with several technologies 
emerging globally, this revised standard accommodates all classes of anti-stripping additives that are being used 
in the industry from amines to phosphoric based to the new generation silanes. 


Since publication of this standard in 2001, many new technologies have emerged globally. The earlier standard was 
product specific to one category of product (amines). The Standard was first revised in 2017. In the first revision 
all classes of additives were accommodated and emphasis was on performance. The tensile strength ratio was 
added to the standard as it will help to assess the loss of strength under wet condition. Minimum wet strength has 
been defined in order to ensure the additives do not affect the absolute value of wet strength required for pavement 
performance. Looking at the high temperature and the medium to heavy rainy monsoon season of 3-4 months in 
our climate zone, the Boil test has been extended from 10 min to 30 min to replicate actual field conditions and to 
ensure retention of bituminous coating to reduce stripping and ravelling and to eliminate development of potholes. 


In this second revision, the requirement of solubility in high diesel oil in the ratio of 2 : 98 at ambient temperature 
has been deleted as it was felt that the requirement was no longer relevant and it is also not mentioned in any 
other standard on the subject worldwide. . Also the specified requirement of Wet strength has been corrected as 
a minimum of 7.50 KN. The requirement “Stripping value with bitumen containing 1.0 percent of anti-stripping 
agent” has been renamed as “Retained coating with bitumen containing 1.0 percent of anti-stripping agent” as 
the required value of 95 percent represents the retained coating and not the amount of coating that has undergone 
stripping. 

In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from following standards: 

AASHTO T 283 ‘Standard Method of Test for Resistance of Compacted Asphalt Mixtures to Moisture-Induced 
Damage’ 

ASTM D 3625 ‘Standard Practice for Effect of Water on Bituminous-Coated Aggregate Using Boiling Water’ 
The Composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14982 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


ANTI-STRIPPING AGENTS FOR BITUMEN 
ADDITION — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 
ae IS No. Title 
1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements of 
anti-strip additives for reducing moisture susceptibility 1448 [P : 10/Sec 2]: Methods of test for 
in bituminous mixes and materials. Hydrated lime and 2013/1SO 3016: 1994 petroleum and Its 
cement which are added directly to the aggregates are products: Part 10 Cloud 
not in the scope of this standard. point and pour point, 


1.2 This standard also provides guidance with 
respect to applications, storage, handling and safety 
precautions, and dosage of anti-stripping agents for use 
in bituminous materials and mixes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in the text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 


334 : 2002 Glossary of terms relating 
to bitumen and tar 


(third revision) 


Methods of testing tar and 
bituminous materials — 
Determination of specific 
gravity (first revision) 
(under print) 


Methods for testing 
tar and bituminous 
materials— Determination 
of flash point and fire 
point (first revision) 
(under print) 


Methods for testing 
tar and bituminous 
materials — Determination 
of water content 
(first revision) 


1202 : 2021 


1209 : 2021 


1211 : 2021 


Section 2 Determination 
of pour point 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 334 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Stripping — Stripping is the breaking of the 
adhesion bond between the aggregates and the 
bituminous binder. In one way or the other water gets 
in between the binder film and the aggregate surface 
and because the aggregate surface has higher attraction 
for water than for bituminous binder the adhesive bond 
is broken. 


3.2 Active Adhesive — If an anti-stripping agent is 
added to the bituminous binder, even wet aggregate 
surface may be coated. This is defined as active 
adhesive. 


3.3 Passive Adhesive — The process of forming and 
maintaining a strong adhesive bond between binder and 
dry aggregate surface is defined as passive adhesive. 


In such case the passive adhesive is the ability of the 
bitumen to maintain the integrity of the adhesive bond 
with aggregate to prevent stripping under wet condition 
once bond formation is achieved. 


4 MATERIALS 


Any chemical additive suitable for modification 
of bituminous binder, which is effective to prevent 
the stripping of any aggregate, may be used. When 
optimized dosage of the additive is added to the bitumen 
binder it shall not change the original viscosity grading 
of the binder, in case of modified binder it shall not 
adversely affect the specification parameters. 


IS 14982 : 2022 


5 REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Anti- stripping agent either liquid or powder shall 
be homogeneous materials having tolerable odour. 


5.2 The physical and performance requirements of the 
anti-stripping agents shall comply with the requirements 
specified in Table 1. 


6 SAMPLING 


6.1 For the purpose of testing, the sampling procedure 
from drums, barrels or tank shall be as follows: 


The content of drum or barrel from which the sample 
is to be drawn shall be warmed up to 45-55 °C, if 
required, and thoroughly mixed by rolling to and 
fro on the ground for a period of 5 to 10 min. Where 
practicable, the content of that tank shall be agitated by 
forced circulation of air before sampling. 


6.1.1 Preparation of Samples 


Before carrying out any of the tests, the sample shall be 
mixed by gentle shaking to ensure uniformity. 


6.2 If the single sample from a single run fails to fulfill 
the test requirements specified under 5, sample shall 
be drawn on the basis of 6.1 for testing in the same 
manner. If these samples conform to requirement of 
5, the lot shall be accepted otherwise the lot shall be 
rejected. 


7 TESTS 


Unless otherwise specified, tests shall be carried out 
according to the methods referred to in Table 1. 


8 MARKING 


8.1 Each container shall be legibly and indelibly 
marked with the following: 


a) Name of the product; 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture; 
c) Month and year of manufacture; 

d) Batch number or code number; and 

e) Expiry date. 


8.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


9 APPLICATIONS 


9.1 Anti-stripping agents can be used for the following 
two applications: 


a) For bituminous Surfacing (Sprayed work) — It 
covers road construction like surface dressing, 
penetration macadam, built up spray grout, etc. 


b) For Bituminous Surfacing (Premixed 
Surfacing) — It covers bituminous surfacing like 
open graded premix carpet mix seal surfacing, 
bituminous macadam, dense bituminous macadam 
semi dense asphaltic concrete and dense asphaltic 
concrete. Stone matrix asphalt, porous asphalt. 


Table 1 Requirements for Anti-Stripping Agents 


( Clauses 5.2 and 7) 
SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, Ref to 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Specific gravity at 27 °C 0.85-1.10 IS 1202 
ii) Pour point °C, Max 42 IS 1448 [P : 10/Sec 2] 
iii) Flash point, °C (COC), Min 75 IS 1209 
iv) Water content, percent by volume, Max 1.0 IS 1211 
v) Thermal stability at 163 °C, 24h No appreciable change in efficacy Annex A 
vi) Under water coating test with maximum Complete coating Annex B 
1 percent anti-stripping agent (Active adhesion) 
for spray work 
vii) Retained Coating with bitumen containing 95 percent Annex C 
maximum 1.0 percent of anti-stripping agent 
(boiling water test for 30 min), Min 
viii) Indirect tensile strength ratio, Min 80 percent Annex D 
ix) Wet Strength , Min 7.50 KN Annex D 


NOTE — The sample of anti-stripping agent shall be drawn within 24 h after delivery and tested within 7 days from the date of drawing, unless 


otherwise specified. 


9.2 Application of Anti-Stripping Agents for 
Bituminous Surfacing (Sprayed Work) 


For this purpose the anti-stripping agent must be well 
mixed with the binder. The type of anti-stripping agent 
supplied is either liquid or solid. It will be fed into the 
bulk distributor through the manhole preferably fitted 
with a stirring device. The binder with agent shall be 
circulated by means of spray pump for at least 30 min 
to ensure homogeneous mixing. The additive can also 
be kept heated in a special storage tank attached to the 
bitumen tank. It shall be fed by a small dosage pump 
into the pipe supplying the bitumen throughout the 
operation. This ensures that the agent is mixed in the 
tank and also saves time. 


9.3 Application of Anti-stripping Agents for 
Bituminous Surfacing (Premixed Surfacing) 


In asphalt plant, the aggregate is normally dried 
and heated then mixed with bitumen. The mixing 
temperature varies between 120° and 175 °C for warm/ 
hot mixes, depending mainly on the grade of bituminous 
binder. With moist and partially wet aggregate the 
desired adhesion can be achieved by addition of 
anti-stripping agent. The amount of anti-stripping agent 
to be added depends upon the type and viscosity of the 
bitumen and type and gradation of aggregate. 


Anti-stripping agents dissolve easily in bitumen 
products, If the bitumen temperature is 130 °C-175 °C. 
There are two methods for adding an agent. The most 
commonly used is to pour the calculated amount into 
the bitumen tank and allow 15-30 min of circulation 
to ensure a homogeneous mix and in this case it is 
necessary to use heat stable anti-stripping agent which 
can be stored in hot bituminous binder for 24 h without 
any significant loss in efficiency. The second method 
is to co-inject using metering pump when bitumen is 
pumped. 


In the drum mix process, the aggregate is mixed with 
bitumen in the drum. Very often the aggregate contains 
a certain amount of moisture content and normally 
remains in the aggregate after mixing. The required 
adhesion in the process can be ensured by use of an 
anti-stripping agent. 


10 STORAGE OF ANTI-STRIPPINGAGENTS 


10.1 Anti-stripping agents are stable at normal 
temperature for many years provided they are stored in 
closed drums, barrels or tanks. 


IS 14982 : 2022 


10.2 The anti-stripping agents are freeze thaw stable, 
but prolonged storage at low temperature may cause 
liquid anti-stripping agents to freeze. These should be 
allowed to thaw and melt on heating. 


10.3 Solid anti-stripping agents should be stored at 
temperature below their melting point (40-50 °C). 


10.4 Steel, aluminium containers or plastic such 
as drums, tanks, etc, are suitable for storage of 
anti- stripping agents as specified in material safety 
data sheet. Gaskets and hoses, made from teflon or 
polyamide should be used. 


11 HANDLING AND SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 


11.1 The anti-stripping agents with HMIS rating 
0-3 only can be used with proper safety guidelines. 


11.2 When handling anti-stripping agents, always 
use PPEs as per MSDS guidelines provided by 
anti-stripping agent supplier. They should be kept away 
from public, especially from children. 


11.3 In case of contact with eyes flush with water for at 
least 15 min and follow MSDS. 


11.4 In case of fire, follow MSDS guidelines. 


11.5 If spillage has occurred, then also MSDS guidelines 
will be followed to remove contamination. 


12 ADDITIVE DOSAGES 


12.1 The dose of anti-stripping agent depends upon the 
nature of aggregates, that is, silicate content and the 
porosity. Higher quantity of dose is required for open 
surfaces like surface dressing bituminous macadam, 
open graded premix carpet and mix seal surfacing. 
In the case of dense bituminous mixes or semi-dense 
bituminous binder a lesser quantity of anti-stripping 
agent is required. Follow the guidelines of manufacturer 
to determine optimum dosage which allows meeting 
the requirement as specified in Table 1. 


12.2 The actual dose of anti-stripping agent shall also 
depend on the quality of anti- stripping agent. The 
method for determination of dose concentration is 
detailed in Annex B for spray work and Annex C and 
Annex D for pre-mix work. 


IS 14982 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
[ Table 1, SI No. (v) ] 
TEST FOR THERMAL STABILITY OF ANTI-STRIPPING AGENT 


A-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


This test determines whether any degradation in quality 
of anti-stripping agent is caused as a result of its storage 
in hot bitumen at 163 °C for 24 h. 


NOTE — Test for spray work. 
A-2 REAGENTS 


Use cut-back bitumen MC-3000 (4 parts of bitumen 
and one part of kerosene) for spray work and only 
bitumen for premix. 


A-3 PROCEDURE 


For premix work blends of optimized dosage of 
anti-strip agent and bitumen will be prepared and kept 


in an oven at 163 °C for 24 h in the sealed condition. 
After heat exposure, the blended samples can be used 
for premix sample preparation to meet the specification 
of Table 1 [SI No. (vii), viii) and (ix)]. For spray it is 
fluxed with kerosene oil to obtain cut-back bitumen of 
consistency of MC-3000 and tested for under water 
coating as per Annex B and used as such for HMA 
mixes test described in Annex C and Annex D. 


A-4 REPORTING OF TEST RESULTS 


Anti-stripping agent is deemed to be heat resistant, if 
the dose requirement before and after heat exposure 
can meet the requirement laid down as per Table 1. 


ANNEX B 
[ Clauses 12.2, A-3 and Table 1, SI No. (vi) ] 
UNDER WATER COATING TEST (FOR SPRAYED WORK) 


B-1 GENERAL 


This test is meant for dose determination of 
anti-stripping agent for sprayed work. 


B-2 PROCEDURE 


Anti-stripping agent (0.02 to 1.0 percent) shall be 
blended with cut-back bitumen MC-3000 (4 parts 
of bitumen and Ipart of kerosene oil). These blends 
shall be used for testing their efficacy to coat the road 
aggregates under water. 


In a tin container of llitre capacity, about 200 g of 
coarse aggregate of 13.2 mm nominal size (passing 
22.4 mm sieve and retained in 11.2 mm sieve) shall 
be taken. The container shall be filled to 3/4th of its 


capacity with distilled water at 40 °C. The bitumen 
anti-stripping agent blend shall be added at rate of 
5.0 percent by weight of aggregate. The lid shall be 
replaced and container shall be vigorously shaken for 
2 min. The water shall be drained off and aggregate 
piece shall be transferred on to a pieces of white paper 
and examined visually for coating. The test shall be 
repeated for different percentages of anti-stripping 
agent. 


B-3 REPORT 


The percent content of anti-stripping agent capable of 
giving 100 percent coating of coarse aggregate shall be 
taken as optimum dose for sprayed work. 


IS 14982 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
[ Clause 12.2 and Table 1, S1 No. (vii) | 
COATING RETENTION TEST (FOR PREMIX WORK) 


C-1 GENERAL 


This test is meant for dose determination of anti- 
stripping agent for premix work. 


C-2 PROCEDURE 


The anti-stripping agent shall be blended in percent 
content should be 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 0,6, 0.8 
and | percent in bitumen. These blends shall be used 
for testing their efficacy in retaining bitumen film on 
coated aggregates. 


200 g of coarse aggregates of 13.2 mm nominal size 
(passing 22.4 mm sieve and retained on 11.2 mm sieve) 
shall be heated to 150 °C and mixed with 8g of bitumen 
and anti-stripping agent blend at 150 °C in a casserole 
with a spatula. Time of coating should be noted and 
reported. The material should be heated till mixing is 
complete to maintain 150°C mixing temperature. 


After complete coating the mixture shall be transferred 
to a tray and allowed to condition at 135 °C for 2 h and 
then transferred to 500 ml beaker and allowed to cool at 


the room temperature for about 2h. Distilled water shall 
then be added to submerge the coated aggregates upto 
500 ml mark of beaker. 


Put the beaker on hot plate and start heating, bring the 
water temperature to boiling and note the time, continue 
boiling for 30 more minutes, at 10, 20, 30 min remove 
the floating bitumen from the top by spatula to avoid 
redeposition. 


C-3 VISUAL INSPECTION 


The aggregate will be taken out and allow to dry at 
room temperature. The brownish surface as well as 
completely stripped surface will be considered as 
stripped area. Only glossy black or dull black portion 
of the aggregate shall be considered as coated surface. 


C-4 REPORT 


The percentage of anti-stripping agent which retains 
95 per cent coating of the aggregate shall be taken as 
minimum dose for premix work. 


ANNEX D 
[ Table 1, SI No (viii and ix) ] 
DETERMINATION OF RETAINED INDIRECT TENSILE STRENGTH (FOR PREMIX WORK) 


D-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


A numerical index of reduced Indirect Tensile Strength 
(ITS) is obtained by comparing indirect tensile strength 
of the freshly moulded and cured samples with 
the indirect tensile strength of triplicate samples at 
30 blows from both sides that have been immersed in 
water for 24 h at 60 °C. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 Water-Baths 


D-2.1.1 Automatically controlled water-bath for 
bringing the immersed test samples to 60 + 1 °C for 
indirect tensile strength test. 


D-2.1.2 Water-Bath for Density Measurement — An 
ordinary water-bath for weighing the test samples in 
water in order to determine their densities. 


D-2.2 Balance — Suitable for weighing the test 
samples in air and water. 


D-2.3 Transfer Plates — Sufficient number of flat 
steel plates of sufficient size to keep the test samples. 
NOTE — The water used for the wet storage of test samples 


shall be either distilled or otherwise treated to eliminate 
electrolytes with conductivity less than 10 micro Siemens/cm. 


D-3 PROCEDURE 


For quantitative evaluation, the test shall be carried out 
on Marshall specimen. The Marshall test specimens 
shall be prepared using mix design with optimum binder 
content with specified percent anti-stripping agents. 
The temperature of the mixing should not exceed 
175 °C. Mixes should be prepared with maximum 
120 coating time and further conditioned at 135 °C for 
2 h. Six specimens should be prepared with 30 blows on 
each side at 135 °C. Each set of 6 test specimens shall 
be sorted out in two groups of 3 each so that the average 
specific gravity of the specimens in Group I shall be 
almost the same as in Group II. Group I specimen shall 
be tested for indirect tensile strength. Keep the samples 
at room temperature and then place in a 25 °C water 


IS 14982 : 2022 


bath for 2 h prior to determining their indirect tensile 
strength. Group II specimens shall be immersed in 
water at 60 °C for 24 h. and then conditioned in water 
at 25 °C for 2 h and then tested for tensile Strength. 
Retained indirect tensile strength will be calculated as 
under: 


Retained indirect tensile strength, percent 


_ Average tensile strength of Group II 
Average tensile strength of Group I 


x 100 


Average tensile strength of Group II will be wet average 
tensile strength. 


D-4 REPORT 


The retained indirect tensile strength will be reported. 


IS 14982 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 06 


Organization 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, R & D 
Centre,Noida 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Kochi 
Refinery 


Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology, 
Jorhat 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 
Dilip Buildcon Limited, Bhopal 
Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Engineer in Chief Branch, New Delhi 


G R Infra-Projects Limited, Gurugram 
GP Global Asphalt Private Limited, New Delhi 
Highways Research Station, Chennai 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Colas Private Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited 
(HP Green R & D Center), Bengaluru 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


PROF SATISH CHANDRA (Chairman) 


SHRI SUPRIO GOSH 
SHRI VINOD KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


Ms SONAL MAHESHWARI 


SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN 


SHRI ADALAZHAGAN K. 


SHRI SRIDHAR RAJU 
Ms RAJANI LAKHANI 
DR AMBICA BEHL 


DR SHASHI D. BARUAH 
Dr B. P. BARUAH (Alternate) 


SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL 


SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN 
Dr V. SELVAVATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI B. B. KAMESWARA RAO 
SHRI ANUSH K. C. (Alternate) 


SHRI UMAKANT KUMAR 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEKANAND 
SHRI ANIL KUMBHARE (Alternate I) 
SHRI SACHIN VINAYAK ZOPE (Alternate II) 


SHRI O. P. SRIVATAVA 
SHRI R. JAYAPRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI U. C. GUPTA 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR JAIN 


SHRI T. S. SUNDAR 
SHRI R. GEETHA (Alternate) 


SHRI HARSHAD KUMAR PANDIT 


SHRI K. G. RANGANATHA 
SHRI T. K. SUBHAASH (Alternate) 


SHRI B. Ravi 
SHRI K. R. KRISHNA (Alternate ) 


SHRI SANTOSH DHAKU BHOGALE 


SHRI MANOJ SRIVASTAVA 
DR KAMAL Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr DHARAMVEER SINGH 


Dr ARAVIND SWAMY 


IS 14982 : 2022 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Oil Corporation (R & D Centre), Faridabad 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited-Refineries and 
Pipelines Division, New Delhi 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhi 
Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Oil Total Private Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


National Rural Roads Development Agency, 
New Delhi 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 


Om Infracon Private Limited, Guwahati 


Ooms Polymer Modified Bitumen Private Limited, 
Gurugram 


Shell Bitumen India Private Limited, Gurugram 
Zydex Industries Limited 


In Personal Capacity 
BIS Director General 


Representative(s) 


Dr J. MURALI KRISHNAN 
Dr A. VEERARAGHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAM SUNDAR RAVINDRANATH 


SHRI DHANESH KUMAR 
Dr I. Devorta (Alternate) 


SHRI S. B. LAHKAR 
SHRI K. Meput (Alternate I) 
Ms K. GEETHASHREE (Alternate I) 


SHRI N. S. RAMAN 


SHRI S. K. NIRMAL 
SHRI R. V. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV GOGNE 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI VARUN AGGARWAL 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI B. C. PRADHAN 


SHRI VINAY KUMAR 


SHRI DHIRAJ GONDALIA 
SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. N. Das 
SHRI MANISH Basa (Alternate 1) 
SHRI DIGAMBAR DEKA (Alternate II) 


SHRI B. R. TYAGI 
SHRI PALASH KATHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI NILANJAN SARKER 


SHRI VISHAL SALUJA 
SHRI HIMANSHU AGARWAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI AJAY RANKA (Alternate II) 


Dr P. S. KANDHAL 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T., SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (PCD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI D. UMA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (PCD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 06 (16290). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


