**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11042-1 (1984): Binding Screws for Alpine Skis, Part 1: 
General Requirements [PGD 27: Mountaineering Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



: t 



"^"i 



5 0^' 



UDC 685'363'22: 621'882'24 



IS : 11042 (Parti ) -1984 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 
BINDING SCREWS FOR ALPINE SKIS 

PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



1. Scope —Specifies the dimensions, meciianical properties and fastening characteristics of screws 
used for mounting ski bindings to Alpine sl<is. 

1.1 The purpose of this standard is to aid the design of a more rational and safer binding mounting 
system. 

2. Definitions — For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Ski Binding Screw — A fastener which, after mounting, ensures the connection of binding and 
ski by axial pretension. 

2.2 Penetration Depth — Ihe distance from the top surface of the ski to the lower extremity of the 
ski binding screw. 

2.3 Driving Torque — The maximum value of the moment required to drive the ski binding screw into 
the drill hole of the ski or test specimen. 

2.4 TIghitening Torque — The moment, specified in the mounting instructions or in the test procedure, 
which is used to tighten the ski binding screw to ensure sufficient fastening. 

2.5 Stripping Torque— -The maximum measurable moment which causes damage to the internal 
thread in the ski or the test specimen, or to the thread of the screw if the already tightened screw is 
further loaded by a driving moment. 

2.6 Static Pull-out Resistance — The resistance of the ski or test specimen to a pull-out force applied 
quasi-statically in the axial direction. 

3. Dimensions 

3.1 Screw Head — Sk\ binding screws shall be having a maximum head diameter of 10 mm and be 
cross recess No. 3 with a recommended minimum penetration depth of 2'7 mm. If screws having 
countersunk heads are used, the angle of countersinking shall be 90 ± 2°. 

3.2 Thread and End Configuration — Within the maximum major diameter of 5*5 mm according 
to Fig. 1 the cross-section of the screw may be circular or non-circular. 



♦ 5.5 h13 



4»2.6 hl6 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 THREAD AND END CONFIGURATION 

3.2.1 Irrespective of the shaft length, the thread length shall be at least 1 mm longer than the 
penetration depth. The tolerance on the length of the screw shall be ± 0*8 mm. 



Adopted 5 September 1984 



© December 1984, ISI 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAKADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 11042 (Parti ) -1984 

3.3 Shaft End — shall correspond to Fig. 1. 

4. Materials — Any material con:iplying with the requirements of 5,1 and 5.2 may be used (for 
example, case-hardened or heat-treated steel). 

5. General Requirements 

5.1 Surface ~Sk\ binding screws shall be coated or plated with materials which provide adequate 
protection against corrosion and ensure a reproducible coefficient or friction. 

5.1.1 A suitable coating meeting the above requirement would be a zinc electroplated coating, 
having a clear chromate conversion coating and a minimum local thickness of B/^m (batch average 
4/im M//7, 7/xm Max), when measured on the top surface of the screw head. During electroplating, 
adequate precautions shall be taken to avoid hydrogen embrittlement. 

5.2 Strength Requirements 

5.2.1 The breaking moment for ski binding screws shall be not less than 10 N.m. 

5.2.2 When subjected to the ductility test screws shall not break. 

5.3 Typical Application characteristics — Ihe specified fastening and mounting characteristics of the 
screw are based on a uniform drill diameter of 4*1 H 12. 

5.3.1 Mounting characteristics— \n the test the screw shall obtain the following values without 
damage to the screw head : 

Driving torque 3*3 N.m Max 

Stripping torque 5 N.m Min 

5.3.2 Fastening characteristics — The mean static pull out resistance shall correspond to at least 
that of a reference screw complying with the requirements of Type B of IS : 5957-1970 'Dimensions 
for screw threads for thread forming tapping screws' and having a diameter of 5*5 mm, a thread pitch 
of V81 mm and symmetrical flank angle of 60^ 

6. Designation — Ski binding screws shall be designated by : 

a) the words 'Ski Binding Screws' and the abbreviation 'SBS'; 

b) the nominal dimensions : diameter (mm)xlength (mm); 

c) the reference to this Indian Standard; and 

d) the type of screw head. 

Example\ 

Ski binding screws of nominal diameter 5'5 mm and length 12 mm, with countersunk heads 
would be designated as : 

Ski Binding Screws SBS 55 x 12 IS : 11042 ( Part 1 ) with countersunk head. 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is being issued in the following two parts : 

Part 1 General requirements 
Part 2 Test methods 

While preparing this standard assistance has been derived from ISO 6004-1981 'Alpine skis — 
ski binding screws requirements' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 

The use of ski binding screws complying with the requirements of this standard will improve 
binding mounting. By standardizing the drill hole diameter, recommendations by the manufacturers 
will no longer be required and mistakes and improper mounting, caused by differences in instructions, 
will, hence, be avoided. Additionally, standardization of the penetration depth will enable ski 
manufacturers to design their products such that there will be sufficient thickness in the mounting 
area and it will facilitate the proper location of reinforcement parts to make optimum use of the 
fastening characteristics. 

The driving torque — stripping torque ratio, which is essentially more advantageous than that of 
the commonly-used tapping screws, will enable adjustable torque limiting screw-drivers to be set 
unifrormly, therefore, reducing the danger of thread stripping. The use of the cross recess No. 3 screw 
also contributes significantly to a considerable simplification of the binding mounting procedure. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



