( Reaffirmed 2005 )

TERMS,

DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATION OF PLAIN BEARING
PART III LUBRICATION

1. scope -Covers bearings lubrication.

the most commonly

used terms, with

their definitions,

applied

in the field of plain for

1.1 For some terms and word combinations their short forms are given which are recommended use when they are unambiguous; self explanatory terms are given without definitions. 2. General Terms Lubricant action, which results in reducing to rubbing

2.1 Lubrication (Type of) and/or friction force. 2.2 lubrication

of wear, surface deterioration

( Method of) -

Supplying

of a lubricant

surfaces. and/

2.3 LubricantSubstance or friction force. 3. Types of Lubrication 3.1 -Types of lubrication 3.1.1

applied

on the rubbing

surfaces to reduce wear surface deterioration

in the plain bearing

shall be as follows.

According to physical state of the lubricants:

a) Gas lubrication, b) Liquid lubrication, and c) Solid film lubrication. 3.1.2 According to the separation of the rubbing surfaces by a lubricant film: lubrication, lubrication,

a) Hydrodynamic b) Hydrostatic

c) Aerodynamic lubrication, d) Aerostatic lubrication, e) Elasto hydrodynamic lubrication, f ) Boundary lubrication, and g) Semi-liquid lubrication. 3.2 Gas Lubrication -Type of lubrication in which bodies are separated by a gaseous lu-bricant. 3.3 Liquid Lubrication -Type of lubrication bodies are separated by a liquid lubricant. in which the rubbing surfaces surfaces of the relatively of the relatively surfaces of the moving moving relatively

the rubbing

3.4 Solid Film lubrication -Type of lubrication moving bodies are separated by a solid lubricant.

in which

the rubbing

3.5 Hydrodynamic Lubrication - Liquid lubrication in which the rubbing surfaces are separated completely due to the pressure, self generated in a liquid film between the relatively moving surfaces. 3.6 Hydrostatic Lubrication - Liquid lubrication in which the rubbing surfaces relative motion or in a state of rest are completely separated by the externally supplied into the gap between the surfaces. of the bodies in pressurized liquid surfaces

in which complete separation of rubbing 3.7 Aerodynamic Lubrication - Gas lubrication is the result of pressure self-generated in the gas film by the relative motion of the surfaces.

3.8 Aerostatic Lubrication - Gas lubrication in which the rubbing surfaces of the bodies in relative motion or in a state of rest are completely separated by the externally pressurized gas supplied into the gap between the surfaces.

Adopted

21 June 1982

@ February 1983, ISI I
INDIAN
MANAK

Gr 2

:-

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

IS:10260 (Part Ill)-1982
of lubrication in which friction and film thickness of 3.9 Nasto-Hydrodynamic Lubrication -Type the liquid lubrication between the relatively moving surfaces are determined by the elastic properties of the materials as well as by the rheologic properties of the lubricant. 3.10 Boundary Lubrication - Type of lubrication in which friction and wear between to surfaces in relative motion are determined by the properties of the surface and by the properties of the lubricant other than bulk viscosity. 3.11 Semi-Liquid realised. 4. Methods 4.1 Lubrication Type of lubrication in which hydrodynamic lubrication is partially

of Lubrication in the plain bearing shall be as follows: of application and of lubricant:

Methods of lubrication

4.1.1 According a) Continuous

to periodicity lubrication,

b) Periodical lubrication, 4.1.2 According Circulating Life-time to methods of renewing the lubricant: lubrication, lubrication, and lubrication.

a) b) cl
4.1.3

Once-through According

to the way of applying the lubricant to the friction surface:

a) Force-feed lubrication, b) Dip-feed lubrication, c) Ring lubrication, d) Drop-feed lubrication, e) Oil fog lubrication ( oil niist lubrication f) Pad lubrication, 9) Wick lubrication, h) Rotaprint lubrication, and i) Solid-film coating. in which the lubricant having passed the rubbing in which the lubricant is applied only before the or ),

4.2 Circu/ating Lubrication - Method of lubrication surfaces is mechanically recirculated to them. 4.3 Life-Time Lubrication - Method of lubrication system is put into operation.

4.4 Once-Through Lubrication - Method of lubrication in which the lubricant is periodically continuously delivered to the rubbing surfaces without returning to the lubricating system. 4.5 Force-Feed Lubrication surface under pressure. Method of lubrication

in which the lubricant is supplied to the rubbing

4.6 Dip- Feed Lubrication - Method of lubrication in which the rubbing surface is partially, permanently or periodically submerged into a bath containing liquid lubricant. 4.7 Ring Lubrication - Method of lubrication with a ring driven into rotation by a shaft. Note-The ring may be fixed on a rotating shaft. in which the lubricant is supplied to the rubbing in which the lubricant is carried to the rubbing surfaces

4.8 Drop-Feed Lubrication - Method of lubrication surfaces in the form of drops at regular intervals.

4.9 Oil Fog Lubrication (Oil Mist Lubrication) - Method of lubrication in which the lubricant is detivered to the friction surface as mist or fog produced by injecting the lubricant into a stream of air or other gas. 4.10 Pad Lubrication - Method of lubrication~in which the liquid lubricant is delivered to the rubbing surface area by a contacting pad of a moistened material possessing capillary properties. 4.11 Wick Lubrication - Method surface by means of a wick. of lubrication in which the lubricant is delivered to the rubbing

2

IS: lO260( Part Ill)in which the surface of the body is supplied 4.12 Rotaprint Lubrication - Method of lubrication the solid lubricant detaching from a special lubricating solid body pressed to the surface. 4.13 Solid-Film Coating - Method before the part is put into operation. 5. Lubricants and their of lubrication when the rubbing surface is coated with

1982
with

a solid film

Components in the plain bearing shall be as
fOllOWS:

5.1 Lubricants and their components

5.1.1 According to their physical state: a) Gaseous lubricant, b) Liquid d) Solid 5.1.2 lubricant, lubricant. to the presence of additive: c) Grease, and

According

a) Base oil, b) Lubricant 5.1.3 with -additive.

According to their origin: oil, lubricant,

a) Mineral

b) Petroleum

c) Vegetable lubricant, d) Animal lubricant, e) Synthetic lubricant. 5.2 Lubricating surfaces. Oil Oil, usually refined, primarily intended to reduce friction between moving or

or solid lubricant consisting essentially of a stabilized 5.3 Grease - Semi-solid It may contain other ingredients. synthetic oil with soaps or other thickeners. 5.4 Base Oil-Oil to which one or several~additives have to be added to obtain either naturally

mixture a finished occurring

of mineral, product.

5.5 Mineral Oiloil consisting of mamixture by the treatment of materials of mineral origin. 5.6 Petroleum Lubricant Oil refined to the

of hydrocarbons

or obtained

in a usual way, obtained lubricant for

from crude oil. of imparting adheience or limits or limits the new properties between time particles of corrosion or of of a of of a

5.7 Additive - Material added enhancing existing properties.

the purpose promotes retards retards

5.6 Solid Lubricant Binder (Binder) - Material which solid lubricant and between them and the surface. 5.9 Anticorrosion lubricated metallic 5.10 Antioxidant lubricant. Additive surfaces. Additive Additive Additive which which prevents, prevents,

the time of oxidation

which 5.11 Rust Preventive Additive - Additive -on the surfaces made from iron-base alloys. 5.12 Antiwear surfaces. Additive-Additive Additive Depressant preventing which which

prevents,

retards or limits

the time~of rust occurring of wear of the rubbing scoring of the lubricant. rubbing

or reducing prevents, lowers

the rate or intensity limits or retards

5.13 Antiscoring surfaces. 5.14 Pour-Point

Additive Additive

down the pour point of a liquid

5.15 Viscosity index - Number on a conventional scale used to characterize the variation of the A high viscosity index indicates a relatively small change of viscosity of an oil with temperature. viscosity with temperature and vice versa. 5.16 Viscosity Index improver - Additive, usually a polymer, which with temperature, thus increasing a viscosity index of an oil. 3 lowers down a viscosity variation

lS:IO26O(PartIII)- 1982
5.17 Antifoam Additive -Additive 5.18 Detergent Additive in an oil. preventing or reducing which foaming helps of a liquid lubricant. particles dispersion in suspension of insoluble of the

Surface active additive

to keep solid increases

5.13 Dispersant Additive - Additive impurities and stability of suspension 5.20 Multifunctional lubricant. 5.21 Additive Mixture

to a liquid lubricant which mostly at low temperature. improving

Additive

simultaneously

several

properties

Additive Package -

of several additives

ready to be added to a lubricant.

6. -Basic Characteristics

of Lubricants or semi-solid wear and friction, substance which causes it to resist

6.1 Viscosity - Bulk property -of a fluid, semi-fluid flow. Viscosity decreases as temperature rises. 6.2 Lubricity properties. Ability of a lubricant to reduce

other than by its purely viscous to mix together force.

of two or several lubricants 6.3 Lubricant Compatibility ( Compatibility ) - Ability without deteriorating their performance properties when they are used or stored. 6.4 Consistency Ability of greases to resist deformation under the action of external

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

The content of this standard was earlier mostly covered in IS :4757-1968 ' Dimensions for `Thin-walled bearings and thrust halfwrapped bushes and thrust washers ' and IS :4774-1968 practices, the concerned committee felt the washers `. On the basis of the current International necessity to bring out a separate standard on plain bearing terminology to make it in line with ISOlDlS 4378/l ' Plain bearing-Vocabulary: Part 1 Construction `, ISO/DIS 4378/2 ' Plain bearingVocabulary: Part 2 Friction and wear ' and lSO/DlS 437813 `Plain bearing-Vocabulary: Part 3 Lubrication `, ' Issued by International Organization for Standardization. The standard consists of the following parts: IS : 10260 ( Part I )-1982 IS : 10260 ( Part II )-I982 Terms, definitions Terms, definitions and wear Terms, cation definitions and classifications and classification and classifications of plain bearing: of of plain plain Part I Construction Part II Friction Part Ill Lubrito

bearing: bearing:

IS : 10260 ( Part III )-1982

These standards have been prepared for the guidance of the manufacturers and consumers assist them for the correct interpretation of the terminology related to the plain bearings.

Print&d

at Delhi

Prlaters.

Delhi.

India

