IS 2491 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IMAA HAF (Reaffirmed 2022) 
Ga aaa — amA Agia — tifa aføar 
(ARRIT JTI) 
Indian Standard 
FOOD HYGIENE — GENERAL PRINCIPLES — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 67.020 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 5 


Food Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems Sectional Committee, FAD 15 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Food Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food 
and Agriculture Divisional Council. 


People have the right to expect the food they eat to be safe and suitable for consumption. Foodborne illness and 
foodborne injury are, at best unpleasant, and at worst, can be fatal. There are also other consequences, such as 
damage to trade and tourism, which may lead to loss of earnings, unemployment and litigation. Food spoilage is 
wasteful, costly and can adversely affect trade and consumer confidence. 


International food trade and foreign travel are increasing, bringing important social and economic benefits. But 
this also makes the spread of illness around the world easier. Eating habits too, have undergone major change in 
many countries over the last three decades and new food production, preparation and distribution techniques 
have developed to reflect this. Effective hygiene control, therefore, is vital to avoid the adverse human health and 
economic consequences of foodborne illness, foodborne injury and food spoilage. Everyone, including farmers 
and growers, manufacturers and processors, food handlers and consumers has a responsibility to assure that food 
is safe and suitable for consumption. 


Keeping in view the above, this standard was first published in 1963 and revised in 1972 and 1998. In the second 
revision, the text was updated and aligned with the Recommended International Code of Practice — General 
Principles of Food Hygiene [CAC/RCP- 1-1969), Rev. 3-1997] published by the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards 
Programme, Codex Alimentarius Commission, Rome. The title was also aligned with the Codex Code of Practice. 
In this revision, the text has been updated and aligned with the latest revision of the Recommended International 
Code of Practice — General Principles of Food Hygiene [CAC/RCP 1-1969, Rev.4- 2003]. 


This standard lays a firm foundation for ensuring food hygiene and should be used in conjunction with each 
specific code of hygienic practice, where appropriate and IS 14595 : 1998 ‘Food hygiene — Microbiological 
criteria — Principles for establishment and application’. The standard follows the food chain from primary 
production through to final consumption, highlighting the key hygiene controls at each stage. It recommends a 
HACCP or FSMS based approach wherever possible to enhance food safety. 


The government, that is the regulatory authorities, can consider the contents of the standard and decide how they 
can encourage the implementation of this standard to protect consumers adequately from illness or injury caused 
by food and provide assurance to the consumers that the food is suitable for human consumption. Similarly, 
industry should apply the hygienic practices set out in this standard to provide food which is safe and suitable for 
consumption and ensure that the consumers gave clear and easily understood information, by way of labelling 
and other appropriate means, to enable them to protect their food from contamination and growth/survival of 
food borne pathogens by storing, handling and preparing it correctly. By adopting this standard the industry can 
also maintain confidence in internationally traded food. 


There may be situations where some of the specific requirements contained in this standard are not applicable. In 
all such cases, the user shall take a decision on the basis of the assessment as to what is necessary and appropriate 
on the grounds of the safety and suitability of food for consumption. 


The text indicates where such situations are likely to arise using the phrases ‘where necessary’ and ‘where 
appropriate’. In practice this means that, although the requirement is generally appropriate and reasonable, there 
will nevertheless be some situations where it is neither necessary nor appropriate on the grounds of food safety 
and suitability. In deciding whether a requirement is necessary or appropriate, an assessment of the risk should be 
made, preferably within the framework of the HACCP or FSMS approach. This approach allows the requirements 
in this standard to be flexibly and sensibly applied with a proper regard for the overall objectives of producing 
food which is safe and suitable for consumption. In doing so it takes into account the wide diversity of activities 
and varying degrees of risk involved in producing food. The controls described in this standard are internationally 
recognized as essential to ensure the safety and suitability of food for consumption. 


This standard is subject to the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 and other food safety legislations, such as the 
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and regulations framed thereunder. Nothing in this standard shall affect the 
operation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and regulations framed thereunder; Standards of Weights 
and Measures Act, 1977 or any other law for the time being in force and shall be subject to the restrictions 
imposed thereunder, wherever applicable. 


IS 2491 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


FOOD HYGIENE — GENERAL PRINCIPLES — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the essential principles of food 
hygiene applicable throughout the food chain 
(including primary production through to the final 
consumer) to achieve the goal of ensuring that food is 
safe and suitable for human consumption. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Following standards listed below contain 
provisions which, through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


3103 : 1975 Code of practice for industrial 
ventilation (first revision) 


3646 (Part 1): Code of practice for interior 


1992 illumination: Part 1 General 
requirements and recommendations 
for working interiors (first revision) 

4251 : 1967 Quality tolerances for water for 
processed food industry 
7688 Code of practice for labelling of pre- 


packaged foods: 

General guidelines 

Guidelines on claims 

Nutritional labelling 

Food hygiene — Microbiological 
criteria — Principles for 
establishment and application 
Hazard analysis and critical control 
point (HACCP) — Requirements for 
any organization in the food chain 
(first revision) 

Food safety management systems — 
Requirements for any organization in 
the food chain 


(Part 1) : 1975 
(Part 2) : 1976 
(Part 3) : 1976 

14595 : 1998 


15000 : 2013 


IS/ISO 22000 : 
2005 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Cleaning — Removal of soil, food residue, dirt, 
grease or other objectionable matter. 


3.2 Contaminant — Any biological or chemical agent, 
foreign matter or other substances not intentionally added 
to food which may compromise food safety or suitability. 


3.3 Contamination — Introduction or occurrence of 
a contaminant in food or food environment. 


3.4 Disinfection — Reduction, by means of chemical 
agents and/or physical methods, of the number of 
micro-organisms in the environment, to a level that 
does not compromise food safety or suitability. 


3.5 Establishment — Any building or area and the 
surroundings, under the control of the same 
management in which food and other related materials 
are handled. 


3.6 Food Hygiene — All conditions and measures 
necessary to ensure the safety and suitability of food 
at all stages of the food chain. 


3.7 Hazard — A biological, chemical or physical agent 
in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause an 
adverse health effect. 


3.8 HACCP — A system which identifies, evaluates and 
controls hazards which are significant for food safety. 


3.9 Food Handler — Any person who directly handles 
food (packaged or unpackaged), food equipment and 
utensils, or food contact surfaces and is, therefore, 
expected to comply with food hygiene requirements. 


3.10 Food Safety — Assurance that food will not cause 
harm to the consumer when it is prepared and/or eaten 
according to its intended use. 


3.11 Food Suitability — Assurance that food is 
acceptable for human consumption according to its 
intended use. 


3.12 Primary Production — Those steps in the food 
chain up to and including, for example, harvesting, 
slaughter, milking, fishing. 


4 PRIMARY PRODUCTION 


4.0 Objectives 


To reduce the likelihood of introducing a hazard which 


IS 2491 : 2013 


may adversely affect the safety of food, or its suitability 
for consumption, at later stages of the food chain, 
primary production should be managed in a way which 
ensures that food is safe and suitable for its intended 
use. Where necessary, this should include, 


a) avoiding the use of areas where the 
environment poses a threat to the safety of 
food; 


b) controlling contaminants, pests and diseases 
of animals and plants in such a way as not to 
pose a threat to food safety; and 


c) adopting practices and measures to ensure 
food is produced under appropriately hygienic 
conditions. 


4.1 Environmental Hygiene 


Potential sources of contamination from the 
environment should be considered. In particular, 
primary food production should not be carried on in 
areas where the presence of potentially harmful 
substances would lead to an unacceptable level of such 
substances in food. 


4.2 Hygienic Production 


4.2.1 The potential effects of primary production 
activities on the safety and suitability of food should 
be considered at all times. In particular, this includes 
identifying any specific points in such activities where 
a high probability of contamination may exist and 
taking specific measures to minimize that probability. 
The HACCP or FSMS based approach (see IS 15000 
or IS/ISO 22000) may assist in the taking of such 
measures. 


4.2.2 Producers should as far as practicable, implement 
measures to, 


a) control contamination from air, soil, water, 
feedstuffs, fertilizers (including natural 
fertilizers), pesticides, veterinary drugs or any 
other agent used in primary production; 


b) control plant and animal health so that it does 
not pose a threat to human health through food 
consumption, or adversely affect the 
suitability of the product; and 


c) protect food sources from faecal and other 
contamination. 


4.2.3 Care should be taken to manage wastes and store 
harmful substances appropriately. On-farm 
programmes which achieve specific food safety goals 
are becoming an important part of primary production 
and should be encouraged. 


4.3 Handling, Storage and Transport 
4.3.1 Procedures should be in place to, 


a) sort food and food ingredients to segregate 
material which is evidently unfit for human 
consumption; 


b) dispose of any rejected material in a hygienic 
manner; and 


c) protect food and food ingredients from 
contamination by pests, or by chemical, 
physical or microbiological contaminants or 
other objectionable substances during 
handling, storage and transport. 


4.3.2 Care should be taken to prevent, as far as 
practicable, deterioration and spoilage through 
appropriate measures which may include controlling 
temperature, humidity and/or other controls. 


4.4 Cleaning, Maintenance and Personnel Hygiene 


Appropriate facilities and procedures should be in place 
to ensure that necessary cleaning and maintenance is 
carried out effectively and appropriate degree of 
personal hygiene is maintained. 


5 ESTABLISHMENT — DESIGN AND FACILITIES 


5.0 Objectives 


Attention to good hygienic design and construction, 
appropriate location, and the provision of adequate 
facilities is necessary to enable hazards to be effectively 
controlled. Depending on the nature of the operations 
and the risks associated with them, premises, 
equipment and facilities should be located, designed 
and constructed to ensure that, 


a) contamination is minimized; 


b) design and layout permit appropriate 
maintenance, cleaning and disinfections and 
minimize air-borne contamination; 


c) surfaces and materials, in particular those in 
contact with food are non-toxic in intended 
use and where necessary, suitably durable, and 
easy to maintain and clean; 


d) where appropriate, suitable facilities are 
available for temperature, humidity and other 
controls; and 


e) thereis effective protection against pest access 
and harbourage. 


5.1 Location 
5.1.1 Establishment 


Potential sources of contamination need to be 
considered when deciding where to locate a food 
establishment as well as the effectiveness of any 
reasonable measures that might be taken to protect 
food. An establishment should not be located 
anywhere, where, after considering such protective 


measures, it is clear that there will remain a threat to 
food safety or suitability. In particular, an establishment 
should normally be located away from, 


a) environmentally polluted areas and industrial 
activities which pose a serious threat of 
contaminating food; 


b) areas subject to flooding unless sufficient 
safeguards are provided; 


c) areas prone to infestations of pests; and 


d) areas where wastes, either solid or liquid, 
cannot be removed effectively. 


5.1.2 Equipment 
Equipment should be located so that it, 


a) permits adequate maintenance and cleaning; 


b) functions in accordance with its intended use; 
and 


c) facilitates good hygiene practices, including 
monitoring. 


5.2 Premises and Rooms 
5.2.1 Design and Layout 


Where appropriate, the internal design and layout of a 
food establishment should permit hygienic practices, 
including protection against cross-contamination 
between and during operations and storage. 


5.2.2 Internal Structures and Fittings 


Structures within a food establishment should be 
soundly built of durable materials and be easy to 
maintain, clean and where appropriate, able to be 
disinfected. In particular, the following specific 
conditions should be satisfied, where necessary, to 
protect the safety and suitability of food: 


a) The surfaces of walls, partitions and floors 
should be made of impervious materials with 
no toxic effect in intended use; 


b) Walls and partitions should have a smooth 
surface up to a height appropriate to the 
operation; 

c) Floors should be constructed to allow 
adequate drainage and cleaning; 


d) Ceilings and overhead fixtures should be 
constructed and finished to minimize the build 
up of dirt and condensation, and the shedding 
of particles; 


e) Windows should be easy to clean, be 
constructed to minimize the build up of dirt 
and where necessary, be fitted with removable 
and cleanable insect-proof screens. Where 
necessary, windows should be fixed; 


f) Doors should have smooth, non-absorbent 


IS 2491 : 2013 


surfaces, and be easy to clean and, where 
necessary, disinfect; and 

g) Working surfaces that come into direct contact 
with food should be in sound condition, 
durable and easy to clean, maintain and 
disinfect. They should be made of smooth, 
non-absorbent materials, which are inert to 
the food, detergents and disinfectants, under 
normal operating conditions. 


5.2.3 Temporary/Mobile Premises and Vending 
Machines 


Premises and structures covered here include market 
stalls, mobile sales and street vending vehicles and 
temporary premises in which food is handled, such as 
tents and marquees. Such premises and structures 
should be sited, designed and constructed to avoid, as 
far as reasonably practicable, contaminating food and 
harbouring pests. In applying these specific conditions 
and requirements, any food hygiene hazards associated 
with such facilities should be adequately controlled to 
ensure the safety and suitability of food. 


5.3 Equipment 
5.3.1 General 


Equipment and containers (other than once-only use 
containers and packaging) coming into contact with 
food, should be designed and constructed to ensure 
that, where necessary, they can be adequately cleaned, 
disinfected and maintained to avoid the contamination 
of food. Equipment and containers should be made of 
materials with no toxic effect in intended use. Where 
necessary, equipment should be durable and movable 
or capable of being disassembled to allow for 
maintenance, cleaning, disinfection, monitoring and 
to facilitate inspection for pests. 


5.3.2 Food Control und Monitoring Equipment 


In addition to the general requirements given in 5.3.1, 
equipment used to cook, heat treat, cool, store or freeze 
food should be designed to achieve the required food 
temperatures as rapidly as necessary in the interests of 
food safety and suitability, and maintain them 
effectively. Such equipment should also be designed 
to allow temperatures to be monitored and controlled. 
Where necessary, such equipment should have effective 
means of controlling and monitoring humidity, air flow 
and any other characteristic likely to have a detrimental 
effect on the safety or suitability of food. These 
requirements are intended to ensure that, 


a) harmful or undesirable microorganisms or 
their toxins are eliminated or reduced to safe 
levels or their survival and growth are 
effectively controlled; 


IS 2491 : 2013 


b) where appropriate, critical limits established 
in HACCP or FSMS based plans (see IS 15000 
or IS/ISO 22000) can be monitored; and 


c) temperatures and other conditions necessary 
to food safety and suitability can be rapidly 
achieved and maintained. 


5.3.3 Containers for Waste und Inedible Substances 


Containers for waste materials, by-products and 
inedible or dangerous substances, should be 
specifically identifiable, suitably constructed and 
where appropriate made of impervious material. 
Containers used to hold dangerous substances should 
be identified and, where appropriate, be lockable to 
prevent malicious or accidental contamination of 
food. 


5.4 Facilities 
5.4.1 Water Supply 


5.4.1.1 Adequate supply of potable water (see IS 4251) 
with appropriate facilities for its storage, distribution 
and temperature control, should be available, whenever 
necessary to ensure the safety and suitability of food. 


5.4.1.2 Non-potable water (for use in, for example, 
fire control, steam production, refrigeration and other 
similar purposes where it would not contaminate food), 
shall have a separate system. Non-potable water 
systems shall be identified and shall not connect with, 
or allow reflux into, potable water systems. 


5.4.2 Drainage and Waste Disposal 


Adequate drainage and waste disposal systems and 
facilities should be provided. They should be designed 
and constructed so that the risk of contaminating food 
or the potable water supply is avoided. 


5.4.3 Cleaning 


Adequate facilities, suitably designated, should be 
provided for cleaning food, utensils and equipment. 
Such facilities should have an adequate supply of hot 
and cold potable water where appropriate. 


5.4.4 Personnel Hygiene Facilities and Toilets 


Personnel hygiene facilities, suitably located and 
designated, should be available to ensure that an 
appropriate degree of personal hygiene can be 
maintained and contamination of food avoided. Where 
appropriate, facilities should include, 


a) adequate means of hygienically washing and 
drying hands, including wash basins and a 
supply of hot and cold (or suitably 
temperature controlled) water, where 
appropriate; 

b) lavatories of appropriate hygienic design; and 


c) adequate cleaning facilities for personnel. 


5.4.4.1 Personnel hygiene facilities and toilets should 
be suitably located and designated. 


5.4.5 Temperature Control 


Depending on the nature of the food operations 
undertaken, adequate facilities should be available for 
heating, cooling, cooking, refrigerating and freezing 
food, for storing refrigerated or frozen foods, 
monitoring food temperatures, and when necessary, 
controlling ambient temperatures to ensure the safety 
and suitability of food. 


5.4.6 Air Quality and Ventilation 


5.4.6.1 Adequate means of natural or mechanical 
ventilation should be provided, in particular to, 


a) minimize air-borne contamination of food, for 
example, from aerosols and condensation 
droplets; 

b) control ambient temperatures; 


c) control odours which might affect the 
suitability of food; and 


d) control humidity, where necessary, to ensure 
the safety and suitability of food. 


5.4.6.2 Ventilation systems should be designed and 
constructed so that air does not flow from contaminated 
areas to clean areas and, where necessary, they can be 
adequately maintained and cleaned. 


5.4.7 Lighting 


Adequate natural or artificial lighting should be 
provided to enable the undertaking to operate in a 
hygienic manner. Where necessary, lighting should not 
be such that the resulting colour is misleading. The 
intensity should be adequate to the nature of the 
operation. Lighting fixtures should, where appropriate, 
be protected to ensure that food is not contaminated 
by breakages [see IS 3103 and IS 3646 (Part 1)]. 


5.4.8 Storage 


5.4.8.1 Where necessary, adequate facilities for the 
storage of food, ingredients and non-food materials 
such as packing materials, cleaning materials, 
lubricants, fuels, should be provided. 


5.4.8.2 Where appropriate, food storage facilities 
should be designed and constructed to, 
a) permit adequate maintenance and cleaning; 
b) avoid pest access and harbourage; 
c) enable food to be effectively protected from 
contamination during storage; and 
d) where necessary, provide an environment 
which minimizes the deterioration of food, 
such as by temperature and humidity control. 


5.4.8.3 The type of storage facilities required will 
depend on the nature of the food. Where necessary, 
separate, secure storage facilities for cleaning materials 
and hazardous substances should be provided. 


6 CONTROL OF OPERATION 


6.0 Objectives 


To reduce the risk of unsafe food by taking preventive 
measures to assure the safety and suitability of food at 
an appropriate stage in the operation by controlling 
food hazards, it is desirable to, 


a) formulate design requirements with respect 
to raw materials: composition, processing, 
distribution, and consumer use to be met in 
the manufacture and handling of specific food 
items; and 

b) design, implement, monitor and review 
effective control systems. 


6.1 Control of Food Hazards 


6.1.1 Food business operators should control food 
hazards through the use of systems, such as HACCP 
or FSMS (see IS 15000 or IS/ISO 22000). They 
should, 


a) identify any steps in their operations which 
are critical to the safety of food; 

b) implement effective control procedures at 
those steps; 

c) monitor control procedures to ensure their 
continuing effectiveness; and 

d) review control procedures periodically, and 
whenever the operations change. 


6.1.2 These systems should be applied throughout the 
food chain to control food hygiene throughout the shelf 
life of the product through proper product and process 
design. 


6.1.3 Control procedures may be simple, such as 
checking stock rotation calibrating equipment, or 
correctly loading refrigerated display units. In some 
cases a system based on expert advice, and involving 
documentation, may be appropriate. A model of such 
a food safety system is given in IS 15000 and/or 
IS/ISO 22000. 


6.2 Hygiene Control Systems — Key Aspects 
6.2.1 Time and Temperature Control 


6.2.1.1 Inadequate food temperature control is one of 
the most common causes of foodborne illness or food 
spoilage. Such controls include time and temperature 
of cooking, processing and storage. Systems should 
be in place to ensure that temperature is controlled 


IS 2491 : 2013 


effectively where it is critical to the safety and 
suitability of food. 


6.2.1.2 Temperature control systems should take into 
account, 


a) the nature of the food, for example, its water 
activity, pH, and likely initial level and types 
of microorganisms; 

b) the intended shelf-life of the product; 

c) the method of packaging and processing; and 


d) how the product is intended to be used, for 
example, further cooking/processing or 
ready-to-eat. 


6.2.1.3 Such systems should also specify tolerable 
limits for time and temperature variations. 


6.2.1.4 Temperature recording devices should be 
checked at regular intervals and tested for accuracy. 


6.2.2 Specific Process Steps 


Specific process steps which contribute to food hygiene 
may include among others, chilling, thermal 
processing, irradiation, drying, chemical preservation 
and vacuum or modified atmospheric packaging. 


6.2.3 Microbiological and Other Specifications 


Systems described in 6.1 offer an effective way of 
ensuring the safety and suitability of food. Where 
microbiological, chemical or physical specifications 
are used in any food control system, such specifications 
should be based on sound scientific principles and state, 
where appropriate, monitoring procedures, analytical 
methods and action limits. 


6.2.4 Microbiological Cross-contamination 


6.2.4.1 Pathogens can be transferred from one food to 
another, either by direct contact or by food handlers, 
contact surfaces or the air. Raw, unprocessed food 
should be effectively separated, from ready-to-eat 
foods, with effective intermediate cleaning and 
disinfection, where appropriate. 


6.2.4.2 Access to processing areas may need to be 
restricted or controlled. Where risks are particularly 
high, access to processing areas should be only via a 
changing facility. Personnel may be required to put on 
clean protective clothing including footwear and wash 
their hands before entering. 


6.2.4.3 Surfaces, utensils, equipment, fixtures and 
fittings should be thoroughly cleaned and where 
necessary disinfected after raw food, particularly meat 
and poultry, has been handled or processed. 


6.2.5 Physical and Chemical Contamination 


Systems should be in a place to prevent contamination 


IS 2491 : 2013 


of foods by foreign bodies such as glass or metal shards 
from machinery, dust, harmful fumes and unwanted 
chemicals. In manufacturing and processing, suitable 
detection or screening devices should be used where 
necessary. 


6.3 Incoming Material 


6.3.1 No raw material or ingredient should be accepted 
by an establishment, if it is known to contain parasites, 
undesirable microorganisms, pesticides, veterinary 
drugs or toxic, decomposed or extraneous substances 
which would not be reduced to an acceptable level by 
normal sorting and/or processing. Where appropriate, 
specifications for raw materials should be identified 
and applied. 


6.3.2 Raw materials or ingredients should, where 
appropriate, be inspected and sorted before processing. 
Where necessary, laboratory tests should be made to 
establish fitness for use. Only sound, suitable raw 
materials or ingredients should be used. 


6.3.3 Stocks of raw materials and ingredients should 
be subject to effective stock rotation. 


6.4 Packaging 


Packaging design and materials should provide 
adequate protection for products to minimize 
contamination, prevent damage and accommodate 
proper labelling. Packaging materials or gases, where 
used, shall be non-toxic and shall not pose threat to 
the safety and suitability of food under the specified 
conditions of storage and use. Where appropriate, 
reusable packaging should be suitably durable, easy 
to clean and, where necessary, disinfected. 


6.5 Water 
6.5.1 In Contact with Food 


6.5.1.1 Only potable water (see IS 4251) should be 
used in food handling and processing with the 
following exceptions: 


a) For steam production, fire control and other 
similar purposes not connected with food; and 

b) Incertain food processes, such as chilling, and 
in food handling areas, provided this does not 
constitute a hazard to the safety and suitability 
of food (for example, the use of clean sea 
water). 


6.5.1.2 Water re-circulated for re-use should be treated 
and maintained in such a condition that no risk to the 
safety and suitability of food results from its use. The 
treatment process should be effectively monitored. Re- 
circulated water which has received no further 
treatment and water recovered from processing of food 
by evaporation or drying may be used, provided its 


use does not constitute a risk to the safety and suitability 
of food. 


6.5.2 As an Ingredient 


Potable water (see IS 4251) should be used, wherever 
necessary, to avoid food contamination. 


6.5.3 Ice and Steam 


Ice should be made from water that complies with 5.4.1. 
Ice and steam should be produced, handled and stored 
to protect them from contamination. Steam used in 
direct contact with food or food contact surfaces should 
not constitute a threat to the safety and suitability of 
food. 


6.6 Management and Supervision 


The type of control and supervision needed shall 
depend on the size of the business, the nature of its 
activities and the types of food involved. Managers and 
supervisors should have enough knowledge of food 
hygiene principles and practices to be able to judge 
potential risks, take appropriate preventive and 
corrective action, and ensure that effective monitoring 
and supervision takes place. 


6.7 Documentation and Records 


Where necessary, appropriate records of processing, 
production and distribution should be kept and retained 
for a period that exceeds the shelf-life of the product. 
Documentation can enhance the credibility and 
effectiveness of the food safety control system. 


6.8 Recall Procedures 


Managers should ensure that effective procedures are 
in place to deal with any food safety hazard and to 
enable the complete, rapid recall of any implicated lot 
of the finished food from the market. Where a product 
has been withdrawn because of an immediate health 
hazard, other products which are produced under 
similar conditions and which may present a similar 
hazard to public health, should be evaluated for safety 
and may need to be withdrawn. The need for public 
warnings should be considered. 


6.8.1 Recalled products should be held under 
supervision until they are destroyed, used for purposes 
other than human consumption, determined to be safe 
for human consumption, or reprocessed in a manner 
to ensure their safety. 


7 ESTABLISHMENT — MAINTENANCE AND 
SANITATION 


7.0 Objective 


To facilitate the continuing effective control of food 
hazards, pests, and other agents likely to contaminate 


food, it is desirable to establish an effective system 
to, 


a) ensure adequate and appropriate maintenance 
and cleaning; 


b) control pests; 
c) manage waste; and 


d) monitor effectiveness of maintenance and 
sanitation procedures. 


7.1 Maintenance and Cleaning 
7.1.1 General 


7.1.1.1 Establishment and equipment should be kept 
in an appropriate state of repair and condition to, 


a) facilitate all sanitation procedures; 

b) function as intended, particularly at critical 
steps (see 6.1); and 

c) prevent contamination of food, for example, 
from metal shards, flaking plaster, debris and 
chemicals. 


7.1.1.2 Cleaning should remove food residues and dirt 
which may be a source of contamination. The necessary 
cleaning methods and materials shall depend on the 
nature of the food business. Disinfection may be 
necessary after cleaning. 


7.1.1.3 Cleaning chemicals should be handled and used 
carefully and in accordance with manufacturer’s 
instructions and store, where necessary, separate from 
food, in clearly identified containers to avoid the risk 
of contaminating food. 


7.1.2 Cleaning Procedures and Methods 


Cleaning can be carried out by the separate or the 
combined use of physical methods, such as heat, 
scrubbing, turbulent flow, vacuum cleaning or other 
methods that avoid the use of water, and chemical 
methods using detergents, alkalis or acids. Cleaning 
procedures will involve, where appropriate, 


a) removing gross debris from surfaces; 

b) applying a detergent solution to loosen soil 
and bacterial film and hold them in solution 
or suspension; 

c) rinsing with water which complies with 5.4.1, 
to remove loosened soil and residues of 
detergent; 


d) dry cleaning or other appropriate methods for 
removing and collecting residues and debris; 
and 

e) where necessary, disinfection with subsequent 
rinsing unless the manufacturers’ instructions 
indicate on scientific basis that rinsing is not 
required. 


IS 2491 : 2013 


7.2 Cleaning Programmes 


7.2.1 Cleaning and disinfection programmes should 
ensure that all parts of the establishment are 
appropriately clean and should include the cleaning of 
cleaning equipment. 


7.2.2 Cleaning and cleaning programmes should be 
continually and effectively monitored for their 
suitability and effectiveness and where necessary, 
documented. 


7.2.3 Where written cleaning programmes are used, 
they should specify, 


a) areas, items of equipment and utensils to be 
cleaned; 


b) responsibility for particular tasks; 
c) method and frequency of cleaning; and 
d) monitoring arrangements. 


7.2.4 Where appropriate, programmes should be drawn 
up in consultation with relevant specialist expert advisors. 


7.3 Pest Control Systems 
7.3.1 General 


Pests pose a major threat to the safety and suitability 
of food. Pest infestations can occur where there are 
breeding sites and a supply of food. Good hygiene 
practices should be employed to avoid creating an 
environment conducive to pests. Good sanitation, 
inspection of incoming materials and good monitoring 
can minimize the likelihood of infestation and thereby 
limit the need for pesticides. 


7.3.2 Preventing Access 


Buildings should be kept in good repair and condition 
to prevent pest access and to eliminate potential breeding 
sites. Holes, drains and other places where pests are 
likely to gain access should be kept sealed. Wire mesh 
screens, for example, on open windows, doors and 
ventilators, will reduce the problem of pest entry. 
Animals should, wherever possible, be excluded from 
the grounds of factories and food processing plants. 


7.3.3 Harbourage and Infestation 


The availability of food and water encourages pest 
harbourage and infestation. Potential food sources 
should be stored in pest-proof containers and/or stacked 
above the ground and away from walls. Areas both 
inside and outside food premises should be kept clean. 
Where appropriate, refuse should be stored in covered 
and pest-proof containers. 


7.3.4 Monitoring and Detection 


Establishments and surrounding areas should be 
regularly examined for evidence of infestation. 


IS 2491 : 2013 


7.3.5 Eradication 


Pest infestations should be dealt with immediately and 
without adversely affecting food safety or suitability. 
Treatment with chemical, physical or biological agents 
should be carried out without posing a threat to the 
safety or suitability of food. 


7.4 Waste Management 


Suitable provision shall be made for the removal and 
storage of waste. Waste shall not be allowed to 
accumulate in food handling, food storage, and other 
working areas and the adjoining environment except so 
far as is unavoidable for the proper functioning of the 
business. Waste stores shall be kept appropriately clean. 


7.5 Monitoring Effectiveness 


Sanitation systems should be monitored for 
effectiveness, periodically verified by means, such as 
audit, pre-operational inspections, or where 
appropriate, microbiological sampling of environment 
and food contact surfaces and regularly reviewed and 
adapted to reflect changed circumstances. 


8 ESTABLISHMENT — PERSONAL HYGIENE 


8.0 Objectives 


People who do not maintain an appropriate degree of 
personal cleanliness, who have certain illnesses or 
conditions or who behave inappropriately, can 
contaminate food and transmit illness to consumers. 
To ensure that those who come directly or indirectly 
into contact with food are not likely to contaminate 
food, it is desirable to, 


a) maintain an appropriate degree of personal 
cleanliness; and 


b) behave and operate in an appropriate manner. 


8.1 Health Status 


Periodical medical examination of a food handler 
should be carried out. 


8.1.1 People known, or suspected, to be suffering from, 
or to be a carrier of a disease or illness likely to be 
transmitted through food, should not be allowed to 
enter any food handling area, if there is a likelihood of 
their contaminating food. Any person so affected 
should immediately report illness or symptoms of 
illness to the management. 


8.1.2 If clinically or epidemiologically indicated and 
immunization records maintained to ensure complete 
immunization for communicable diseases. 


8.1.3 Conditions which should be reported to 
management so that any need for medical examination 


and/or possible exclusion from food handling can be 
considered, include jaundice, diarrhoea, vomiting, 
fever, sore throat with fever, visibly infected skin 
lesions (boils, cuts, etc) and discharges from the ear, 
eye or nose and respiratory tract illness. 


8.2 Personal Cleanliness 


8.2.1 Food handlers should maintain a high degree of 
personal cleanliness, and where appropriate, wear 
suitable protective clothing, head covering, and 
footwear. Cuts and wounds, where personnel are 
permitted to continue working, should be covered by 
suitable waterproof dressings. 


8.2.2 Personnel should always wash their hands when 
personal cleanliness may effect food safety, for 
example: 


a) at the start of food handling activities; 

b) immediately after using the toilet; and 

c) after handling raw food or any contaminated 
material, where this could result in 
contamination of other food items. 


8.2.3 Personnel should avoid handling ready to eat 
food, where appropriate. 


8.3 Personal Behaviour 


8.3.1 People engaged in food handling activities should 
refrain from behaviour which could result in 
contamination of food, for example, smoking, spitting, 
chewing or eating, and sneezing or coughing over 
unprotected food. 


8.3.2 Personal effects, such as jewellery, bangles, 
watches, pins or other items should not be worn or 
brought into food handling areas, if they pose a threat 
to the safety and suitability of food. 


8.4 Visitors 


Visitors to food manufacturing, processing or handling 
areas should, where appropriate, wear protective clothing 
and adhere to the other personal hygiene provisions. 


9 TRANSPORTATION — CONVEYANCE AND 
BULK CONTAINERS 


9.0 Objectives 


Food may become contaminated, or may not reach its 
destination in a suitable condition for consumption, 
unless effective control measures are taken during 
transport, even where adequate hygiene control 
measures have been taken earlier in the foodchain. 
Measures should be taken where necessary to, 


a) protect food from potential sources of 
contamination; 


b) protect food from damage likely to render the 
food unsuitable for consumption; 

c) provide an environment which effectively 
controls the growth of pathogenic or spoilage 
microorganisms and the production of toxins 
in food; and 

d) to ensure that the type of conveyances or 
containers required depends on the nature of 
the food and the conditions under which it 
has to be transported. 


9.1 Design and Construction 


Where necessary, conveyances and bulk containers be 
designed and constructed so that they, 


a) do not contaminate foods or packaging; 

b) can be effectively cleaned and, where 
necessary, disinfected; 

c) permit effective separation of different foods 
or foods from non-food items where 
necessary during transport; 


d) provide effective protection from 
contamination, including dust and fumes; 

e) can effectively maintain the temperature, 
humidity, atmosphere and other conditions 
necessary to protect food from harmful or 
undesirable microbial growth and 
deterioration likely to render it unsuitable for 
consumption; and 

f) allow any necessary temperature, humidity 
and other conditions to be checked. 


9.2 Use and Maintenance 


9.2.1 Conveyances and containers for transporting food 
should be kept in an appropriate state of cleanliness, 
repair and condition. Where the same conveyance or 
container is used for transporting different foods, or 
non-foods, effective cleaning and, where necessary, 
disinfection should take place between loads. 


9.2.2 Where appropriate, particularly in bulk transport, 
containers and conveyances should be designated and 
marked for food use only and be used only for that 
purpose. 


10 PRODUCT INFORMATION AND 
CONSUMER AWARENESS 
10.0 Objectives 


Insufficient product information, and/or inadequate 
knowledge of general food hygiene, can lead to 
products being mishandled at later stages in the food- 
chain. Such mishandling can result in illness, or 
products becoming unsuitable for consumption, even 
where adequate hygiene control measures have been 


IS 2491 : 2013 


taken earlier in the food chain. To prevent such 
situations, the following is desirable: 


a) Products should bear appropriate information 
to ensure that adequate and accessible 
information is available to the next person in 
the food chain to enable them to handle, store, 
process, prepare and display the product 
safely and correctly, and the lot or batch can 
be easily identified and recalled, if necessary; 

b) Consumers should have enough knowledge 
of food hygiene to enable them to understand 
the importance of product information, make 
informed choices appropriate to the 
individual, and prevent contamination and 
growth or survival of foodborne pathogens by 
storing, preparing and using it correctly; and 

c) Information for industry or trade users should 
be clearly distinguishable from consumer 
information, particularly on food labels. 


10.1 Lot Identification 


Lot identification is essential in product recall and also 
helps effective stock rotation. Each container of food 
should be permanently marked to identify the producer 
and the lot [see IS 7688 (Part 1)]. 


10.2 Product Information 


All food products should be accompanied by or bear 
adequate information to enable the next person in the 
foodchain to handle, display, store and prepare and use 
the product safely and correctly. 


10.3 Labelling 


Pre-packaged foods should be labelled with clear 
instructions to enable the next person in the foodchain 
to handle, display, store and use the product safely [see 
IS 7688 (Parts1, 2 and 3)]. Specific product standards 
may also be referred to. 


10.4 Consumer Education 


Health education programmes should cover general 
food hygiene. Such programmes should enable 
consumers to understand the importance of any product 
information and to follow any instructions 
accompanying products, and make informed choices. 
In particular, consumers should be informed of the 
relationship between time/temperature control and 
foodborne illness. 


11 TRAINING 


11.0 Objectives 


Training is fundamentally important to any food 
hygiene system. Inadequate hygiene training, and/ or 


IS 2491 : 2013 


instruction and supervision of all people involved in 
food related activities pose a potential threat to the 
safety of food and its suitability for consumption. It is, 
therefore, desirable that those engaged in food 
operations who come directly or indirectly into contact 
with food should be trained, and/or instructed in food 
hygiene to a level appropriate to the operations they 
are to perform. 


11.1 Awareness and Responsibilities 


Food hygiene training is fundamentally important. All 
personnel should be aware of their role and 
responsibility in protecting food from contamination 
or deterioration. Food handlers should have the 
necessary knowledge and skills to enable them to 
handle food hygienically. Those who handle strong 
cleaning chemicals or other potentially hazardous 
chemicals should be instructed in safe handling 
techniques. 


11.2 Training Programmes 


Factors which shall be taken into account in assessing 
the level of training required include, 


a) the nature of the food, in particular its ability 
to sustain growth of pathogenic or spoilage 
micro-organisms; 

b) the manner in which the food is handled and 


10 


packed, including the probability of 


contamination; 

c) the extent and nature of processing or further 
preparation before final consumption; 

d) the conditions under which the food will be 
stored; and 

e) the expected length of time before 


consumption. 


11.3 Instruction and Supervision 


11.3.1 Periodic assessments of the effectiveness of 
training and instruction programmes should be made 
and routine supervision and checks should be 
undertaken to ensure that procedures are being carried 
out effectively. 


11.3.2 Managers and supervisors of food processes 
should have the necessary knowledge of food hygiene 
principles and practices to be able to judge potential 
risks and take the necessary action to remedy 
deficiencies. 


11.4 Refresher Training 


Training programmes should be routinely reviewed and 
updated, where necessary. Systems should be in place 
to ensure that food handlers remain aware of all 
procedures necessary to maintain the safety and 
suitability of food. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 15 (2185). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


