IS 7207 :1992 v77399nq

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

CRITERIAFORDESIGN OF GENlikATOR FOUNDATION FOR HYDROELECTRIC POWERSTATIONS
( First Revision )

UDC

621*311*21-217

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK May J992

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG Price Group 3

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Hydroelectric

Power House Structures Sectional

Committee,

RVD 15

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydroelectric Power House Structures Sectional Con;mittee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. The generator foundation of a hydro-power station takes various -forms depending mainly upon the In the case of vertical shaft generator, its foundation is located almost directly shaft arrangement. over the spiral casing. For horizontal shaft generator, the foundation is in the form of rectangular Design of foundation of vertical block with a recess in the middle for housing the air coolers. generator comparatively is more complicated as it involves configuration comprising more structural elements as against that of the horizontal generator which generally has mass concrete foundation. It is virtually impossible to deal with all possible variations in generator foundation arrangement. Hence use of general procedures described in this standard should be based on sound engineering judyement of the design. This standard was first published in 1974. This revision has been taken up in the light of the The major modifications made in this first revision are as comments received from the members. follows: a) The hydraulic thrust has been included under necessary data. b) Important design considerations have been included. c) A separate paragraph on block-outs is included. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised 1'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 7207 : 1992

Indian Standard
CRITERIA, FOR DESIGN OF GENERATOR FOUNDATION FOR HYDROELECTRIC POWER STATIONS ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard deals with the guidelines and criteria for design of generator foundations in hydroelectric power stations. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard:
ZS No. Title

g) The operating and runaway machine; and ,~

speed of the of air

h) Maximum rise in temperature surrounding the machine. 4 GENERATOR FOUNDATION ARRANGEMENT

are necessary

456 : 1978 800 : 1984

Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ) Code of practice for general construction in steel ( second revision )

4.1 The generator consists of stationary and rotating parts. The stationary parts mainly comprise of wound stator, top and bottom brackets housing thrust and guide bearings. The rotating parts include generator rotor, ( spider : rim and field system ) exciter armature and permanent magnet and generator rotor.

I

4.1.1 In a vertical shaft machine, wound stator and bottom bracket directly rest on the Criteria for earthquake resistant 1889 : 1984 foundations. Top bracket rests on stator top. design of structures ( fowth revision) The weight of the rotating parts of the generator Code of practice for design and as well as of turbine and hydraulic thrust is 2974(Part3): transmitted through thrust bearing bracket. construction of machine founda1975 Guide bearings are provided for maintaining the for tions : Part 3 Foundations alignment of the shaft. rotary type machines ( medium and high frequency ) (jirst revision ) In case of horizontal shaft generator, the stator and the rotor generally rest on a common 3 NECESSARY DATA bed plate through pedestal bearings. 3.1 The following information should be finalized 4.1.2 Generators are classified mainly in three by the structural engineer in consultation with categories depending upon the location of the the electrical engineer, mechanical engineer and thrust and guide bearing as follows: generator manufacturer: 4 A detailed diagram showing plan and a) Umbrella type in which thrust bearing section of generator and its foundations; and one guide bearing are below the rotor; b) A detailed drawing showing sizes and location of all anchor bolts, pipe sleeves, umbrella type in which thrust b) Semi pockets, bus ducts, embedded parts, access bearing and lower guide bearing is ways, etc; below the rotor and one guide bearing is above the rotor, called upper guide indicating cl A detailed loading diagram bearing; and points of application of all loads and forces considered in foundation design as c) Suspension type in which thrust bearing given in 5. In the diagram not only the is located over the rotor and one guide load but also the location direction and bearing is above and another below the areas over which these loads will be rotor; the one above is called upper distributed should be indicated; guide bearing and the other one as lower guide bearing. 4 The complete weight of the machine as well as separate weights of rotating and 4.1.3 Generator foundations are designed stationary parts; _ keeping in view the above categories. These e) Hydraulic thrust; comprise lower bracket support, stator support of steel `or concrete. output of the and barrel/housing Lower f> The capacity of rated bracket and stator supports may be continuous machine ; 1

IS 7207 : 1992 circular or polygonal rings or in form of number of raised pedestals and lower bracket foundation or discontinuous may also be continuous may be cantilever. The barrel/housing constructed in cast-in-situ reinforced concrete or in pre-cast steel framed reinforced/prestressed concrete units properly secured to each other or in steel. 4.2 Generator Foundation Types of generator The shape and configuration foundation largely depends upon: ( a > the shaft whether the shaft is vertical or arrangement, horizontal, and ( b) location of the thrust bearing. The details of foundations, however, may also vary depending upon the design and configuration of the equipment. For the purpose of this the generator foundation is broadly standard, classified under the following categories: RCC a> polygonal or circular foundation with thrust bearing on top of stator and provided with either RCC or steel generator housing ( see Fig. 1 ). polygonal or circular foundation with combined thrust and guide bearing located below the rotor ( see Fig. 2 ). bearing in case of suspension type machines ) resting on the stator support on the stator foundation, which also take the static load. 6.2 The loads and forces given in 6.2.1 to 6.2.11 should be considered for designing the generator foundation. Some of the loads. listed below may not be applicable to any particular generator foundation. Any other load peculiar to any foundation arrangement and recommended by the turbine or generator manufacturers should be considered. design loads should be Final established through close co-ordination with the manufacturers and electrical and mechanical F engineers. 6.2.1 Dead loads from civil works. 6.2.2 Live load on generator foundation. floors transmitted to the

6.2.3 Vertical load on stator may comprise the following:

sole plate which magnet generator,

4 Weight of permanent
wherever applicable; applicable;

b) RCC

b) Weight of pilot and main exciter, wherever 4 Weight of thrust bearing, generator,
rotor, shaft, turbine rotating parts and hydraulic thrust ( for suspended type generators only );

4 Steel pit liner d) RCC
frame

cylindrical or truncated cone shape independent of surrounding concrete ( see Fig. 3 ). with columns/walls 4 ). shaft and beams;

4 Weight of top guide bearing; d Weight of top bracket, stator flooring and
stator; and

4 RCC dome ( see Fig.
f) RCC

foundation for -horizontal arrangement ( see Fig. 5 ).

f) Any other load due to equipment

5 SOME IMPORTANT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 5.1 Special care should be taken to avoid the danage to foundations against vibrations. 5.2 In case of use of horizontal jacks for transferring the load through the thrust bearings at the top of the generator to the barrel around location of the jacks. This portion should be designed as a ring to take hoop tension, moments and shears for worst combination of loads during normal running of machines, at the time of erection and at the time of double short circuit of the rotor windings. 6 LOADS AND FORCES 6.1 The generator foundation is to transfer static as well as rotating forces due to stationary Rotating parts generate and rotating parts. torsional as well as radial forces. In case of these static urn brella/semi-umbrella machines, and dynamic forces are transferred down to substructure mass concrete through lower bracket resting on the lower bracket support end through upper bracket ( lower as well as through thrust 2

on the generator foundation, recesses in the pit liner housing gate operating servomotor, etc. which may

6.2.4 Vertical load on lower bracket, comprise the following: b) Load while lifting the wherever applicable; and rotor

a) Weight of lower bracket, brakes and jacks; on jacks,

c) Weight of thrust bearing generator rotor, shaft, turbine rotating parts and hydraulic thrust ( not applicable for suspended type generator ) . 6.2.5 Torsional following: load, which may comprise
I

the

a) Maximum tangential force at the stator sole plate due to short circuit in stator winding; and b) Tangential force at lower bracket sole plate due to braking or bearing friction torque, wherever applicable. 6.2.6 Radial following: force, which may comprise the

IS 7207 : 1992

4 Radial force on stator

sole plate/RCC generator housing due to one sided magnetic attraction; and one sided magnetic attraction.

b) Radial force on lower guide bearing due to
6.2.7 The loads on a horizontal shaft generator on a common bed plate may comprise the following: a) Weight of stator, and bed plate; c) Maximum vertical circuit in stator; d) Bearing and reaction rotor, pedestal bearing

during the machine in action from that of average surrounding tempeature. However, a minimum of 25 mm bars at 30 cm centre-to-centre should be provided on both the faces in both directions. 6.2.12 All possible combinations of forces and loads should be examined for evaluation of critical moments, shears and thrust on the generator foundation. However, the maximum radial force due to one sided magnetic attraction caused due to short-circuiting of half of the rotor poles need not be considered alongwith seismic loads. * 7 EFFECT OF VIBRATJONS 7.1 To take the effects df vibrations into account guidance may be taken from IS 2974 ( Part 3 ) : 1975. Further in a hydro-electric power station foundation, should be checked against the effects of runaway speed. 8 BLOCK-OUTS 8.1 Efforts should be made to provide minimum possible number of block-outs in the concrete barrels. For supporting purposes steel plate/flat embedments be used for welding the supporting brackets instead of providing block-outs for grouting bolts. For making block-outs wherever unavoidable, thermocole form-work be used which gets dissolved in petrol instead of wooden one. Provision of block-outs for tightening the bolts at both the ends be made for effective installation of the bolts, wherever possible, well designed non-shrink grouts be used for grouting of the bolts. 9 MATERIALS AND PERMISSIBLE 9.1 Reinforced Concrete It should conform to IS 456 : 1978. 9.2 Structural Steel It should conform to IS 800 : 1984. 9.3 Permissible Stresses Permisible stresses should be taken in accordance with IS 456 : 1978 and IS 800 : 1984. 9.3.1 Concrete and steel stresses may be suitably care of indeterminacy of reduced to take loads/structure and dynamic forces. STRESSES

b) Weight of overhang exciter and runner; force due to short jets;

due to unbalanced

e) Axial hydraulic thrust. 6.2.8 Forces Due to Eccentricity in Rotating Parts Although each generator should be well balanced, yet certain unbalanced forces, caused by the fact that the centre of gravity of rotating parts may not exactly coincide with the axis of rotation, which induce foundation vibrations, should be accounted for in the design of foundation in consultation with the manufacturers. 6.2.9 Yibrations Due to Unequal Ground Settlement Vibrations may also be induced due to change in verticality of the shaft as a result of unequal ground settlement which may take place over time during the course of operation. 6.2.10 The generator foundation should be designed for seismic loads in accordance with IS 1893 : 1984. 6.2.10.1 In case of generator foundation located in seismic zones the sole plates for stator and bottom brackets should be anchored not only vertically and transversely but also radially. 6.2.11 Forces Due to Temperature and Shrinkage Forces due to temperature variation and shrinkage in generator foundation should be catered for in tht: design. The temperature variation should be taken as the difference of temperature developed

3

IS 7207:1992

PLAM
P1A.N

SECTIONAL ELEVATION
vertical force on stator sole plate PZ = tangential force on stator sole plate Pa = radial force on stator sole plate ( direction assumed; may act in any direction in horizontal plane ) Pt = vertical force on lower bracket sole plate P, = tangential force on lower bracket sole plate Pg = radial force on lower bracket sole plate P, = radial force on RCC generator housing ( present only if bracing provided between housing and top bracket )
PI =

SECTIONAL

ELEVATION

P, = vertical force on s'ator sole plate

PZ = tangential force on stator sole plate Pa = radial force on s~a:cr sole plate ( direction assumed; may act in any direction in horizotal piane ) P4 = vertical force on lower bracket sole plate P, = tangential force on lower bracket sole plate P, = radial force on lower bracket sole plate P, = radial force on RCC generator housing ( present only if bracing provided between housing and top bracket )

FIG. 1 RCC CIRCULAR FOUNDATION WITH THRUST TOP OF STATOR

GENERATOR
BEARJNG ON

FIG. 2 RCC OCTAGONAL FOUNDATJON WITH CONBIND GUIDE BEARING LOCATED STATOR

GENERATOR THRUSTAND BELOW THE

4

IS 7207 : 1992

UPPER

GUIDE

STEEL

BARREL

SCROLL

CASE

NOTE - Load is transferred through the thrust bearing which is mounted on the barrel. FIG. 3 STEEL PIT LINER TRUNCATED CONE SHAPED FOUNDATION WITH THRUST BEARING SUPPORTED ON TURBINE TOP COVER

FIG. 4

DOME TYPE GENERATOR

FOUNDAT `ION

IS 7207 : 1992

+

+

*

l

6_-+--_

4 OF I .. Wi 3 I

ALTERNATOR

-'

.

l

l

+

PLAN

SECTIONAL

ELEVATION

PI

= vertical load PZ = horizontal component of bearing reaction ( direction assumed ) pa = axial hydraulic thrust ( direction assumed )

FIG. 5 RCC

GENERATOR

FOUNDATION

FOR SHAFT

ARRANGEMENT

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 1986 and the Rules hand Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Act,

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ~$`lr~dinn Standrvds Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. This does not preclude the free use, in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ). grade designations. BIS. Revision of Indian Standards A when necessary and amendments, if any, Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, Users of Indian Standards should ascertain $hat they are in possession are issued from time to time. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving of the latest amendments or edition. the following reference: Dot : No. RVD 15 ( 4399 ) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date

of Issue

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Rahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 New Delhi 110002 Telegrams ( Common : Manaksanstha to all Offices )

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg ! 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62

Eastern

: 1'14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C.1.T Campus,

Maniktola

Northern Southern Western Branches

Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri

160036 600113 ( East ) BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. GUWAHATI. GHAZIABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR.

53 38 43 235 02 16 632 92 95

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. FARIDABAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Progresive Printers, Shahdara

Delhi, India

