UDC

621'5154

IS

:

12258 - 1987

hdian

Standard
FOR

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

TECHNICAL

SUPP-LY CONDITION

AIR SCREW COMPRESSORS ( OIL FLOODED ) FOR GENERAL PURPOSE AND INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS Scope -This standard covers the minimum requirements for air screw compressors ( oil fooded type ) for general purpose and industrial applications using prime movers up to 370 kW.
.1 The standard does not cover the mobile airscrew compressors, iir-conditioning and refrigeration screw compressors. I. Terminology - For the purpose of Glossary of terms relating to compressors I. Enquiry and Proposal this standard, and exhausters' dry (oil free) screw compressors given in IS : 5727-1981

definitions as shall apply.

1.1 Enquiry - The purchaser shall complete the data as given in Appendix A to theextent possible md appiicable, and also specify the known abnormal conditions of workings. In addition, purchaser nay also specify any of his additional requirements. 1.2 Proposal - In reply to the enquiry :omponents and accessories alongwith 3.2.1 The proposal :ompliance with the urnished. by the purchaser, any other details the supplier shall supply a fist required by the purchaser. of all the

shall include either a specific statement purckaser's specifications or ~specific list the charges tools for deputing required

that all equipment are in strict of deviations therefrom shall be representative for superwork

3.2.2 If required by the ~purchaser, lision of erection shall be furnished. 3.2.3 The supplier shall It additional charges. 1.3 Guarantee furnish

suppliers

any special

for installation

and maintenance

3.3.1 Performance guarantee - The compressors nance at the specified operating conditions. These he time of performance test. lhe tolerances to be ;hall be in accordance with IS : 5456-1985 `Code ype air compressors and exhausters ~(first revision

shall be guaranteed for satisfactory perforinclude a guarantee for capacity and power at allowed on the capacity and power consumption of practice for testing of positive displacement )`. bought out arise from be applicathe date of established alteration,

3.3.2 Workmanship guarantee-All equipment, components and spare parts,other than zomponents, shall be guaranteed by the supplier against manufacturing defects which defective or improper materials or poor and faulty workmanship. This guarantee shall >le for a period of 12 months from the date of supply or 2 000 working hours from If any defects or mal-performance is nstallation of compressor, whichever is earlier. Turing the guaranteed period, the supplier shall make the-all necessary~or desirable ,epair and replacement free of charge. 1. General Requirements to air pressure shall have sufficient strength. shall be ensured be ensured, by the while

1.1 Parts subjected

4.1.1 If electrical prime mover is used, proper earthing Die for the installation of compressors.

agency responsimanufacturing, to

4.1.2 Every part shall have the interchangeability and shall avoid any deviation in the performance of compressor.

4.1.3 Generally parts ~shall be manufactured to `fits and tolerances' for limits and fits for engineering: Part 1 `General `Recommendation which ensure proper functioning of compressors.

of IS : 919 (apart 1 J-1963 engineer ( first revision )`$

Adopted

1 December

1987 I

0

Juty 1988, BIS

Gr 3 I

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS: 12258-1987 4.1.4 Manufacturer shall reserve the right to make modification reflecting improvements performance/life of compressor. This shall not affect the guarantee mentioned in 3.3.1 and 3.3.2.
in

4.1.5 Maximum allowable working pressure shall exceed the rated discharge pressure by at least 10 percent or l-bar, whichever is greater, but shall not be lower than safety valve set pressure. 4.2 Materials 4.2.1 Casing and bearing housing adequate and suitable for maximum 4.2.2 The casing jacket cooling, gas into the coolant. - The thickness of the casing design working pressures. whenever provided, shall and bearing housing shall be

be designed

to prevent

any leakage of pro-

4.2.3 Compressor housing sh~all have built-in oil sump of adequate uided container depending upon the design aspects. 4.3 Rotors

capacity

or a separately

4.3.1 Rotors shall be of forged steel, rolled bar or cast iron materials depending upon the design These may be single piece or two-piece construcaspects and physical size ot screw compressors. tion of similar materials, In the case of smaller rotors, two differem materials may be used for constructing rotor assembly, enabling the use of non-ferrous and polymers. 4.3.2 Normally, by and large `( 4 + 6 ) lobe arrangement is accepted by various manufacturers but this shall also be with other lobe combinations depending upon the specific design. 4.4 Valves and Filters 4.4.1 Receiver-cum-oil separator shall be provided ssure rising and to ensure safety of the unit. 4.4.2 Suitably designed inlet control from malfunctioning and rusting, etc. valve~shall with a safety valve to prevent abnormal so that they operate smoothly, to suction prefree and

be provided

4.4.3 Suction air filter shall be selected shall be effective for dust prevention.

such that they offer minimum to form an integral

resistance

4.5 Air/oil separation system shall be provided with replaceable separation element.

part of the operational

package

4.5.1 The oil separator system shall be redesigned so that the oil carry over through dfscharge air shall not exceed 1 litre per cubic metre per 100 h. This shall be termed as oil consumption and the measurement of oil consumption shall be carried out as mentioned in IS : 5456-1985. 4.5.2 The vessel used to accommodate `Code for unfired pressure vessels'. oil and separator element shall conform to IS : 2825-1969 lubricating

4.6 Cooling System - An efficient cooling system for oil/air shalh be provided such that oil/air temperature shall be maintained within the-limits specified by manufacturer.

4.7 Lubrication System -Shall consist of a built-in oil reservior with compressor housing or a separator oil filter, with or without built-in by-pass valve, injection port and hoses connecting the oil cooler compressor housing, ideally the control system shall be such when restriction covered by filter exceeds present limits, the compressor shall stop. However, when the situation demands, the filter shall be provided with by-pass valve so that compressor is not stopped till such time the filter element is changed. The circulation of oil may be arranged by a separate electric motor or the drive may be taken from either rotor shaft extension. The oil reservior capacity shall be such that it stores adequate amount of lubricating oil which circulates through the closed loop system. It is important that oil temperature at acceptable minimum level and acceptable maximum level shall be maintained so that condensation is not separated out at minimum temperature within oil system and also to ensure the discharge air temperature shall not run very high at maximum temperature since it is a close oil system. 4.8 Lubricating-Oil - The manufacturer shall operating conditions based on the information 5. Prime Mover and Drive Equipments -The in the enquiry according to Appendix A. recommend a proper lubricating provided by the purchaser. supplier shall specify oil considering the

the type of prime mover/drive

2

IS : 12258 - 1987
5.1 Prime Mover rating. It shall have minithe rated operating condifrom rest line, starand the

5.1.1Electric motor -Serving as main driver, shall be of continuous mum at5 percent margin over power required by the compressor under tions considering the tolerances as specified in IS :5456-1985. 5.1.2 Electric motor shall have enough starting to the full load running condition under specified delta, autotransformer,-etc. 5.1.3 Proper purchaser. 5.2 Internal -earthing shall Engine the expected engine. duty to which be ensured

torque to be able to start compressor starting system, for example, direction to between the manufacturer

as agreed

Combustion

5.2.1 The purchaser shall specify manufacturer to select proper sized

compressor

shall

operate

to enable

5.2.2 The manufacturer shall ensure that the engine shall have minimum 5 percent margin over the power required by compressor under any operating condition after taking into account site conditions specified by the purchaser. 5.2.3 The manufacturer variable speed. shall select the coupling after analysis of the system class and considering shall be selected

5.2.4 The engine selected shall be a governed based on the duty specified by the purchaser. 6. Auxiliary Equipment

engine

and the governing

shall specify the air discharge temperature required to enable 6.1 Coolers - The purchaser manufacturer to provide suitablecooler. The cooler shall conform to IS : 4503-1967 `Specification shell and tube type heat exchangers'. receiver, 6.2 Air Receiver -The additional receiver than provided 6.3 Guards 6.3.1 Guards shall be of removable be hazardous to opening personnel. type provided on all movable parts which with are considered whenever supplied, as an oil separator shall conform to IS : 2825-1969. with the package. This

the for is an

to

6.3.2 If guards are not easily removable type, an opening mesh) shall be provided to have access for any part requiring

( if necessary attention.

covers or suitable

6.3.3 When belt driven compressor is consldered, the belts shall be selected to transmit maximum shaft power of the compressor. The belt drive design shall also be suita-ble for same, and appropriately be provided with the guard. The slide rails used under motor for taking up belt slackness ( after some running of unit ) shall be selected such that it provides enough room for tightening. 6.4 Silencer 6.4.1 The purchaser shall specify the required noise level of the unit. to limit noise level according to agreement,

6.4.2 The manufacturer 6.5 Piping

shall

provide

the silencer

6.5.1 The pipe work requiled with with base plate ), shall consist of:

the compressor,

when given as a package discharge,

( with

receiver

or

a) air piping ( hose or metallic type ) for final ( if after cooler is a part of supply ); b) auxiliary metallic pipe work-oil cooler to compressor type; drain and vent and instrument

that is, compressor upon compressor

to after-cooler design ) hose or

( depending air.

6.5.2 The scope of supply of pipe work by the supplier shall be properly defined with termina~l points clearly fixed. The supplier shall supply all pipe work to interconnected items of his supply reducing the number of terminal points for the purchaser's connection, to a minimum when the scope of supply shall be mutually agreed upon. 6.5.3 Auxiliary pipe work, that be suitably fixed on the package. is, oil cooler to compressor, drain, vent and instrument air shall

3

IS:12258
6.5.4

- 1987
otherwise specified, Device the supplier Following shall supply the pipe work of his choice. shall be provided by manufac-

Unless

6.6 instrumentation turer: a) Delivery b) Lubricating c) Lubricating e) Safety

and Safety pressure oil/air

instrumentation

gauge, guage, temperature running hours, vessel, oil filter ( optional ), ), elements ), systems is used ), and system is used ). ( optional gauge, delivery

oil pressure

d) Hour meter for recording valve on air/oil pressure pressure f ) Differential g) Differential

separator

gauge for lubricating gauge for oil separator safety filter, safety switch

h) High lubricating j ) High air discharge k) Clogging m) Low water indicator

oil temperature pressure for air suction safety switch

switch, ( optional

pressure

( if water coolant safety switch

n) High cooling Additional instruments

water temperature for electric driven

( if water coolant are:

compressors

a) Power-`On-off' b) Voltmeter, c) Ammeter. 7. Controls and

high indicator,

7.1 Automatic start stop mode of operation makes or breaks electric contact to the motor at predetermined pressures. This type of regulation shall be used when the demand of air is small or intermittent, but where pressure shall be continuously maintained. 7.2 Constant speed mode of operating unloads the compressor at predetermined pressure motor continuous to operate. This type of regulation shall be used when thedemand practically constant at the capacity of the compressor. 7.3 Dual control permits stop control, depending 8. Name Plate a normal selection between upon the air requirements. Arrow at an easily accessible point on the compressor equipment. and to constant speed control and while the for air is start/

automatic

and Rotation

9.1 Name plate shall be securely attached any other major auxiliary equipment. 8.2 Rotation 9. Tests arrow shall

be cast in or attached

to major item of rotating

on Compressors tests, shall be in accordance with manufacturer's test pressure of

9.1 The tests, other than hydrostatic and pressure requirements, unless otherwise specified.

9.2 Air receiver ( when supplied ) and cooler shall be subjected 1 5 timesthe design pressure or in accordance with the specified 10. Preparation for Despatch are completed, shall with all exposed

to the hydrostatic requirements,

10.1 After test and inspection suitable rust preventive, 10.2 Unmachined 10.3 All openings external shall

machined

surfaces

shall

be coated

with

surfaces

be cleaned plastic

thoroughly

and painted

with suitable

p;sint.

be provided

or metal closures.

11. Documentation 11.1 The following data and drawings shall be furnished by the supplier, in addition, any other documentation mutually agreed between the purchaser and the supplier before placement of the order shall be furnished. 11.1.1 ~Msnufacturers shall provide deviations and exceptions, etc. data as required by data sheat given in Appendix A alongwith

4

11.1.2 Overall arrangement, shall be provided. The drawing

drawing of the compressor, shall also show the following: those and in the supply, required

prime

mover

and

dther

accessories and mainte-

a) Atl principal dimensions, including nance, and withdrawal space; b) Direction c) Position,of of rotation foundation of drive shaft; bolts.

for purchasers

foundations

11.1.3 If the prime mover is not included shall be supplied.

the relevant

data for the

prime

mover

11.1.4 Schematic drawing of contro~l system, when ~required and not covered in maintenance and operating instruction book, cooling system and outline dimensiolial drawing for accessories such as after cooler and instrument panel, make, type, size, etc, shall be indicated for all these accessories. 11.1.5 Mainfenance and operating user handbook ( operating manual purchaser. 11.1.6 Certificate issued. for pressure insfrucfions -Manufacturer shall supply the literature, such as ), part identification manual and maintenance manual to the to which these are designed and nianufactured shall be

vessels

11.1.7 Material certificates for mechanical, performance supplier and the purchaser. 11.1.8 Required

for materials used in the manufacture of compressor and all test report test and other tests shall be supplied, as mutually agreed between the spare parts shall be furnished. shall be~mutually agreed between the

data for ordering

11.1.9 The number of copi-es for drawings purchaser and the supplier.

and documen~ts

APPENDIX ( Clauses DATA A-l. General a) No. of units b) Site c) Service d) Installation e) Type of driver f by purchaser/ SHEETCONTAINING

A

3.1, 5 and 11.1 .l ) PURCHASER'S SPECIFICATIONS

Running/standby Continuous/intermittent Indoor/outdoor Electric with roof/outdoor engine/petrol without engine roof motor/diesel

) Prime mover furnished
. supplier

g) Used as portable/stationary A-2. Required Operating Condition

a) Site Dafa

1) Barometric 2) Relative
3) Ambient

pressure, humidity, Max Min at filter, z;i

temperature,

condition - Clean/very dusty/in any unusual corrosive atmosphere, 4) Environmental Any special electrical equipment required because of hazard 5) Division Grade Class Type of water, pressure and temperature of supply 6) Cooling water supply for coolers and return ( if applicable ), ._~.. . .._. 5

IS: 12258 - 1987
b) Electrical c) Capacity d) Discharge A-3. Capacity supply required pressure, characteristics (each and required ( specify only if after-cooler is required ). machine ( required, ), if prime mover is a motor ),

e) Dischar~ge temperature Control

a) For maintaining 1) Suction 2) b) Any other A-4. Special

air receiver start/stop.

presssure and

at -

kg/cm'.

This shall

be done by;

valve unloader,

requirements.

Requirements allowable materials, for air, and heat exchanger, conform, and prime mover shall code for air receiver to which speed (rpm) at prime mover shaft,

a) b) cl d) e)

Maximum Special Design Standard

Type of filter

f)

Transmission-V-Belt, Flat Belt Belt Box Director Drive

9)
A-5.

Any special

type of couplings.

Scope

of Supply

Prime mover Additional instrumentation Additional safety devices After-cooler Air receiver receiver Safety valves - compressor, Ai~r filter, lub hlter, separation system Cooling water piping for alter-coolers ( if applicable Instrument panel Special tools Spare parts and operations manual Foundation plane ( if applicable ) GAD-auto and manual compressor de-pressurization A-6. Inspection and Tests

)

on shutdown

Shop inspection required Test to be withstood: Hydrotest of compressor housing Mechanical run test Performance test Strip test Run test of the prime mover ( if applicable

) ( at suppliers

end ).

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

The supplier may offer an alternative design provided it covers a construction which is equivalent to or' otherwise in accordance with the requirements given in this standard. The proposal shall include either a specific statement that all MlUiPment is in accordance with this standard or a specific list with explanation of any deviations thereform. 6
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

