UNA Wad IS 16289 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


fafine ema — wet ch 
WfSreet Ara — fatorite 


Medical Textiles — Surgical Face 
Masks — Specification 


ICS 11.140; 59.080.01 


© BIS 2014 


ada res em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"IW Wa, 9 FIRM WAL AMT, ae feeeit-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2014 Price Group 4 


Technical Textiles for Medtech Applications Sectional Committee, TXD 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Technical 
Textiles for Medtech Applications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


The transmission of infective agents during surgical procedures in operating theatres and other medical settings 
can occur in several ways. Sources are, for example noses and mouths of the surgical team. The main intended 
use of surgical masks is to protect the patients from infective agents from the noses and mouths of the staff and, 
in certain situations, additionally to protect the wearer against splashes of potentially contaminated liquids. 


The protection of the healthcare professional, as well as the patient, has, therefore more recently become an issue 
of infection control and is becoming more complex (see Annex A). 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16289 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


MEDICAL TEXTILES — SURGICAL FACE MASKS — 
SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the performance requirements 
and test methods of surgical face masks intended to 
limit the transmission of infective agents from staff to 
patients and (in certain situations) vice-versa during 
surgical procedures in operating theatres and other 
healthcare services such as patient care, with similar 
requirements. This standard is not applicable to masks 
intended exclusively for the personal protection of staff. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Surgical Face Mask — A medical device covering 
the mouth, nose and chin providing a barrier to 
minimize the direct transmission of infective agents 
between staff and patient 


3.2 Bacterial Filtration Efficiency (BFE) — The 
effectiveness of a surgical face mask to filter (prevent 
passage of) aerosol droplets containing bacteria of a 
specified particle size of 3.0 um (micron) + 0.3 um. 
This is expressed as a percentage of a quantity that 
does not pass through the material. 


3.3 Differential Pressure/Delta P — It is the pressure 
drop across a surgical mask under specific conditions 
of air flow, temperature and humidity. This is an 
indicator of the breathability of the mask. 


3.4 Sub-micron Particle Filtration Efficiency 
(PFE) — It is the effectiveness of a material to filter 
aerosol droplets containing bacteria of a specified 
particle size range 0.1 um. This is expressed as a 
percentage of a quantity that does not pass through the 
material. 


3.5 Fluid/Splash Resistance — It is defined as the 


ability of a facemask's material construction to 
minimize fluids from traveling through the material 
and potentially coming into contact with the user of 
the facemask. Fluid resistance helps reduce potential 
exposure to blood and body fluids caused from 
splashes, spray or splatter. Resistance to penetration 
by synthetic blood is indicated as pass/fail at one of 
three distinct velocities of 80, 120 and 160 mm of Hg. 
Penetration (visual evidence of synthetic blood on the 
side opposite impact results in fail at that pressure. Non- 
penetration results in a pass. 


3.6 Colony Forming Unit (CFU) — A particle 
containing one or more bacterial cells which gives rise 
to a single bacterial colony on a culture plate 


3.7 Infective Agent — The micro-organism that has 
been shown to cause surgical wound infection or that 
might cause infection in the patient or in members of 
the surgical team 


3.8 Surgical Procedure — A surgical intervention 
penetration skin or mucosa, performed by a surgical 
team under controlled environmental conditions. 


3.9 Aerosol — It is the suspension of solid, liquid, or 
solid and liquid, particles in gaseous medium, the 
particles having a negligible falling velocity, generally 
considered to be less than 0.25 m/s. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 General 
4.1.1 Materials and Construction 


The surgical face mask shall not disintegrate, split or 
tear during intended use. 


4.1.2 Design 


The surgical face mask shall have a means by which it 
can be fitted closely over the nose, mouth and chin of 
the wearer and which ensures that the mask fits closely 
at the sides. 


4.2 Performance Requirements 


The surgical face masks shall conform to the 
requirements specified in Table 1. The surgical masks 
have been categorized into three classes based on 
performance, Class 1, Class 2 and Class 3. 


NOTE — Class 3 is splash/fluid resistant. 


IS 16289 : 2014 


Table 1 Performance Requirements for Surgical Face Mask 


(Clause 4.2 ) 

Sl Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, 

No. ee es Ref to 
Class Class 2 Class 3 IS No. Annex 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 

i) Bacterial filtration efficiency, Percent, min 95 98 98 IS 16288 — 
ii) Differential Pressure, Pa, Max 29.4 29.4 49.0 — C 
iii) Splash resistance, mm Hg, Min - - 120 — D 
iv) Sub-micron particulate filtration Efficiency at 0.1 u, percent, Min - - 98 - E 


5 MARKING 


5.1 Each piece of the surgical facemask shall be legibly 
marked with the following information: 


a) Name of the product that is surgical facemask 
and the class of the mask; 


b) Manufacturer’s name, initials or trade-mark, 
if any; 

c) Month and year of manufacture or batch /lot 
number; and 

d) Any other statutory requirement as required 
by the law in force. 


5.2 BIS Certification Marking 
The product may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 


5.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


6 SAMPLING AND 
CONFORMITY 


CRITERIA FOR 


6.1 Lot 


All the surgical face masks of the same grade and 


material, produced under similar conditions of 
manufacture shall constitute a lot. 


6.1.1 Each lot shall be tested separately for 
ascertaining the conformity of the lot. 


6.1.2 The number of dressings to be selected from the 
lot shall depend on the size of the lot and shall be in 
accordance with col 2, col 3 and col 5 of Table 2. 


6.1.3 These face masks shall be selected at random 
from the lot. For this purpose, reference may be made 
to IS 4905. 


6.2 NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


6.2.1 All the face masks selected as per col 3 of Table 2 
shall be examined for workmanship and finish 
(see 4.1). 


6.2.1.1 Any mask failing in one or more of the above 
requirements shall be termed as defective. The lot shall 
be considered as conforming to the above requirements, 
if the total number of defectives found in the sample is 
less than or equal to the acceptance number given in 
col 4 of Table 2. Otherwise, the lot shall be rejected. 


6.2.2 Out of the sample already found satisfactory 
according to 6.2.1.1, a sub-sample as per col 5 of 
Table 2 shall be taken. This sub-sample shall be further 
tested for the remaining requirements. 


Table 2 Number of Face Masks to be Selected 
(Clause 6.1.2) 


SI Lot Size Non-Destructive Testing Destructive Testing 
m No. of Masks Acceptance No. of Masks Acceptance 
to be Selected Number to be Selected Number 
N n a ni a, 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Up to 280 13) 1 8 0 
i) 281-500 20 2 8 0 
ii) 501-1200 32 3 13 0 
iv) 1201-3200 50 5 13 0 
v) 3201-10000 80 7 20 1 


Or lot size when less than 13. 


6.2.3 The lot shall be considered as conforming to the 
requirements of the specification, if the total number 
of defective masks found in the sample (as per 6.2.2) 
is less than or equal to the acceptance number as given 
in col 6 of Table 2. 


IS 16289 : 2014 


7 PACKING 


The packing of surgical masks shall be done within an 
air-conditioned and dust free environment directly from 
the machine into dispenser boxes then outer cartons. 
The masks should not be packed in poly packs which 
do not offer suitable protection against the environment. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2.1) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
4905 : 1968 Methods for random sampling 
16288 : 2014 Medical textiles — Method for 


IS No. Title 
evaluation of the bacterial filtration 
efficiency of surgical face masks 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
INFORMATION FOR USERS 


B-1 When breathing, speaking, coughing, sneezing etc 
one releases smaller or larger amounts of droplets of 
secretions from the mucous membranes in the mouth 
and nose. Those droplets quickly evaporate and leave 
nuclei suspended in the air. The majority of the nuclei 
are between 0.5 um and 12 jum in diameter and the 
larger ones can contain micro-organisms from the 
source site. Nuclei can subsequently spread through 
the air to a susceptible site such as an open operating 
wound or sterile equipment. 


B-2 The surgical masks intended to be used in 
operating theatres and health care settings with similar 
requirements are designed to protect the working 
environment and not the wearer. When the primary 
intention is to protect the wearer from infection, the 
use of other devices should be considered. 


B-3 A special case is that in which the wearer wishes 
to protect himself/herself against splashes of potentially 
contaminated fluids. For this application this standard 
specifies performance requirements and gives a test 
method for a special class of surgical masks offering 
protection against splashes. 


B-4 The degree of protection offered by a mask 


depends on a number of factors such as the filtration 
capacity of the material and the fit of the mask on the 
wearer's face. Different designs are suited for 
different applications and the careful choice of mask 
is therefore important in order to achieve the desired 
result. 


B-5 The filtration capacity of mask materials can vary 
depending on the filter media. The fit of masks varies 
considerably from those which are held in place by 
ear loops fastened behind the wearer's ears to those 
with tie bands around the head and a nose clamp that 
can be shaped to the wearer's nose. The effect of a 
very good or less good fit can be tested in vivo whereas 
the filtration capacity may be reproducibly tested in 
vitro. 


B-6 The considerable variations in results when masks 
are tested in vivo results in the need for large groups 
of test subjects and observations. It is thus usual to 
characterize mask performance using in vitro tests of 
the material from which the mask is made. It is, 
however, important to consider the fit of the mask 
carefully when a mask for a certain application is 
chosen. Users should request such information from 
their suppliers. 


IS 16289 : 2014 


B-7 A further factor to be considered is the capacity 
of the mask to absorb moisture from the exhaled air 
and thereby to maintain its performance over a longer 
period of time. The more advanced designs easily 
maintain their performance throughout even very long 
operations whereas the less advanced ones are 
intended only for short procedures. There is no 
scientific evidence that demonstrates a limitation in 
wearing time for the advanced surgical masks that 
are available today. 


B-8 The contamination risk resulting from hand contact 
with a used mask means that it is essential that the 


mask is taken off and disposed of when no longer worn 
over nose and mouth. When there is a further need for 
protection then a new mask should be put on. Touching 
a used mask or putting on a new one should always be 
followed by a full hand disinfection procedure. 


B-9 In summary, to use an appropriate mask is an 
effective means to protect the working environment 
from droplet contamination from nose and throat 
during health care procedures. Masks with very 
different performance are, however, available. 
Therefore such factors as infection risk and mask fit 
should be carefully considered when choosing a mask. 


ANNEX C 
[Table 1, SI No. (ii)] 
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF BREATHABILITY (DIFFERENTIAL PRESSURE) 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


A device which measures the pressure differential 
required to draw air through a measured surface area 
at a constant air flow rate is used to measure the air 


1 
Key 
1 Air inlet 5 Monometer M2 
2 Flow meter 6 Valve 
3 Manometer M1 7 Vacuum pump 
4 Filter material 


exchange pressure of the surgical mask material, as 
shown in Fig.1. Water-filled manometers (M1 and 
M2) are used to measure the pressure differential. A 
flow meter is used for measurement of the air flow. 


0001110 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR MEASURING AIR RESISTANCE 


4 


An electric vacuum pump draws air through the 
apparatus and a needle valve is used to adjust the air 
flow rate. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Flow Meter, capable of measuring an air flow 
of 8 litre/min. 


C-2.2 Manometers, M1 and M2. 
C-2.3 Electric Vacuum Pump 
C-2.4 Valve 


C-3 TEST SPECIMENS 


Test specimens shall be complete masks or shall be 
cut from masks. Each specimen shall be able to provide 
five different circular test areas of 2.5 cm in diameter. 
The number of specimens that shall be tested shall be 
five. 


C-4 PROCEDURE 


C-4.1 The test specimen is placed across the 2.5 cm 
diameter orifice (total area 4.9 cm?) and clamped into 
place so that the tested area of the specimen will be in 
line and across the flow of air. 


C-4.2 The pump is started and the flow of air adjusted 
to 8 litre/minute. 


IS 16289 : 2014 


C-4.3 The manometers M1 and M2 are read and 
recorded. 


C-4.4 The procedure described in steps C-4.1 
through C-4.3 is carried out on five different areas of 
the mask and the readings averaged 


C-5 CALCULATION OF DIFFERENTIAL 
PRESSURE 


For each test specimen, calculate the differential 
pressure, AP as follows: 


AP-(X,-X,)/49 


where 
X, = water pressure, in mm, manometer 1, mean 
of five test areas, low pressure side of the 
material; 
X w = water pressure, in mm, manometer 2, mean 
of five test areas, high pressure side of the 
material; 


4.9 = area of the test material, in cm?; and 


AP = pressure differential per cm? of test 
material expressed as mm of water. 


C-6 TEST REPORT 
The test report shall include the following information: 


a) Flow rate during testing; and 
b) Differential pressure for each test specimen. 


ANNEX D 
[Table 1, SI No. (iii)] 
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF SPLASH RESISTANCE 


D-1 PRINCIPLE 


A volume of synthetic blood is disbursed at a specimen 
mask by a pneumatically controlled valve from a set 
distance at specified pressure to simulate the impact 
of blood or other body fluid onto the specimen. The 
velocity and volume of fluid are set to simulate a given 
health care scenario. 


D-2 APPARATUS AND REAGENTS 


D-2.1 A suitable test apparatus to dispense a specified 
volume of synthetic blood through a small diameter 
canula (1.27 cm long with an internal diameter of 
0.084 cm) over a controlled amount of time at a 
specimen mask a set distance away. The test apparatus 
consists of a specimen holding fixture, a targeting 
plate, a pressurized fluid reservoir, a pneumatically 


actuated valve with interchangeable canula and a 
valve controller. The test apparatus includes a base 
for more convenient mounting of the components and 
a hood or other components to contain or control the 
splash. 


D-2.2 Synthetic Blood 


D-2.3 Isopropanol, laboratory grade, for cleaning the 
apparatus. 


D-3 TEST SPECIMEN 


D-3.1 Use complete surgical face masks as the test 
specimen. If in the design of a face mask, different 
materials or thickness of material are specified at 
different locations, test each area of the specimen 
separately. If in the design of a surgical face mask, 
seams are claimed to offer the same protection as the 


IS 16289 : 2014 


base material, test these areas of the face mask 
separately. 


D-3.2 Prior to test, the specimens shall be conditioned 
to moisture equilibrium in the standard atmosphere of 
temperature 27 + 2 °C and relative humidity of 65 + 2 
percent. When the test specimens have been exposed 
to standard atmosphere for at least 6 h in such a way to 
expose as far as possible, all portions of the specimens 
to the atmosphere, they shall be deemed to have reached 
moisture equilibrium. 


D-4 PROCEDURE 


D-4.1 Place a small droplet (approximately 0.1 ml) 
of the synthetic blood on the normal inside surface of 
an extra surgical face mask. The droplet must remain 
easily visible to ensure that a droplet penetrating the 
material shall be seen. If not, use talcum powder on 
the normal inside surface of the surgical face mask to 
enhance droplet visibility. 


D-4.2 Mount a specimen on the specimen holding 
fixture and position the specimen so that the impact of 
the synthetic blood occurs in the desired area of the 
mask. If the mask contains pleats, spread the pleats 
out when mounting the face mask onto the test fixture 


to present a single layer of material as the target area. 
Use the centre of the specimen as the target area. The 
inside of the mask shall contact the entire perimeter of 
the viewing hole. The specimen mask shall be 
supported by the specimen holding form. Remount the 
specimen mask, if necessary. 


D-4.3 Locate the exit of the canula 30.5 cm from the 
target area of the specimen mask. Dispense the 
synthetic blood (approximately 2 ml) at a pressure of 
120 mm of Hg onto the specimen surgical face mask. 
Ensure that the synthetic blood hits the target area of 
the surgical face mask. 


D-4.4 Inspect the viewing side of the specimen for 
synthetic blood within 10 s of dispensing the synthetic 
blood against the target area. Using suitable lighting 
note whether any synthetic blood, or other evidence 
of wetness, or both appears on the viewing side of the 
specimen. Use a cotton absorbent swab or similar item 
to lightly daub the target area, if doubt exists for visible 
penetration of the synthetic blood. 


D-5 TEST REPORT 


Any evidence of synthetic blood penetration on the 
inner facing of the surgical face mask constitutes a 
failure at the specified pressure. 


ANNEX E 
[Table 1, SI No. (iv)] 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF SUB-MICRON PARTICULATE FILTERATION 
EFFICIENCY 


E-1 PRINCIPLE 


Filtered and dry air is passed through an atomizer to 
produce an aerosol containing suspended latex spheres. 
This aerosol is then passed through a charge neutralizer. 
The aerosol is then mixed and diluted with additional 
pre-conditioned air to produce a stable, neutralized and 
dried aerosol of latex spheres to be used in the 
efficiency test. 


E-2 APPARATUS 


Aerosol test system consisting of clean, dry compressed 
air supply, HEPA filters, aerosol generator, charge 
neutralizer, humidifier, test filter holder and duct 
assembly, pressure drop measuring device, air flow rate 
measuring device, temperature and humidity detectors 
and optical particle counters. 


E-3 TEST SPECIMEN 


E-3.1 Prior to test, the specimens shall be conditioned 


to moisture equilibrium in the standard atmosphere of 
temperature 27 + 2 °Cand relative humidity of 65 + 2 
percent. When the test specimens have been exposed 
to standard atmosphere for at least 6 h in such a way to 
expose as far as possible, all portions of the specimens 
to the atmosphere, they shall be deemed to have reached 
moisture equilibrium. 


E-4 TEST PROCEDURE 


E-4.1 Set main airflow, dilution airflow and aerosol 
generator airflow to test conditions. Establish airflow 
controls at required test face velocities as to have air 
dilution (drying) for aerosol generation of 2 : 1 or 
greater. Purge main airflow for 10 to 15 min. Warm up 
optical particle counter (OPC) for 15 to 30 minutes. 
After OPC warm up, check built in calibration signal 
or OPC output signal on an oscilloscope for stable gain 
on photomultiplier tube or other optical detectors. 
Switch the OPC into main airflow and balance OPC 


airflow against the main airflow. Observe OPC count 
data. 


E-4.2 Set-up the aerosol generator with a nominal 
volume of the distilled water to be used in the latex 
dilutions. Without a material specimen in the test 
system, establish the main system airflow and the OPC 
sampling airflow for the upstream sampling probe. 
Sample the upstream and downstream airflow for 1 
min each. Verify complete drying of the aerosol 
droplets by comparing these counts to count obtained 
in E-4.1. Run this drying test for 1 h, sampling every 
15 min for upstream and downstream counting and 
record aerosol stability and system relative humidity. 
Measure the water consumption of the aerosol 
generator. Record any dilution airflow and the required 
air pressure for the aerosol generator. 


E-4.3 Fill the aerosol generator with the desired 
dilution of latex suspension. Without a filter media 
sample in the test specimen, close the system and 
establish the required system airflows. Stabilize the 
system airflow with the aerosol suspension for 
approximately 5 min, then begin successive 1 min 
upstream and downstream counts for 15 min or until 
reproducible counts are established. Verify that 


IS 16289 : 2014 


counting is within a 10 percent coincidence of the 
OPC. 


E-4.4 Install the material specimen in the test system 
and re-establish the required airflows. Monitor the 
OPC airflow and adjust for the added material 
specimen on the sample flow. Sample and record the 
upstream and downstream aerosol counts for a 
minimum of 5 counts at each position using a 1 min 
sampling time. If the downstream count is less than 
100, extend the test until 100 counts are obtained. 
However do not count longer than 5 min to avoid the 
loading the specimen. 


E-4.5 Monitor the upstream counts; if these counts 
fall outside 100 + 1 percent penetration average with a 
coefficient of variation of 3 percent, stop the test and 
check the system for aerosol generation instability. 


E-5 CALCULATION 


Average the upstream counts and the downstream 
counts, then calculate the decimal efficiency by the 
following definition: 


(average downstream counts) 


Efficiency = 1 
(average upstream counts) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 36 (1035). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.IL.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


