**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8254-1 (1976): Valve, Non-Rebreathing, Part I: Ruben's 
Pattern [MHD 13: Veterinary Hospital Planning and Surgical 
Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 614'894'28 



IS: 8254 (Part I) -1976 




Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
VALVE, NON-REBREATHING 

PART I RUBEN'S PATTERN 



( Reaffirmed 1998) 



1. Scope — Dimensional and other requirements for Ruben's pattern valve used for preventing 
rebreathing during ventilation of lungs aird for equipment for resuscitation. 

2. Materials 

2.1 Metal Parts — The metal parts shall be made of material suitable for the purpose intended. They 
shall be given suitable corrosion-resistant finish where required. They shall satisfy the corrosion 
resistance test as given in 5.2. 

2.2 Plastics Parts — The plastics parts shall be sturdy, nonbreakable, clean, transparent and free 
from scratches. They shall be resistant to anaesthetic vapours and gases. They shall withstand 
the normal steam or chemical sterilization. 

2.3 Spring — Made from phosphor bronze or stainless steel wire. 

3. Shape and Dimensions — As shown in Fig. 1. 

82 



INLET 



OUTLET 




PATIENT 
CONNECTOR 



OUTLET TO 
PATIENT END 

All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 VALVE, RUBEN'S PATTERN 

3.1 The dead space (space between seat of valve and patients connector ) in the valve shall not be 
more than 9 mm. 



Adopted 5 November 1976 



February 1977, ISI 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 8254 (Part I)- 1976 

3.2 A deviation of ±2"5 percent shall be allowed on all dimensions. 

4. Workmanship and Finish 

4.1 The valve shall sit on the valve seat accurately with least resistance during inspiration and 
expiration. 

4.2 The valve shall not stick at any stage. 

4.3 All the surfaces of the valve shall be smooth and free from pinholes, wrinkles, creases, embed- 
ded foreign matter and other defects. 

4.4 The inlet and the outlet to patient end shall be suitable for conical fittings conforming to 
IS: 7409-1974 'Specification for breathing attachment for anaesthetic apparatus'. Inside metal 
connection shall also be provided to accommodate the standard sized catheter mount for paediatric 
use. 

4.5 The metal parts shall be anodized, if made of aluminium; passivated, if made of stainless steel; 
and chromium plated over nickel, if made of brass. 

5. Tests 

5.1 Performance — The valve shall be tested for inspiration and expiration pressures. The 
resistance to flow at 25 l/min shall not be more than 78 N/m 2 (approximately 0"8 cm of water) during 
inspiration and 98 N/m a ( approximately 1"0 cm of water) during expiration. 

5.2 Corrosion Resistance — The metal parts shall be immersed in a 10 percent solution of citric acid 
at room temperature for 5 hours. They shall then be boiled in distilled water for 30 minutes and 
cooled while immersed in it for 48 hours. The metal part shall show no corrosion. 

The test shall be conducted in a glass container. 

5.3 The functioning of the valve shall remain unimpaired when the valve is operated at a frequency 
of 40 respirations per minute. 

5.4 Non-return Action 

5.4.1 The closing of the valve for inspiratory action shall not require a flow of air more than 
25 l/min from the inlet side. 

5.4.2 The leakage through the valve, when the valve is closed in either direction under a 
gas pressure of 1'96 kIM/m a ( approximately 20 cm of water ), shall not be more than 400 ml/min. 

6. Marking — The valve shall be marked with manufacturer's name, initials or recognized trade- 
mark, and an arrow mark on the body to indicate the direction of flow of gas. 

6.1 IS! Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. Packing — As agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 



Printed at Neelkamai Printers. Delhi, India 



