NAT Alan IS 17869 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


nt gata te ATT cent — Tale 


Low-Pressure Steam Cooker — 
Specification 


ICS 98.540.50 


© BIS 2022 


anda get SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay ect 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2022 Price Group 4 


Utensils, Cutlery Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee, MED 33 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Utensils, 
Cutlery Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional 
Council. 


The low pressure steam cooker is generally used for cooking rice, idli, dhokla, momo etc, using steam. 


While drafting this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn from IS 2347 : 2017 ‘Domestic pressure 
cooker — Specifications (sixth revision)’. For the purpose of simplicity and uniformity in this standard, ‘low 
pressure steam cooker’ has been used as cooker, where ever required. 


Electric type steam cookers are covered in IS 11879 : 1986 ‘Electric steam cookers’. 
Provision of braille has been provided for instruction manual for the product(s) as per this standard. 
The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 
Pressure 1 Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 
1 kgf/mm? = 9.806 65 MPa 
The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 
The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 
Pressure 1 Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 
1 kgf/mm? = 9.806 65 MPa 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17869 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
LOW PRESSURE STEAM COOKER — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the requirement for low pressure 
steam cookers with external heat source whose nominal 
working pressure is upto 0.1 Kgf/cm?. 

NOTE — This cooker does not need to comply with the 


requirements of IS 2347, if the normal operating pressure is 
upto 0.1 kgf/cm’. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard listed below contain provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, edition was 
valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties 
to agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate possibility of applying the most recent 
edition of the standard indicated below: 


TS No. Title 


21: 1992 Wrought aluminium and aluminium 
alloys for manufacture of utensils — 


Specification (fourth revision) 
2347:2017 Domestic pressure cooker — 
Specification (sixth revision) 
5522:2014 Stainless steel sheets 
for utensils — 


(third revision) 


and strips 
Specification 


6527: 1995 Stainless steel wire rod — 
Specification (first revision) 

6603: 2001 Stainless steel bars and flats — 

Specification (first revision) 

Non-stick  unreinforced ` plastics 

coatings on domestic cooking 

utensils — Specification 


(first revision) 


9730 : 2008 


9806 ` 2001 Methods of test for and permissible 
limits of toxic materials released from 
ceramicware, vitreous enamelware, 
glassware and glass — Ceramicware 


in contact with food (first revision) 


9845: 1998 Determination of overall migration of 
constituents of plastics materials and 
articles intended to come in contact 
with foodstuffs — Method of analysis 


(second revision) 


15997 :2012 Low nickel austenitic stainless steel 
sheet and strip for utensils and kitchen 


appliances — Specification 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Low Pressure Steam Cooker — A domestic 
cooking utensil for use with external heat source and 
capable of maintaining nominal cooking steam pressure 
less than 0.1 kgf/cm? gauge nominal. 


3.2 Rice Cooker — A domestic rice cooking utensil 
for use with external heat source and capable of 
maintaining nominal cooking steam pressure upto 
0.1 kgf/cm? gauge nominal. 


3.3 Steam Cooker — Appliance in which food is 
heated by steam generated at atmospheric pressure. 


3.4 Stopper — Cover for the utensil which is an 
integral part of the low pressure cooker. 


3.5 Auxiliary Closure — Cover which is an accessory, 
for its usage during cooking or serving. 


3.6 Container/Inserts/Separator — Vessel/plate/ 
accessories which is placed inside the cooker for 
cooking foods separately. 


3.7 Grid — Used inside cooker to ensure that there is 
a gap between the separator and the cooker inside base 
so that the food does not burn. This may be also used 
for cooking food in steam without getting into direct 
contact with water or base of the cooker. It may be used 
when separators are used. This may also be used for 
steam of food. 


4 CAPACITIES 


4.1 The nominal capacity of cooker shall be from 1 to 
10 litre and shall be expressed only in complete or half 
litre units. No negative tolerances shall be allowed on 
the nominal capacity. 


4.2 The capacity of the cooker shall be tested as given 
in 8.3. 


NOTE — If the capacity of a cooker is not in complete or half 
litre unit, its nominal capacity shall be marked as the nearest 
lower complete or half litre units. For example, in the case of 
a cooker having a capacity of 4.9 litre, the nominal capacity to 
be marked shall be 4.5 litre. 


5 MATERIALS 


5.1 Material which come in contact with food shall 
conform to designation 19000, 19500, 31000 or 40800 
of IS 21 or stainless-steel conforming to designation 
304 of IS 5522 or N 2 of IS 15997. The body of the 


IS 17869 : 2022 


cooker if made of 3 ply construction material, it shall 
satisfy the requirements as prescribed in IS 2347. 


5.2 Outer protective case and accessories of the cooker 
shall be of materials which shall be rigid enough to 
hold the inner container securely under conditions of 
use, corrosion resistant and protect it from damage in 
normal handling. 


5.3 If the cooker is provided with tempered glass lid, 
the lid shall conform to the performance requirements 
as given in 8.10. The minimum thickness of glass shall 
be 3.5 mm. If the stainless steel rim is provided on the 
glass lid, the material of rim shall be as per IS 5522 or 
IS 15997. The minimum thickness of the rim shall be 
0.25 mm. 


5.4 Rubber, if provided and comes in contact with food 
shall be made of food grade silicone (manufacturers 
certificate is acceptable). 


5.5 In case plastic comes in contact with food, the 
plastic should be food grade and shall not contain 
Bisphenol A (BPA). 
NOTE — Accessories and extra inner container may not be 
supplied along with the cooker unless specifically ordered or 


indicated on the packaging/user manual. 


5.6 Inserts/accessories if provided in the cooker, shall 
be of material at given in 5.1. In case stand is provided, 
the material shall be made of stainless steel of 
designation X02Cr18N111/X04Cr18N110/X07Cr18N19 
/X10Cr17Mn6Ni4 as per IS 6527 or stainless steel 
of designation  X02Cr19Ni10/X10Cr17Mn6Ni4N 
as per IS 6603. In case material used is aluminium, 
anodized aluminium it shall comply to the applicable 
requirements as per IS 2347. 

NOTE — Only chemical composition of stainless steel and 

aluminium needs to be complied with. 


6 CONSTRUCTION 


The construction of the cooker shall be suitable to 
ensure an easy and safe handling, good performance 
and a reasonable life. The vessel shall be so constructed 
that no distortion takes place under normal conditions 
of use. 


7 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


7.1 The inner body and the lid of the cooker shall be 
free from wrinkles, scratches and other surface defects. 
The inner body and the lid shall be neat and clean. 


7.2 The external cooker body should be free from 
defects. 


7.3 The cooker, if hard anodized, fully or partially, shall 
satisfy the requirements as given in IS 2347. 


8 REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 


8.1 Cooking Tests 


8.1.1 Cook rice three times using the full capacity 
as stated by the manufacturer. There should be no 
spillage/droplets outside the cooker. The spillage can 
be inside an integrated cup, by design, if provided by 
the manufacturer. The rice cooked should not have 
any uncooked portion. 


8.1.2 Steam vegetables (greens) three times using 
the full capacity as stated by the manufacturer, 
there should be no spillage (no droplets outside the 
cooker, it can be inside an integrated cup, by design, 
if provided by the manufacturer). The vegetables 
steamed should not have any uncooked portion. 


8.2 Leakage Test 


The cooker to be filled with 60° hot water upto 
its brim upright for 30 min. There should be no 
leakage. 


8.3 Capacity Test 


8.3.1 The nominal capacities may be as declared. The 
tolerance on the nominal capacity shall be +5 percent. 
No negative tolerance is permitted on nominal capacity 
of the cooker. 


8.3.2 Volume of water at room temperature required 
to fill the container, when in an upright position, to 
the brim of the vessel/body. 


8.3.3 Ensure the cooker body is empty, take water in 
a calibrated jar, pour the water from the calibrated 
jar into the cooker body, to the brim of the cooker 
body, the difference in reading of water level in the 
calibrated jar is the capacity. 


8.4 The cooker, if coated with powder coating or 
ceramic coating or high temperature resistant liquid 
coating fully or partially externally, shall conform to 
the thickness test, salt water corrosion test, adhesion 
test as per IS 9730. The coating shall comply with 
IS 9806. The minimum thickness of the coating shall 
be declared by the manufacturer. The externally 
coated cooker shall be subjected to thermal shock test 
as given at 8.4.1. 


8.4.1 Dry heat the cooker body on gas stove to 
220 +5/0°C and then quench in water at ambient 
temperature. Repeat the test 25 times. There shall be 
no blistering of coating from the cooker during or on 
completion of 25 gas heat cycles. 


NOTE — Temperature to be measured inside bottom of the 
cooker body. 


8.5 Stability of Cooker 


When the cooker filled with water to the full capacity 
is placed upright over a rough 10° inclined plane, it 
should not overturn or fall. 


8.6 Stopper 


The stopper of the inner container shall be of non-toxic 
and food grade material (see IS 9845). If stainless steel 
or aluminum is used, it shall conform to the material 
specified for the inner container (see 5.1). If O-ring or 
Gasket is provided it should be food grade silicone. The 
materials shall not contain Bisphenol A (BPA). 


8.7 Auxiliary Closure 


The auxiliary closure(s), if provided shall be non-toxic, 
food grade material and shall not deform under normal 
conditions of use (see IS 9845). The materials shall not 
contain BPA. 


8.8 Induction Bottom Cooker 


If the cooker is provided with induction bottom, it shall 
pass the requirements as given in IS 2347. 


8.9 Test(s) on Tempered Glass Lid 
8.9.1 Fragmentation Test 


8.9.1.1 One lid from each lot having the same thickness 
is to be tested for this purpose. The sample lid shall be 
supported on a level surface (vitrified tile or smooth 
concrete surface). Paste a 50 mm x 50 mm transparent 
tape inside the glass lid, where the glass would be 
impacted. The glass lid shall be broken by means ofa center 
punch having radius of curvature 0.20 mm + 0.05 mm 
at its tip by giving one severe blow to cause fracture. The 
point can be center point between the outer edge and the 
center (away from a hole, if provided). 


8.9.1.2 The particle count determination shall be 
completed within 3 minutes of the fracture of that glass. 
No magnifying lens or other aid to vision need be used 
when making the particle count. The broken particle in 
a square of side 50 mm shall be counted. There shall 
be not less than 60 particles in a square of side 50 mm 
(50 mm x 50 mm). Biggest grain size shall not be more 
than 4.2 mm. 


8.9.2 Ball Drop Test 


8.9.2.1 One lid from each lot having the same thickness 
is to be tested for this purpose. The specimen shall be 
supported on a level surface (vitrified tile or smooth 
concrete surface). Mark three points 120° apart, the 
point can be center point between the outer edge and 
the center, (away from a hole, if provided). 


8.9.2.2 The smooth surface steel ball of 227 grams is 
placed at a height of 1 000 mm from the surface (can be 
inside a plastic tube with a sliding stopper). Allow the 


IS 17869 : 2022 


ball to free fall on the three points. No crack shall be 
seen by the naked eye under normal light. 


8.9.3 Thermal Shock Test 


8.9.3.1 This test is applicable for glass lids used for 
cooker, for others this test is optional. 


8.9.3.2 One lid from each lot having the same thickness 
is to be tested for this purpose. Place the glass in an 
air circulating oven at 120 + 5°C. Soak for the cited 
temperature for 30 min. Remove the glass, pour one 
liter of water at ambient temperature on the lid. The lid 
shall not shatter. 


8.9.4 Free Fall Test 


8.9.4.1 Drop the lid with rim facing down, from a height 
of 900 mm on a vitrified tile surface or a level smooth 
concrete surface. The glass shall not break/crack. 


8.9.4.2 Drop the lid without rim facing down, from a 
height of 900 mm on a vitrified tile surface or a level 
concrete surface. The glass shall not break/crack. 


9 SAMPLING 


For the purpose of conducting the tests, 3 samples of 
each individual size shall be tested. In the event of one 
of the 3 samples failing the test, additional 7 samples 
shall be tested and these shall all pass. 


10 INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 


10.1 The manufacturer shall supply fully illustrated 
instructions for use with each cooker. The instructions 
shall also indicate the cooking capacity of the cooker 
and shall include instructions or illustrations to identify 
features intended to reduce risks. The instruction for 
use may be provided in Braille. 


10.2 The instruction manual shall include the important 
safeguards specified in 10.3, 10.4 and 10.5. 


10.3 Unless otherwise indicated, the text of the 
instructions maybe be verbatim to, or in equally 
definitive terminology as specified in 10.5, except 
where specific conflict in the risk alluded to has been 
reduced. The items may be numbered. In a list of items, 
the phrases “Read all Instructions”, “SAVE THESE 
INSTRUCTIONS? shall be first and last, respectively. 
Other important and safeguard items considered 
appropriate by the manufacturer may be inserted. 


10.4 The instruction manual shall include the following 
as a basic requirement: 


a) Instruction for use (for example, how to open and 
close, how to use the menus); 


b) Important safeguards; 
c) Safety instruction; 


IS 17869 : 2022 


d) Do’s and dont’s; 
e) Care and cleaning; 


f) At least two recipes using each function, unless 
it’s only a keep warm function or child lock; 


g) Trouble shooting; 

h) A drawing or picture of the cooker with parts 
identified; 

j) List of spares; 

k) Service centers; and 


m) Customer care number and email id, web site 
details, with instruction on how to log in a 
complaint or service request. 


10.5 Important Safeguards 


10.5.1 Caution be sure to observe the following to 
prevent malfunction that may cause an accident: 


a) Measure the quantity of rice and water according 
to the instructions; 

b) Clean the cooker, particularly the condensation 
collector, after each use; 

c) Set the unit on a stable surface; 

d) Do not expose to water, high humidity, or heat 
sources; 

e) Do not use the pot directly on an open flame; 

f) Besure to keep the unit out of the reach of children; 

g) Keep holes that drain into the condensation 
collector clean and free of debris; 


h) The unit becomes hot when in use. Do not touch 
the lid with your hand, and do not place your face 
or hand directly over the steam coming from the 
cooker; 

j) Always keep the outside bottom of the pot and the 
heating plate clean and dry. Any foreign matter 
between them will cause the unit to malfunction; 

k) The pot must not be filled above the maximum cup 
marking; 

m) The lid must be closed tightly in the latched 
position at all times during cooking. That is, the 
unit must not be operated with the lid opened; 

n) Do not cover the lid with a cloth. The lid may 
deform or change color; and 


p) Do not move the unit while cooking. 


10.5.1.1 Cleaning and care 
a) Do not immerse the cooker in water; 
b) Clean the body and outer lid with a damp cloth. 
Do not use dishwashing detergent; 


c) Wash the rice cooker pot, steaming basket, 
measuring cup, scoop and condensation collector 
in warm soapy water; and 


d) Remove the detachable inner lid by grasping on 
both sides and gently pulling down. Wash in warm 
soapy water and dry thoroughly. 


10.5.1.2 Helpful hints 


a) Using the keep warm function for more than 
5 hours may cause discoloration or an odor in the 
rice; 

b) You can adjust the amount of water and/or rice to 
your own taste preferences; 


c) When steaming vegetables please reference the 
steaming chart in this manual. The charts are 
merely a guide, you may wish to adjust the times 
according to your own taste preferences; 


d 


wm 


Washing Rice when rice is milled some bran and 
residues adhere to the surface of the rice. You 
can remove these residues by first washing the 
rice with water before cooking. This will remove 
excess starch and amp; residues, which will 
provide you with much whiter, fluffier rice; 


e) Remember to always use the measuring cup 
provided to accurately measure the rice. Add the 
desired amount of rice to the rice cooker pot. Fill 
with cold water until all of the rice is submerged. 
Wash the rice by simply stirring the rice around in 
the water and rubbing between your hands. You 
will notice that the color of the water will become 
cloudy as the rice is cleaned. Without spilling the 
rice, tip the rice cooker pot to remove the cloudy 
water and repeat several times until the water 
remains clear; 


f) Cooking other types of rice such as long grain 
rice, wild rice, yellow rice, brown rice, basmati 
rice, etc. When cooking rice other than short grain 
white rice it will be necessary to increase the 
amount of water by 1.5 to 2 times more than the 
standard short grain white rice recipe. Adjust to 
suit your own personal taste; 


= 


Foods that are overly sweet or oily can cause the 
rice cooker to switch to keep warm earlier than 
desired. If this happens, add some liquid like 
water, wine, stock, milk or juice; 


g 


h) When baking in the rice cooker, it is usually 
necessary to push cook more than once. You will 
need to wait for about 10 min after the machine 
switches to keep warm to be able to press it back 
to cook. This is normal; and 


wa 


Do not double recipes in the rice cooker. The 
tightly closed lid will force excess liquid out of 
the steam vent if you do. 


j 


12 MARKING 


12.1 Each cooker shall be marked with its nominal 
capacity, the name or recognized trade-mark of the 


manufacturer on the body. The carton shall also be 
similarly marked. Grade of material used for the 
manufacture of body and lid shall be permanently 
marked on the body of the cooker (for example, Lid-SS 
304 or Al 19000 or SS304/Al 19000/SS 430, Body-SS 
304 or Al 19000 or SS304/Al 19000/SS 430). 


NOTE — For aluminium cooker with induction bottom, the 
grade can be added as a sticker/leaflet. 


12.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 


IS 17869 : 2022 


assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may be 
marked with the Standard Mark. 


13 PACKAGING 


Each cooker shall be suitable packaged to avoid 
any damage during transit. The packaging shall be 
eco-friendly 


IS 17869 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Utensils, Cutlery Domestic Hardware Sectional Committee, MED 33 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (A-504, K.G Chandra Vista, 
OMR, Opposite to Satyabhama University, 
Sholinganallur, Chennai) 


Aligarh Locks Manufacturers and Traders 
Association, Aligarh 
Anna Aluminium Ltd, Cochin 


Butterfly Gandhimati Appliances Ltd, Chennai 


Central Electrochemical Materials Science Division, 
Karaikudi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Consumer Voice, New Delhi 

Delhi Test House, New Delhi 

D P Garg and Co Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Federation of Hardware Mfg and Traders Welfare 
Association, Gurugram 


Godrej and Boyce Manufacturer’s Company Ltd, 
Mumbai 


Hamilton Housewares Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Hawkins Cookers Ltd, Thane 


Hindalco Industries Ltd, Disttt, Sonbhadra 
Jindal Stainless Limited, Hisar 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Kanpur 

MSME Testing Centre, New Delhi 

National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 


Pritam Internationl, Baddi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI G. SHANMUGANATHAN (Chairman) 


SHRI P. L. SHIROMANI 
SHRI DHRUV MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. CHANDRASHEKRAN PILLAI 
SHRI V. THULASIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SHANMUGAVELU 
SHRI A. BASKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI A. VIJAIMIRATHARAJ (Alternate II) 


DR S. VASUDEVAN 
DR S. MURALIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SURINDER KUMAR 
SHRI R. K. SARASWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRI M. A. U. KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH GOEL 
SHRI ROHIT GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDIP GARG 


SHRI AJAY BHASIN 
SHRI RAJESH BANSAL (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SHITIJ R. GAIKAR 
SHRI VINAYAK G. NALGIRKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY MORESHWAR MHATRE 
SHRI INDUPRAKASH SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI VIKAS SURENDRA KUMAR BHATIA (Young Professional) 


SHRI B. S. SETHI 
SHRI RAHUL PATHAK (Alternate) 
SHRI RAVINDER MALI (Young Professional) 


Dr VIVEK SRIVASTAVA 
SHRIMATI MANALI KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI BISWABASU ROY CHOWDHURY 
SHRIMATI JALAJA MENON (Alternate) 


ER M. SATYANARAYANA 
SHRI S. J. KOLARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S.V. SHARMA 
SHRI S. S. YADAV (Alternate) 


Dr S. GHOSH CHOWDHURY 
Dr K. L. Sanoo (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL KHERA 
SHRI ROHIT KHERA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Republic Engineers, New Delhi 
Royal Kitchen Appliances Pvt Ltd, Sonepat 
Sat Rattan Engineering Works, New Delhi 


Sriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India, Salem 
TTK Prestige Ltd, Bengaluru 


In Personal Capacity (179, Sri Sai, 13% Cross, 
Ananthnagar Phase 1, Electronic City Post, 
Bengaluru) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17869 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI M. P. SINGH 
SHRI SURESH AGARWAL 


SHRI G. L. KHERA 
SHRI RAHUL KHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR 
SHRI ANEESH KUMAR (Alternate 1) 
SHRI PUNEET KAPOOR (Alternate II) 


SHRI M. VELMURUGAN 
SHRI N. K. VIJAYAVARGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANTO VIMAL ANAND 
SHRI RAJASEKARAN S. (Alternate) 


SHRI B. VISWANATH SHENOY 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (MED) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 33 (17811). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western S Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


