( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO ALUMINIUM ALUMINIUM ALLOYS
PART II PLANT AND TREATMENT, CONTROL
Ligh't Metals
Chairman SHRI B. K. MIJBTEY Members Aluminium Corporation of India Ltd. Calcutta Hindustan Aluminrum Corporation Ltd, Renukoot ( Dist Mirzapur ) Directorate of Technical Development and ProducSARI S. N. CHATTERJEE tion ( Air ), Air Headquarters, New Delhi Integral Coach Factory, Pcrambur, Madras CHEMIST & METALLURQWT Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay &RI D. M. DAVE= SHRI A. T. BORATE ( Alfcrnats ) Cable and Conductor Manufacturers' Association SERI P. U. DEORA of India, New Delhi National Test House, Calcutta SERI A. GHOSH SHRI B. N. SARKAR ( Alf~rnutc ) Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. GOPALKRI~HNAN SHRI A. K. HAJRA ( Alfrrnats ) Indian Standard Metal Co Ltd, Bombay SERI F. A. A. JASDANWALLA SHRI C. CHATTERJEE ( Altcrnafc ) JOINT DIRECTOR ( MET )-PM, Ministry of Railways RDSO, LUCKNOW CHEMIST & METALLUROIST, EASTERN RAILRAY, JAYALPUR ( Alternate I ) DEPUTY DIREOTOR, STANDARDS ( CARR )-II, RDSO, LUCKNOW ( Altcrnatc II ) Aluminium Industries Ltd. Madras SHRI P. M. JOSEPE Ministry of Defence ( R & D) SHRI M. K. JOSRI Salt1 I. N. BHATIA ( Altcrnatc ) ( Continued on page b ) SERI V. D. AQARWAL SHRI V. K. AQRAWAL Indian

AND

OPERATIONS, THERMAL AND TESTING, FINISHING
Sectional Committee, SMDC IO

and

Their

Alloys

Representing Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1980 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

I

I

IS : 5047 ( Part II) - 1979
( Confinucd from page Members
SHRI M. L. KAUL

1) Representing

Bharat Aluminium Co Ltd, New Delhi ' LT-COL D. B. BEAN ( Altsrnatd ) Ministry of Dcfencc ( DGI ) SHRI S. L. KHANNA SHRI M. Y. BORKAR ( Alfcrnate ) Malaviya Regional Engineering College, Jaipur DR D. KUMAR National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), DR R. KUMAR lamshcdpur DR MANJIT SIN~H ( Alternate ) " Electrical Manufacturing Co Ltd., Calcutta SHRI 0. P. MATHUR Directorate General of Tcchmcal Development, SHRI L. MISHRA New Delhi Directorate General, Ordnance Factories, Calcutta SHRI D. Y. MOQHE SHRI B. D. BISWAS ( Alfcrnatc ) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd ( Bangalore Division ), DR KRISHNA Dns NAIR Bangalore SHRI V. S. L. PATRIKAR ( Alfernate ) Jindal Aluminium Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. R. RA~HUNATH Rharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI U. MOHAN RAO DR K. K. SEN GODAN ( Alternate ) India Government Mint ( Ministry of Finance ), SHRI P. M. RAW Hyderabad Planning Commission, New Delhi REPRESWNTAT~VE India Pistons Ltd, Madras SHRI M. S. SESHADRI Jeewanlal ( 1929 ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI D. H. SHAR SHRI N. H. SHAH ( Alfcrnate ) Madras Aluminium Co Ltd, Mettur Dam SHRI N. SHANMUQEAY Ministry of Steel & Mines SHRI C. SRARMA Central Electrochemical Research Institute ( CSIR) , SERI B. A. SH~NOI Karaikudi SHRI P. S. DWIKAN ( Alternate ) Genera1 of Supplies & Disposals, Directorate SHRI K. M. TANEJA New Delhi SHRI S. B. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-&cio Mcmbar ) SHRI C. R. RAMA RAO, Director ( Strut & Met )

Deputy

SHRI B. MUKHERJI Director ( Metals ), IS1

Glossuy

and

Alloy Designations

Panel,

SMDC

10/P-12

SHRI B. K. MURTHY Members Shri B. K. Murthy SHRI V. K. A~RAWAL

Indian Aluminium

Co Ltd, Calcutta

SHRI N. GOPALKRISHNAN ( Alternate to

)

Hindustan Aluminium ( Dist Mirzapur )

Corporation

Ltd, Renukoot

IS :5047 (Part11 ) - 1979

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO ALUMINIUM AND ALUMINIUM ALLOYS
PART II PLANT AND TREATMENT, CONTROL OPERATIONS, THERMAL AND TESTING, FINISHING

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 23 July 1979, after the draft finalized by the Light Metals and Their Alloys Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council.

0.2 This standard ( Part II ) has been prepared to making the glossary of terms for application in the aluminium industry more comprehensive by including the terms connected with special types of wrought metals, plant and operations, thermal treatment, control and testing, finishing, geometrical properties and tolerance, structural and surface defects, etc. It is hoped that this comprehensive standard on glossary of terms for aluminium and its alloys will help in establishing a generally recognized usage for various terms encountered in the aluminium industry and eliminate any confusion which may sometimes arise due to individual interpretation of terms used in the industry. 0.3 This standard is being issued in three parts covering different subjects in a logical sequence. This part dealing with plant and operations, thermal treatment, control and testing, and finishing forms Part II of the series. The other parts in the series are as given below: Part I Part III Unwrought Geometrical defects and wrought metals ( main and special types ) properties of this and tolerance, assistance structural has been and The and surface derived from

0.4 In the preparation the following:

standard

BS 3660 : 1963 Glossary of terms for aluminium alloys. British Standards Institution. Nomenclature Association for aluminium of USA. 3 mill products.

aluminium Aluminium

IS : 5047 ( Part

II ) - 1979

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard aluminium industry control and testing,
2. TERMS ( Part II ) defines commonly relating to plant and operations, and finishing. used terms in the thermal treatment,

AND DEFINITIONS and Operations
in which molten metal is poured into a

2.1 Plant

2.1.1 Chill Casting - A process permanent mould and solidified.

2.1.2 Direct Chill ( D.C. ) Continuous Casting - A process in which liquid metal is solidified rapidly in a short water-cooled metallic mpuld or die and continuously withdrawn and cut to length whilst the mould is being simultaneously replenished with liquid metal. 2.1.3 Direct Chill ( D. C. ) Semi-continuous Casting - A process in which liquid metal is solidified rapidly in a short water-cooled metallic mould or die and continuously withdrawn until the required length has been produced, when casting is discontinued. 2.1.4 Homogenizing the uniform distribution Prolonged heating of billets, of the soluble constituents. slabs, etc, to achieve

2.1.5 Cro@ing - The removal by shearing or sawing, of the ends of cast or semi-fabricated products at an intermediate stage of processing. initial hot-working 2.1.6 Breaking- Down - The heavy reduction is given to slabs or cast forging stock. 2.1.7 ScaljGzg - The surface machining of billets, and wirebars preparatory to their fabrication. 2.1.8 Sheet Mill A mill used for cold rolling coiling either operation forging whereby stock, slabs

plate or sheet. employed for the

2.1.9 Strip Mill - A mill with continuous cold rolling of strip.

equipment,

area 2.1.10 Hot Rolling - The reduction of thickness or cross-sectional of slabs and wirebnr by rolling at temperature usually at or above the lower limit of the recrystallization temperature range. 2.1.11 Cold Rolling - The reduction strip by rolling at temperature below range. 2.1.12 Temper Rolling the required mechanical Controlled properties. 4 of thickness of plate, sheet and the recrystallization temperature reduction by cold rolling to deveIop

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.1.13 Pack Rolling through the same pass. cutting cutting term of strip into of metal for two or more by the use widths of by the or to 2.1.14 Slitting - The use of rotary shears. 2.1.15 Shearing guillotine. The Rolling two or more thin sheets simultaneously

a press pressure

2.1.16 Press - A general deform or shear metal. 2.1.17 bending Press Brake plate or sheet.

machine single

employing action

A power-operated A press used production

press

used for plate,

2.1.18 Blanking Press sheet or strip. 2.1.19 Blanking - The ing on blanking press. 2.1.20 Blanking Die -

for shearing

blanks

from

of circles

and other circles

shapes by shearand other blanks.

A die used for shearing

2.1.21 Extrusion Press - A machine consisting essentially a ram and a die used for the production of extrusions. 2.1.22 container die.

of a container,

Direct Extrusion - A process in which a billet is placed in a and under pressure from a ram is forced through a stationary at

2.1.23 Indirect JZxtrusion - A process whereby a moving die located the end of a hollow ram is forced against a stationary billet. 2.1.24 Impact Extrusion sudden blow. A process in which extrusion is effected

by a more

one or 2.1.25 Extrusion Die - A block of special steel having holes of the required contour through which a billet is forced. 2.1.26 2.1.27 Single-Hole Die Multi-Hole Die An extrusion An extrusion die having die having only one hole.

more than one hole.

die which incorporates 2.1.28 Porthole Die, Bridge Die - An extrusion a mandrel as an integral part of the die assembly. It is used to provide extruded hollow products from solid billets. 2.1.29 through Container - The cylinder with a round or rectangular which the billet is extruded in an extrusion press. area bore, of the

2.1.30 Extrusion Ratio - The ratio of the cross-sectional extrusion container to that of the extruded section. 5

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.1.31 Mandrel internal A steel insert within the die orifice controlling form of hollow products during extrusion or drawing. the

2.1.32 Fixed Mandrel - A tapered mandrel attached to the main As the latter moves forward the mandrel passes through extrusion ram. the hollow billet and die giving a product slightly tapering in wall thickness along the length. 2.1.33 auxiliary mandrel. with an Piercing Mandrel - A fixed mandrel used in conjunction ram to pierce solid billets and thereafter to serve as an arrested

2.1.34 Arrested Mandrel - A tapered mandrel attached to an auxiliary As the main ram moves forward the tapered mandrel is extrusion ram. held stationary in the die, resulting in a product of uniform wall thickness along the length. 2.1.35 Floating Mandrel - A tapered mandrel which is not attached to the main extrusion ram and which is left free to centre itself in a hollow billet. The resulting product tapers slightly in wall thickness along the length. 2.1.36 Discard That portion of a billet which is left unextruded. to effect reduction to develop rod wire or sections,

2.1.37 Drawing - Working material on all surfaces in cross-sectional area, by pulling it through a die. 2.1.38 Temper Drawing - Controlled the required mechanical properties. reduction

by drawing

2.1.39 Bull Block tube through a die.

A power

driven drum used for drawing drawing bars,

for 2.1.40 Draw Bench - A machine shaped tube and tube in straight lengths.

rods,

2.1.41 Drawing Die - A plate or block of special steel, or block containing a hard insert, which is pierced by a hole of the required contour through which the metal is pulled. 2.1.42 Pointing ( Tagging ) - Reducing wire to a size capable of passing through 2.1.43 Drawing Plug ( Draw Bulb ) control the internal dimensions. 2.1.44 of tube mandrel. Sinking ( Sinking Pass j by pulling it through The one end of a rod, bar, a drawing die. A plug used in drawing of the outside using a draw from tube tube or tube to diameter plug or bloom by

-

The reduction a die without

2.1.45 Tube Reducing rolling on a mandrel.

production 6

of tube

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.1.46 Turks-Head Die - Four adjustable undriven rollers arranged at right angles to serve as a die for the drawing of square or rectangular sections from rod or wire.
2.1.47 Flattening Mill - A machine consisting pairs of rollers used in the production of flattened 2.1.48 Rod Mill A mill used for the production essentially wire. of driven rod.

of hot rolled

2.1.49 Shaving - The drawing of hot rolled rod, tube, or wire through a die with a cutting edge in order to remove a thin layer from its surface. forging machine in which 2.1.50 Drop Hammer -A blow is derived from a free-falling weighted top die. 2.1.51 Tup the top die. The heavy moving portion of the drop the force of the

stamp

carrying

2.1.52 Moulding Die ( Preforming Die ) prior to forging between closed dies. 2.1.53 Open Die which no impression A forging die with has been cut.

A die which a flat face,

shapes the stock is, a die into impressions

that

2.1.54 Closed Die - Forging dies, used in pairs, have been cut to impart the required shape.

into which

2.1.55 Swageing Die - Forging dies used in pairs, through which stock circular cross-section of the material is worked by a hammering action, being thereby reduced. 2.1.56 Clipper Die ( Trimmer Die ) from stampings. 2.1.57 2.1.58 sectional 2.1.59 increase Finishing Die A die used for removing the final forging the flash

A die used during

operation.

Drawing-Out area of forging

Increasing the length and reducing the crossstock by working under a hammer or press. of working hand forging forging stock of in order to

Upsetting - A method its cross-sectional area.

2.1.60 Dummy Forging - The rough for forging to shape in closed dies. 2.1.61 Dummy closed dies. 2.1.62 Moulding closed dies. A rough hand forging Preliminary

stock

destined

destined

for forging

to shape in between

die-shaping 7

prior

to forging

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.1.63 Swagcing - The reduction of the circular by a hammering or squeezing action.
2.1.64 Stamping - The shaping closed dies on a drop hammer. 2.1.65 Coining close tolerances. A final cold of sheet forging or cross section stock to of stock between obtain closed and

forging

operation

applied

2.1.66 Pressing - The shaping of sheet or forging dies on a mechanical or hydraulic press, 2.1.67 Clipping pressings. The removal of the flash removal of excess from

stock between drop stampings metal

2.1.68 Fettling ( Dressing ) - The forging at any stage of production. 2.1.69 Trimming - The semi-fabricated product. 2.1.70 facilitate removal

of unwanted metal from

from a

the edges of a to by a

of unworked Tonghold - A projection manipulation during processing.

metal

on a forging

2.1.71 Milling - A machining process in which metal is removed revolving multi-edged cutter to provide flat or profile surfaces. 2.1.72 products Punching - The by perforating. removal of metal from rolled or

extruded or

a thin layer 2.1.73 Cladding - A process whereby aluminium alloy is metallurgically bonded to the core. 2.1.74 Rectijcation The correction of irregularities.

of aluminium

2.1.75 Stretching - The levelling of rolled materials or the straightening of extruded or drawn materials by imparting the minimum permanent extension required to remove distortion. to effect a minimum specified 2.1.76 Controlled Stretching - Stretching permanent extension ( percentage permanent set ) in order to relieve internal stresses and to minimize distortion during machining. of plate or sheet 2.1.77 Roller Lcvelling ( Flattening ) - The flattening by passing it between a series of staggered rollers of small diameter. 2.1.78 Detwisting - An operation designed to remove torsional tions from the transverse axis along the length of an extrusion. deviaof

2.1.79 Reeling - The straightening by rotary and flexing action round bar, rod or tube by passing it through offset driven rollers. 8

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.1.80 Straightening The removal of longitudinal distortion.

2.1.81 Roller Straightening - The than round ) by passing it through diameter.

straightening of an extrusion ( other a series of staggered rollers of small

straightening 2.1.82 Spinner Straightening and Cutting - The automatic and cutting to length of coiled wire by feeding it through a machine consisting of rotating offset dies in tandem with a pair of cropping dies. of oil to products to provide tempo2.1.83 Oiling - The application rary protection against atmospheric attack during transit and during storage. 2.1.84 Degreasing - The removal of oil or grease organic solvent or an aqueous detergent. 2.1.85 Znterleaving - The sheet and strip by separating usually by a suitable

practice of protecting the surface of plate, adjacent surfaces by suitable paper.

sheet, plate and 2.1.86 All-Over Marking - A method of identifying strip by printing at close intervals over the surface the name of the manufacturer, the relevant specification number and in some cases the temper of the material. 2.1.87 Spinning - A method for making articles, having rotational symmetry, from circular sheet blanks, by mounting in a lathe and slowly forming it into shape, as it rapidly rotates about its axis, through pressure applied by tools. 2.1.88 2.2 Spinning Lathe An equipment for making articles by spinning.

Thermal

Treatment
Solution treatment followed by precipitation

2.2.1 Full Heat Treatment treatment.

2.2.2 Solution Treatment - Heating at a prescribed temperature followed by rapid cooling ( quenching ) as a predude to natural ageing or precipitation heat treatment. 2.2.3 Precipitation Treatment ( ArtiJicial Ageing ) - The controlled heating of solution heat treated material above room temperature for required duration in order to increase its hardness, proof stress and tensile strength. 2.2.4 Quenching - Rapid cooling from rature by contact with water, air or oil. 2.2.5 Die Benching ( Press Qyenching ) at the press as it leaves the die. 9 the solution treatment tempe-

The quenching

of an extrusion

IS I 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.2.6 Natural Ageing ( Age Hardening ) - The increase in hardness and tensile properties and reduction in ductility which occurs at room. temperature after the solution treatment and quenching of most heat treatable alloys. The change in properties is substantially complete within four to five days.
2.2.7 Stabilizing aluminium-magnesium will remain constant. A low temperature treatment applied to cold worked alloys to provide mechanical propertics which The replacement of cold-worked metal grain effected by heating metal to and holding at a

2.2.8 Rccrystalli~ation by new strain-free grains, suitable temperature.

temperature 2.2.9 Stress Relieving - Heating below the recrystallization with the object of reducing internal stresses set up in a material as a result of previous operations. 2.2.10 Annealing - The softening of material by heating at a temperature sufficient to cause recrystallization. 2.2.11 Flash Annealing - Annealing involving annealing temperature, with the primary object size. to and holding

rapid heating to the of ensuring fine grain

2.2.12 Su#er Annealing - The annealing of heat treatable alloys, followed by a slow controlled rate of cooling to produce a condition of maximum ductility with a minimum tendency to natural ageing. 2.2.13 Partial Annealing treatment of cold-worked causing recrystallization. mediate tempers. ( Temper Annealing ) - The low temperature material to effect limited softening without This treatment is used to obtain certain interthe peri-

2.2.14 Di$erential Annealing - The heating of blanks so that pheral annulus or other specified parts only are annealed.

and hardness at room 2.2.15 Age Sofcning - The loss of strength temperature which takes place in certain alloys due to spontaneous reduction of residual stresses in the strain hardened structure. 2.3 Control

and Testing
specification

2.3.1 Batch OY Lot - A quantity of material of the same and size produced and/or processed at the same time.
2.3.2 Cast product of one furnace melt, or of one crucible crucible a) The

melt. or furnace

b) The product of a number of either melts mixed prior to casting. 10

melts

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 c) The
amount of metal tapped from the furnace further addition of metal having been made when melting process is used. without any a continuous

2.3.3 Heat-Treatment Batch - A quantity of material one alloy of the same dimensions and produced in the same way, solution-treated and subsequently precipitation-treated in one furnace load. More than one heat-treatment batch may comprise a furnace load. 2.3.4 Control Bar - A test bar in a given alloy, of known response to heat-treatment, which is included in a furnace load to check the effectiveness of the heat-treatment operation. 2.3.5 First-Of Forging ( Proof Forging ) - An initial sample new dies and used for checking dimensional and metallurgical 2.3.6 Integral Test Piece with the forging. 2.3.7 Tonghold Test Piece hold of a forging. A tensile A tensile test sample test sample produced taken from made from quality. integrally the tong-

of

properties 2.3.8 Directional Properties - The mechanical in various d.irections with respect to the grain flow. 2.3.9 Longitudinal grain flow. Properties Mechanical properties properties

of a product parallel to the

2.3.10 Transverse Properties - Mechanical axis at right angles to the grain flow.

along

the major along the

2.3.11 Shorf Transverse Properties - Mechanical minor axis at right angles to the grainflow.

properties

is 2.3.12 Hardness Test - A test in which the resistance to deformation determined by relating to the load applied to an indenter of prescribed form, the depth ( Rockwell ), or surface area ( Brine11 and Vickers ), of the impression produced. 2.3.13 Tensile Test - A test in which the test piece is stressed in tension, generally until fracture, to determine one or more of its tensile properties. 2.3.14 Tensile Strength - The maximum load in the tensile by the original cross-sectional area of the test piece. test, divided

2.3.15 Proof Stress - The stress which produces, while the load is still applied a non-proportional extension equal to a specified percentage of the gauge length. 11

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.3.X Gauge Length - The length of the selected part of the unstrained test piece to which any increase in length is referred. 2.3.17 Perctntage Elongation of the gauge length expressed length. The permanent extension ( after fracture ) as a percentage of the original gauge

2.3.18 Bend Test - The bending of a specimen to conform with a predetermined radius and angle, to assess bending characteristics and ductility. 2.3.19 Bend Radius - The which a specimen is bent. radius of curvature of the former is stressed around in shear by

2.3.20 Shear Test - A test in which the test piece until fracture to determine its shear strength. 2.3.21 Bore Test - A test tube to verify freedom passing a metallic bob or wire of specified diameter

from constriction through the tube.

2.3.22 Drift Test (Drift Expansion Test ) - The diametral expansion of the end of a tube sample to a predetermined amount by the insertion of a cone to assess, for example, suitability for end expansion. rim of predeter2.3.23 Flanging Test - A test in which a disc-shaped mined size is formed at the end of a tube sample to assess its suitability for the manufacture of tubular rivets. 2.3.24 extruded specified
Pressure

or pneumatic test applied Test - A hydraulic or. drawn tube to ensure that the material will withstand pressure for a specified time without leakage or distortion.

to a

2.3.25 Flattening Test -A test in which circular, square, or `streamlined tube is flattened until the diameter, diagonal or major axis is reduced to a predetermined value. 2.3.26 Torsion Test - A test in which given number of revolutions. a sample is twisted axially for a

2.3.27 Wrapping Test - Wire under test is wrapped round a wire or mandrel of its own diameter to form a close helix for a specified number of turns, then partly unwrapped for a specified number of turns and then rewrapped to the original number of turns in the same direction as the first wrapping. 2.3.28 cut-up Test - A destructive verify details of the grain flow and positions in the forgings. 12 test carried out on forgings to mechanical properties in various

IS I 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979
2.3.29 Grain Size - The mean size of metal crystals expressed in terms of the number of grains ( metal crystals ) per unit area or as the mean grain diameter. test in which a piece of metal is 2.3.30 Fracture Test - A qualitative notched and broken, and the fracture surface examined in order to assess grain structure and freedom from defects. 2.3.31 Etching using a chemical of the cross-section of a sample Test - The treatment reagent to reveal the macro-structure of the metal.

test in which clean and 2.3.32 Dye Penetrant Test - A non-destructive degreased material is immersed in or covered by a dye penetrant for a After the residual superficial penetrant has been requisite period. removed and a developer applied, the dye seeps out from any flaws and cracks. test using a fluores2.3.33 Fluorescent Penetrant Test - A dye penetrant cing dye with subsequent examination of the dried material under ultraviolet radiation. test in which degreased 2.3.34 Anodizing Test - A non-destructive material is chromic acid anodized and rinsed. If cracks or other superficial flaws are present they retain some of the chromic acid solution which subsequently seeps out and stains the anodic film. 2.3.35 Cupping Test - A mechanical test used to determine the ductility and drawing properties of sheet metal. It consists in measuring the maximum depth of bulge ( or cup ) which can be formed before fracture. 2.3.36 Ultrasonic Test - A non-destructive test frequency sound waves for the location and assessment defects. employing high of size of internal

test which can 2.3.37 Eddy Current Test - A non-destructive for the assessment of a number of characteristics, for example, soundness and thickness of anodic film. 2.3.38 opposite

be used internal

Electrical Resistivity ( Volume Resistivity ) - The resistance between faces of a unit cube of a given material at a given temperature.

of volume resistivity. 2.3.39 Electrical Conductivity - The reciprocal Electrical conductivity is often expressed in terms of percentage of the international annealed copper standard. ( IACS ). 13

IS t 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.3.4Q Endurance Limit - The limiting stress below which a material will withstand a specified large number of cycles of stress. 2.3.41 Modulus of Elasticify - The ratio of stress to corresponding strain throughout the range where they are proportional. 2.3.42 Modulus of Rigidity - The ratio of the unit shear stress, in a torsion test, to the displacement caused by it per unit length in the elastic range. This modulus corresponds to the modulus of elasticity in the tension test. 2.3.43 Strain Hardening - Modification of a metal structure by cold working resulting in an increase in strength and hardness with loss of ductility. 2.4 Finishing 2.4.1 Scurling - Grinding with a coarse abrasive to remove superficial defects usually preparatory to further processing. 2.4.2 Tumbling - The treatment of articles in a rotating container for deburring or to provide a variety of surface textures. 2.4.3 Bujing - Polishing abrasive compound. 2.4.4 Brightening reflectivity. 2.4.5 2.4.6 with a flexible rotating mop carrying an

The treatment

of articles to improve their specular

Chemical Brightening Electra-Brightening -

-

Brightening Brightening

by chemical means. by electro-chemical means.

2.4.7 Grit Blasting - The projection of abrasive grit so as to strike the surface of an article, providing a cleaning action and producing a matt finish. 2.4.7.1 Sand blasting - The projection of sand/quartz particles so as to strike the surface of an article providing a cleaning action and producing a matt finish. 2.4.8 Vapour Blasting - The projection of a mixture of abrasive grit, water and air to strike the surface of an article, providing a cleaning action and producing a satin finish. 14

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.4.9 Etching chemical The production of a uniform or electro-chemical attack. Etching Etching matt finish by controlled

2.4.10 Acid Etching 2.4.11 Caustic Etching -

using an acid solution. using a caustic alkali solution.

2.4.12 Chemical Conversion Coating ( Prepainting Treatment, Chemical Conversion, Wash Priming, Etch Priming ) Treatment of material with chemical solutions, used as a prepainting treatment or for preparing the surface for special application.
2.4.13 Pre-treatment Priming ( Etch Priming ), Wash Priming - The application of a solution containing a resin, a chromate and an acid which is allowed to dry on and provide the key for subsequent painting. 2.4.14 Priming with a corrosion pre-treatment. The application inhibitor such of a priming paint, as zinc chromate often pigmented after suitable

method of producing an oxide 2.4.15 Anodizing - An electro-chemical film of controlled thickness and predetermined characteristics. The anodic film is applied to improve resistance to corrosion and abrasion and to provide an electrically insulating surface or a base for a decorative finish. The oxide film may be coloured by using organic dyes or inorganic pigments or by electrolytic colouring in metal salt solution. applied 2.4.16 Scaling of Anodic Coatings - A treatment to reduce porosity and/or absorptivity ofthe coating. after anodizing

2.4.17 Hard Anodizing - Anodizing under special conditions to provide a dense hard film offering extremely high resistance to abrasion.

2.4.18 Chromic
electrolyte. 2.4.19 Oxalic electrolyte. 2.4.20 Sulphuric electrolyte.

Acid

Anodizing -

Anodizing Anodizing Anodizing

using using using

a an a

chromic oxalic sulphuric

acid acid acid

Acid

Anodizing -

Acid Anodizing -

2.4.21 Mirror Finish reflectivity.

A rolled

or polished

finish

with

high

specular

15

IS : 5047 ( Part II ) - 1979 2.4.22 Frosted Finish etching. A white slightly specular usually finish produced by

2.433 Matt Finish - A diffuse finish scratch brushing or sand blasting. 2.4.24 Grey Plate Finish technique. 2.4.25 Satin Finish -

produced

by etching,

A matt finish produced by a special rolling

A fine textured matt finish. or satin finish produced by

2.4.26 Scratch-Brushed Finish - A matt abrasion with rotating wire brushes.

16

