**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  3600-1  (1985) :  Method  of  Testing  Fusion  Welded  Joints 
and  Weld  Metal  in  Steely  Part  1:  Cruciform  fillet  weld 
tensile  test  [MTD  11:  Welding  General] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


UDC621.731-58-063-2: 66904:  620-1^2         (  ( Rrst  Reprint  JUNE  1 994 )  IS  :  3600  (  Part  1  )- 1M5 


Indian  Standard 

METHOD  OF  TESTING  FUSION  WELDED 
JOINTS  AND  WELD  METAL  IN  STEEL 

PART  1  CRUCIPORM  PILLET  WELD  TENSILE  TEST 
( Sacond  Ravlslon ) 


(  Reaffirmed  2003 ) 


1.  Scope  —  Covers  the  procedure  for  carrying  out  the  cruciform  tddt  to  determine  the  relative  tensile 
strength  under  static  loading  of  joints  employing  fillet  welde  between  plates.  This  test  should  be 
preferably  be  supplemented  by  the  use  of  macro  examination  of  cross-sections  of  the  joints  covered  in 
IS  :  3600  (  Part  9  )  -  198^  'Method  of  testing  fusion  welded  joints  and  weld  metal  in  steel:  Part  9 
Macro  and  Micro  examination'. 

2.  Definitions  —  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  definitions  given  in  IS  \  812-19S7  'Qlbssary 
of  terms  relating  to  welding  and  cutting  of  metals  ^hall  apply'. 

3.  Preparatidn  of  Test  Pieee  and  Test  Specimens  —  The  test  piece  shall  be  made  from  plate  of 
full  thickness.  The  test  piece  and  test  specimens  shall  be  prepared  according  to  the  shape  and 
dimensions  given  in  Fig.  1.  The  plate  thiclcness,  fillet  leg  length,  welding  procedure,  penetration, 
etc,  however,  shall  be  as  specified  in  the  appropriate  application  standard.  The  length  of  the 
specimens  shall  be  chosen  as  to  suit  the  particular  testing  machine. 


CENTRE  UNIS  OF 
VERTICAL  PLATiS 
SHALL  BE  IN  THE 
SAME  PLANE  DIRECTION  OP 

TEST  LOAD 


TACK  WELDS 


TH  TO 


LENGTH 
SUIT  TESTING 
MACHINE 


LENGTH   TO 
SUrt  TESTING 
MACHINE 


1A  IB 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

1A  Test  Piece  and  Method  of  CutUng  Test  Specimens 
IB  Method  of  Testing  Specimens 

FIG.  1   CRUCIFORM  TEST  PIECE,  SPECIMENS  AND  METHOD  OF  TESTING 

4.  Separation  of  Test  Specimens  —  The  method  employed  for  the  separation  of  the  test  specimens 
shall  be  such  as  to  cause  minimum  deformation  and  minimum  heating.  The  best  method  is  usually 
by  machining.  If  thermal  cutting  or  other  method  which  could  effect  the  cut  surfaces  are  used,  the 
cuts  shall  be  made  at  a  distance  from  the  test  specimens  greater  or  equal  to  8  mm  but  in  any  case 
sufficient  according  to  the  process  used,  not  to  induce  alterations  which  could  alter  the  test  results. 

5.  Heat  Treatment  —  Test  specimens  shall  be  heat-treated  only  if  the  welded  part  they  represent  is 
heat-treated,  in  which  case  they  shall,  where  possible,  be  heat-treated  together  with  the  welded  part 
before  the  test.  Where  this  is  not  possible,  the  specimens  shall  be  heat-treated  separately,  the 
treatment  and  the  rate  of  cooling  being  similar  to  that  given  to  the  part. 

6.  Testing  —  The  specimens  shall  be  tested  in  tension  with  the  load  applied  in  the  direction 
indicated  in  Fig.  1'  Care  shall  be  taken  that  the  centre  lines  of  the  vertical  plates  are  in  the  same 
plane.  The  inner  edges  of  the  outer  discards  should  be  prepared  for  macro  examination. 


Adopted  14  February  1985 


©May  1386,  BIS 


Gr  1 


BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,  9    BAHADUR    SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 

NEW  DELHI   110CX)2 


IS:  3600  (  Parti  )  -  1985 

7«  Reporting  of  Results  —  The  following  shall  be  reported  as  results  of  the  test: 

a)  Thickness  of  parent  metal; 

b)  Throat  thickness  and  leg  length  of  weld; 

c)  Location  of  the  fracture,  whether  in  the  weld,  in  the  heat-affected  zone  or  in  the  parent  metal. 
If  the  fracture  is  in  the  parent  metal  its  appropriate  distance  from  the  weld  junction  shall  be 
stated;  and 

d)  Description  of  the  appearance  of  surfaces  subjected  to  macro  examination  and  the  type  and 
location  of  any  weld  flaws  present 

EXPLANATORY  NOTE 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1966  and  subsequently  revised  in  1973  covering  various 
tests  on  fusion  welded  joints  and  weld  metal  In  steel.  In  view  of  the  experience  gained  and  in 
order  to  bring  the  test  and  test  requirements  in  line  with  other  International  Standards  published  so 
for,  it  has  been  decided  to  revise  the  standard  in  the  following  parts: 

Part  1  Cruciform  fillet  weld  tensile  test 

Part  2  Beam  impact  (  Charpy  V-notch  )  test 

Part  3  Transverse  tensile  test  on  butt  welds 

Part  4  Longitudinal  tensile  test  on  cylindrical  weld  metal  test  pieces  on  butt  welds 

Part  5  Transverse  root  and  face  bend  test  on  butt  welds  (corresponding  to  ISO  5173-1981  ) 

Part  6  Transverse  side  bend  test  on  butt  weld  (  corresponding  to  ISO  5177-1981  ) 

Part  7  Longitudinal  root  and  face  bend  test  on  butt  welds 

Part  8  Nick  break  test  and  fillet  weld  fracture  test 

Part  9  Macro  and  micro  examination. 

In  this  revision  free-bend  test  has  been  deleted  as  the  ductility  of  the  weld  zone  is  being 
assessed  more  and  more  by  other  bend  tests.  Special  tests  such  as  tests  for  the  susceptibility  to 
lamellar  tearing,  reheat  cracking,  brittle  fracture  and  creep  fatigue  will  be  covered  in  separate 
standards. 

The  main  purpose  of  this  standard  is  to  recommend  test  procedures  and  test  specimens  that 
should  be  quoted  or  incorporated  in  engineering  application  standards  that  deal  with  welded  cons- 
tructions primarily  for  the  qualification  of  welding  procedures  and  operators.  Where  differences  still 
exist  between  application  standards,  the  methods  of  test  given  in  this  standard  should  be  prefered. 

A  general  indication  is  given  of  the  purpose  served  by  the  tests  specified  in  this  standard  but 
this  standard  does  not  indicate  the  choice  of  test  method  nor  a  particular  application  nor  the  number 
of  specimens  to  be  tested  or  the  repeat  tests  to  be  allowed  in  the  event  of  failure.  Such  requirements 
are  matters  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  particular  application  standards  where  they  exist  or  to  be  agreed 
between  the  manufacturer  and  the  purchaser. 

It  should  be  realized  that  variations  in  welding  procedure  and  the  preparation  of  test  specimens 
can  give  rise  to  variations  in  the  test  results. 

In  preparing  this  part  of  the  standard  assistance  has  been  derived  from,  BS  :  709-1983  'Destruc- 
tive testing  fusion  welded  joints  and  weld  metal  in  steel'  issued  by  British  Standards  Institution. 

In  reporting  the  result  of  a  tast  on  analysis  made  in  acccordance  with  this  standard,  if  the  final 
value,   observed  or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded  off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960 
Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised)'. 


Reprography   Unit>    BIS>    New  Delhi,    India 


