NAT Alan IS 17317 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


SUCHT H SCANT Gh SAAT 
(Gara ht) aay ehr aS 


Gradation of Post-Consumer 
(Recycled) Paper 


ICS 13.100 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2019 Price Group 2 


Paper and its Products Sectional Committee, CHD 15 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Paper and Its 
Products Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

The recycling of paper is the process by which waste paper is turned into new paper products. It has a number 
of important benefits besides saving trees from being cut down. It is less energy and water intensive than paper 
made from wood pulp. There are three categories of waste paper that can be used as feedstock for making recycled 


paper: 
a) mill broke, 
b) pre-consumer waste, and 
c) post-consumer waste. 
Mill broke is paper trimmings and other paper scrap from the manufacture of paper, and is recycled in a paper mill. 
Pre-consumer waste is a material which left the paper mill but was discarded before it was ready for consumer use. 


Post-consumer waste is material discarded after consumer use, such as, old corrugated containers, old magazines, 
and newspapers etc. 


This standard is developed to provide guidance to industry professionals, organization and individuals in buying 
and selling of post-consumer waste as raw material intended for recycling by the paper and board industry in India. 


The list of experts who had made significant contribution to the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised y. 


IS 17317 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


GRADATION OF POST CONSUMER 
(RECYCLED) PAPER 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard prescribes standard grades of 
recovered paper and board suitable for recycling 
anddefining their broad composition and permissible 
limits for out throws and prohibitives. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standard listed in Annex A contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this Indian Standard. At the 
time of publication, the edition indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revisions, and parties 
to agreements based on this Indian Standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the Indian Standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this Indian standard the following 
terms and definition apply. 


3.1 Out Throw — The term out throw is defined 
as material which cannot be recycled for paper 
manufacturing and during processing may cause 
damage to machine or interruption to production, or 
reduce the quality of finished product. Such materials 
are: 


a) Metal, 

b) Plastic, 

c) Glass, 

d) Textile, 

e) Wood, 

f) Sand and building materials, 
g) Synthetic materials, and 

h) Synthetic paper. 


The percentage of out throws should not exceed the 
limits specified within the grades 


3.2 Prohibitive — The term prohibitive material is 
defined as materials by presence of which in excess 
amount in a packing of paper stock will make the 
whole package unusable in the specified grades. Such 
materials include, carbon paper, waxed paraffin, oily 
paper, plastic laminated paper, paper or board treated 
with water insoluble adhesive, punch cards with 
magnetic strips, mechanical fibre in wood free paper 
etc. are considered as prohibitive. Recovered paper and 
board should in principle be supplied free of prohibitive. 


4 GRADE DEFINITIONS 


Recovered paper and board are broadly classified in 
four grades as follows: 

a) Grade 1 — High quality. 

b) Grade 2— Medium quality. 

c) Grade 3 — Ordinary quality. 

d) Grade 4— Kraft/old corrugated containers. 
The following definitions prescribe grades as they 
should be sorted and packed. 
4.1 Grade 1 — High Quality 
High quality recycled paper shall be generated from 
following identified source of waste paper with defined 
characteristics. 
4.1.1 Uncoated White Cuttings/White Shavings 


Contains uncoated shavings or sheets of high bleached 
grade, high brightness bond/ledger/Maplitho papers 
free from printing inks and wood furnish. These 
cuttings are generated from stationary manufacturers/ 
publishing houses etc. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : 2 percent 
Prohibitive : Nil 

4.1.2 Coated White Cuttings/Trimmings 


Contains shavings and sheets of white unprinted wood 
free coated paper manufactured from bleached pulp. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : 2 percent 
Prohibitive : 2 percent 


4.1.3 Used Exercise Note Books 


Contains used exercise note books without cover 
excluding rough exercise note books of low brightness, 
collected from  school/examination boards or 
universities etc. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : 2 percent 
Prohibitive : 2 percent 


4.1.4 White Panna 


Contains office records manufactured from used white 
ground wood free paper of high brightness. Office 
records may contain up to 30 percent ground wood 


IS 17317 : 2019 


free paper from cash books, carbon papers and water 
insoluble adhesives. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : 2 percent 
Prohibitive : 2 percent 


4.1.5 Computer Printout 


It consists of white ground wood free paper used for 
data processing. The stock must be untreated and non- 
coated. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : Nil 
Prohibitive : 2percent 


4.1.6 Bleached Board Cuttings 


Contains ground wood free sheets or cartons of 
bleached board free from wax, grease, laminations, and 
adhesives etc. that are insoluble in water. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : | percent 
Prohibitive : 2 percent 


4.2 Grade 2 — Medium Quality 

Medium quality recycled paper shall be generated from 
following identified source of waste paper with defined 
characteristics. 

4.2.1 Mixed Waste Paper/Cuttings 


These consist of white or coloured ground wood free 
paper/paper cuttings, duplex board and other items. 
These may contain small portion of ground wood 
computer printout. 


The permissible levels of outthrow and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : 3 percent 
Prohibitive : 2 percent 

4.2.2 Ground Wood Computer Print Out 


This grade consists of ground wood papers used in data 
processing machines. This grade may contain impact/ 
non-impact (laser) prints. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : | percent 
Prohibitive : 2 percent 

4.2.3 Coloured Stock/Cuttings 


Contains white or coloured coated and uncoated 
periodicals, brochures, magazines and their shavings 
with or without mechanical pulp based paper of 
unbleachable grade. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : 2 percent 
Prohibitive : 2 percent 


4.2.4 Old Book Stock 


Contains used books (cover free) collected from school, 
libraries, offices and other papers which are not brittle 
or eaten by borer. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive 
are: 


Out throw : 3 percent 
Prohibitive : 2 percent 


4.2.5 Box Board Cuttings 


Contains cuttings from carton, corrugated paper/box 
manufacturers, which may be printed or unprinted. 
Cuttings may be from mono cartons or poly coated 
ones. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive 
are: 


Out throw : 2 percent 
Prohibitive : 2 percent 


4.3 Grade 3 — Ordinary Quality 

Ordinary quality recycled paper shall be generated 
from following identified source of waste paper with 
defined characteristics. 

4.3.1 Over Issue Newspapers 


Contains unused, overrun printed newspapers 
containing normal percentage of coloured sections, 
collected from newsprint presses. 


The permissible levels of outthrow and prohibitive are: 
Outthrow: 2percent 
Prohibitive: Nil 

4.3.2 Old Newspapers 


These consist of sorted/fresh newspapers not sunburned 
collected by vendors from offices/libraries/homes, 
which may contain little of magazines. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : 2 percent 
Prohibitive : 1 percent 


4.3.3 Telephone Directories/Lottery Tickets 


Contains wood free/ground wood paper as well as 
recycled paper collected from offices/publishing 
houses. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive 
are: 


Out throws : 3 percent 
Prohibitives : 2.5 percent 


4.4 Grade 4-Kraft/Old Corrugated Containers 


Kraft/old corrugated containers grade recycled paper 
shall be generated from following identified source of 
waste paper with defined characteristics. 


4.4.1 Kraft Grade Paper/ Cuttings/ Kraft Paper/ Old 
Corrugated Containers 


These consist of baled brown kraft bags/brown kraft 
cuttings/sheets/printed kraft cuttings/ kraft multi wall 
bag cuttings or used wrappers from reams packing/ 
reels packaging including old corrugated containers 
and shall be wood free. 


The permissible levels of out throw and prohibitive are: 
Out throw : 3 percent 
Prohibitive : 3 percent 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Moisture Content 


5.1.1 Recovered paper and board in principle be 
supplied with moisture of not more than the naturally 
occurring level that is, all paper must be on air dry 
basis. 


5.1.2 The moisture in paper varies from grade to grade, 
therefore, permissible moisture content should be 
10 percent maximum in recovered paper grades. 
Moisture content above 10 percent may be considered 
under deduction clause as agreed by the seller and buyer. 


5.2 Hazardous Materials 


5.2.1 Hazardous materials are the material (biological, 
chemical, radiological and/or physical) which has 
the potential to cause harm to humans, animals and 
environment either by itself or through interaction with 
other factors. 


5.2.2 Absence of hazardous material in the container/ 
bale or stock of recycled papers is essential. In case 
of any dispute, the matter should be legally dealt as 
per the statutory norms, imposed from time to time 
by the Central Pollution Control Board, Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF & 
CC), Government of India or at State level, if assigned 
by MoEF & CC. 


6 PACKAGING/BALING 


The recovered papers should be packed grade wise in 
bundles of 15-20 kg or in bales of 150-200 kg for the 
convenience of loading/inspection/unloading at the 
user site. 


7 MARKING 


Bale/packaging of recovered paper shall be clearly 
identified through appropriate marking for the grade 
and co-relate with their test results in order to avoid any 
dispute in trade and marking procedure shall be in line 
with prevailing trade practices usually being followed 
or as agreed between interested parties. 


IS 17317 : 2019 


Test report should also be followed along with 
consignment of identified bale/packaging. The test 
report shall furnish information regarding criteria for 
grading and test result. 


8 SAMPLING 


Representative samples for test shall be drawn as given 
in 3 of IS 1060 (Part 1). 


9 TEST PROCDEURES 


9.1 Visual Inspection 


It is important to visually examine the incoming bales 
to assess the sample for prohibitive and out throw. 
Visual inspection shall be taken as guidance only for 
acceptance of the material. 


9.2 Quantification of Prohibitive and Out Throw 


The prohibitive and out throw which are not desirable 
with the specified grades shall be separated manually 
and weighed. Five percent of total lot or two bundles/ 
bales from lot, whichever is higher shall be selected for 
testing and acceptance of whole consignment. If the 
weight of prohibitive/out throw exceed the limits, the 
sample lot shall be rejected. 


9.2.1 Prohibitive and Contaminants 


The majority of prohibitive and contaminants can be 
separated manually and weighed in a balance to ensure 
compliance of limit prescribed for different grades and 
for grading. 


9.3 Moisture Content 


9.3.1 Objective 

The moisture content analysis should be confined to 
samples as such received in lots bales/ containers. 
9.3.2 Principle 

Weigh the test piece at the time of sampling and again 
after drying to constant mass. 


9.3.3 Apparatus 
9.3.3.1 Drying oven 


The thermostatic hot air oven should be capable of 
maintaining the air temperature between 102°C to 
105°C and should be suitably ventilated. 


9.3.3.2 Balance 


The balance should have accuracy up tol mg for 
weighing samples of 2 g or less. For weighing larger 
samples, it should have accuracy up to 0.05 percent of 
the original mass of the sample to be weighed. 


IS 17317 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
1060 (Part 1) : 1966 Methods of sampling and test for paper and allied products: Part 1 (revised) 
IS 1060 (Part 4/Sec 2): 2018/ Methods of sampling and test for paper and allied products: Part 4 Methods 
ISO 1762 : 2015 of test for paper board and pulps, Section 2 Determination of residue (ash) on 
ignition at 525°C 
ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


EXPERTS WHO MADE SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION TO THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF THIS STANDARD 


Organization Representative(s) 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute Dr B. P. THAPLIYAL (CHAIRMAN, CHD 15) 
Ms RITA TANDON (Alternate I) 
Dr Sansay Traci (Alternate ID) 
SHRI ALOK Kumar GOEL (Alternate II) 
Dr R D Gopryat (Alternate IV) 


Avantha Centre for Industrial Res & Development, Dr. NISHIKANT BHARDWAJ 
Yamuna Nagar 


Ballarpur Industries Ltd, New Delhi SHRI SHAMIM AHMAD 

SHRI V. V. PATHARKAR (Alternate I ) 
Directorate of Printing, Min. of Urban Development, Suri A. K. BansaL (Alternate I) 

New Delhi 

DIPP, Min. of Commerce & Industry, New Delhi Suri H. M. RATHI 
Indian Agro & Recycled Paper Mills Association Dr M. PATEL 

Suri P. G. MUKUNDAN (Alternate ) 
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee Dr DHARM Dutt 
Indian Paper Manufacturers Association Mr BISWARANJAN DASH, 

MR Ronrr Panpit (Alternate) 
Indian Recycled Paper Mills Association Dr R. C. Rastocı 
JK Paper Ltd, New Delhi SHRI MAHESH NARAYAN BHAT 
Seshasayee Paper & Boards Limited, Erode SHRI A. K. MEHROTRA 

Dr P. MARIMUTHU (Alternate) 
Whale Stationery Products Ltd, New Delhi SHRI MUKESH GUPTA 

SHRI GAURAV GoEL(Alternate) 
Directorate General, BIS Suri U. K. Das, Scientist “E” AND HEAD (CHD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 
SHRISHTI DIXIT 
Scientist ‘C’ (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 15 (13809). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


