IS 12737:1988 IEC Pub 759 ( 1983 )

((Reaffirmed Reaffirmed1994) 2006 ) him Wandurd STANDARD TEST PROCEDURES FOR SEMICONDUCTOR X-RAY ENERGY SPECTROMETERS

UDC

621"384"8

@ 131f51990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW

STANDARDS
SH.AH 110002
Price Gromp 14

ZAFAR

MARG

February 1990

IS 12737: 1999 IEC Pub 759( 1993)

Indian Standard STANDARD TEST PROCEDURES FOR SEMICONDUCTOR X-RAY ENERGY SPECTROMETERS
NATIONAL FOREWORD

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IEC Pub 759 ( 1983 ) `Standard test procedures for semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometers' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( TEC ), was adopted by the Bureau of I)ndian Standards on 21 September 1988 on the recommendation of the Nuclear Instrumentation Sectional Committee ( LTDC 26 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Comma ( , ) has Standard, the current CROSS -REFERENCES International Standards
Corresponding

Standard'

appear,

reefrring

to this standard,

they should while in

be

been used as a decimal marker in the adopted standard pl;actice is to use point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

Indian

In this standard the following places the following :
International Standard

are referred
Indian Standard

to.

Read

in their respective

Degree of Correspondence

IEC Pub 50 International Electrotechnical Vocabulary ( IEV ) IEC Pub 333 Test procedures for semiconductor detectors for ionizing radiation IEC Pub 340 Test procedures for amplifiers and preamplifiers for semiconductor detectors for ionizing radiation IEC Pub 656 Test procedures for high-purity germanium detectors for X and gamma radiation Only the English language in this Indian Standards.

IS 1885 ( Part 63 ) : 1985 Electrovocabulary: technical Part 63 Nuclear instrumentation IS 11425 : 1985 Test procedure for semiconductor charged-particle detectors IS 11645 : 1985 Test procedures for amplifiers and preamplifien for semiconductor detectors for ionizing radiation IS 12639 : 1988 Test procedures for high-purity germanium detectors for X and gamma radiation Standard has been retained

Identical

Identical

Identical

Identical

text of the International

while adopting

it

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

18 12737: 1988

IEC Pub 759 ( 1983

j

1.

Scope

This standard presents standard test procedures for semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometers. Such systems consist of a semiconductor radiation detector assembly and signal processing electronics interfaced to a pulse-height analyzer/computer. Test procedures for pulse-height analyzers and computers are not covered in this standard. Clause 5 is essentially tutorial.

2.

Object

This standard is not intended to imply that all tests described herein are mandatory, but only that such tests as are carried out shall be performed in accordance with the procedures described herein. Companion publications to this standard are I EC Publication 333: Test Procedures for Semiconductor Detectors for Ionizing Radiation, IEC Publication 340: Test Procedures for Amplifiers and Preamplifiers for Semiconductor Detectors for Ionizing Radiation, and I EC Publication 656: Test Procedures for High-purity Germanium Detectors for X and Gamma Radiation. The list of symbols and the glossary are derived from those in the above-mentioned publications. Contrary to previous convention in the X-ray spectroscopy field, this standard utilizes the characteristic -energy E of the X-ray rather than its wavelength ;1. This approach is consistent with the fact that the basic quantity measured by this type of spectrometer is the X-ray energy. A convenient conversion is provided by the relationship: L(m) = 12.4 *,lO-10 E-i (keV) (A(A) = 12.4. E-l (keV))

3.

Glossary Analog

(according to digital

to English converter

alphabetical

order)

(ADC)

A sub-assembly designed to provide an output of the analog input signal (IEV 391-1 l-36).
Background (associated with a spectral peak from

signal which is a digital representation

a semiconductor

detector)

Non-ideal spectral response monoenergetic line of interest.
Baseline (at pulse peak)

which results

from radiation

which is not a part of the

The instantaneous value that the voltage would have had at the time of the pulse peak in the absence of that pulse (IEC Publication 340).

3

IS 12737 : 1988 EC Pub 759 ( 1983) Baseline restoration (BLR) Appropriate linear or non-linear a voltage to its baseline. techniques which are used to accelerate the return of

Bias resistor (of a semiconductor radiation detector) The resistor 340). through which bias voltage is applied to the detector (I EC Publication

Biased pulse amplifier A pulse amplifier designed to provide an amplified output pulse only for that portion of an input signal exceeding a predetermined threshold value (IEV 391-~1 l-05). Bias voltage (of a semiconductor radiation detector) The voltage charge. applied to the detector to produce the electric tield to collect the signal

Breakdown (of a reverse-biased junction) Transition from a state of high dynamic resistance to a state of substantially dynamic resistance for increasing magnitude of reverse voltage (IEV 391-10-50). Breakdown region (of a semiconductor -diode characteristic) That entire region of the voltage-current characteristic breakdo.wn for increasing magnitude of reverse current. beyond the initiation of lower

Breakdown voltage (of a semiconductor diode) The voltage measured Capacitance at a specified current in the breakdown region

(of a semiconductor radiation detector) capacitance measured of bias and frequency. between terminals of' the ~detector under

The small-signal specified conditions

Charge carrier (abbreviation: carrier) In a semiconductor, a free conduction electron or a mobile hole (IEV 391- 10-53).

Charge collection time (of a semiconductor detector) By convention, the time interval for the integrated current due to the charge collected in the semiconductor detector, after the passage of an ionizing particle, to increase from 10% to 90% of its final value (IEV 391-10-59). Clip, clipping bargon) A limiting operation such as: 1) use of a high-pass filter (see Differentiated), non-linear operation such as diode limiting of pulse amplitude. or 2) a

4

lsl2737:1!988

nsOhb759(19B3)
Compensated. semiconductor A semiconductor in which the effects of the impurities of a given type on the charge carrier density partially or completely cancel those of the other type. Such a semiconductor has properties which are similar to those of an intrinsic semiconductor (IEV 391-05-03).

,

Compensated semiconductor detector A semiconductor detector consisting of a region of compensated a P-type region and an N-type region (IEV 391-09-44). semiconductor between

CR-RC shaping The pulse shaping present in an amplifier that has _a simple high-pass filter consisting of a capacitor and a resistor together with a simple, low-pass filter, separated by impedance isolation. Pulse shaping in such an amplifier cuts off at 6decibels per octave at both ends of the band.

Crest factor (of an average reading or root-mean-square voltmeter) The ratio of (1) the peak voltage value that an average reading or root-mean-square voltmeter will accept without overloading to (2) the full scale value of the range being used for measurement (I EC Publication 340).

D.C. level (see Baseline)

Dead layer (of a semiconductor detector) A layer of a semiconductor detector in which no significant part of the energy lost by particles can contribute to the resulting signal (IEV 391-10-55).

Decay time constant The time for a true single-exponential original height (I EC Publication 340). waveform to decay to a value of l/e of the

Depletion layer (in a semiconductor detector) A layer of a semiconductor detector in which no significant particles can contribute to the resulting signal. part of the energy lost by

Diflerentiated (pulse) (pulse ampltfk A pulse that is passed through cation 340).

jargon) a high-ptiss network, such as a CR filter (I EC Publi-

Efficiency (of a semiconductor radiation detector for a monoenergetic radiation source) The ratio of the number of events in the spectral distribution to the total number photons incident on the active detector volume during the same time interval. of

5

IS 12737 t 1999 IEcPub759( 1983) Energy resolution (FWHM) (of a semiconductor radiation detector) The detector's contribution (including detector leakage current noise), expressed in units of energy, to the FWHM of a pulse-height distribution corresponding to an energy spectrum (I EC Publication 340). Energy resolution (per cent) (of a semiconductor radiation detector) One hundred times the energy resolution resolution is specified (I EC Publication 340). divided by the energy for which the

Equivalent noise referred to input (of a linear amplifier) The value of noise at the input that would produce output as does the actual noise source (I EC Publication the same value of noise at the 340).

Full energy peak flor a monoenergetic photon spectrum for a semiconductor spectrometer system) The distribution of events within the peak of the pulse-height representing response to the monoenergetic photon source.
Note -

distribution

spectrum

Notwithstanding other definitions or procedures for subtracting background and other distortions, the full energy peak intensity is defined as not including any events which exceed a Gaussian distribution by more than a factor 2~.

Full energy peak efficiency (of a semiconductor radiation detectorj The ratio of the number of events in the full energy peak of the spectral distribution to the total number of photons incident on the active detector volume during the same time interval. Full width at fifth maximum Same as full width at half maximum except that measurement the maximum ordinate rather than one-half (N.B.: This definition entirety). Full width -at harf maximum (FWHM) In a distribution curve comprising a single peak, the distance between the abscissae of two points on the curve whose ordinates are half of the ordinate' of the peak.
Note. --If the curve considered comprises several peaks, a. full width at half maximum exists for each peak (IEV 391-15-08).

is made at one-fifth of should be written in its

Full width at tenth maximum (FWTM.) Same as full width at half maximum except that measurement is made at one-tenth the maximum ordinate rather than one-half (I EC Publication 340). FWFM (see Full width at fifth maximum) FWHM (see Full width at harf maximum) FWlYM (see Full width at tenth maximum) of

I8 12737 I l!m8 RMM'ub759( 190s) Gate
A device or element that, depending upon one or more specified to permit or inhibit the passage of a signal.

inputs, has the ability

Geometry, detector (detector jargon) The physical configiiration of a solid-state detector.

Znactive region (of a semiconductor radiation detector) A region of a detector in which charge created by contribute significantly to the signal (I EC Publication 340). Integral non-linearity (ZNL) (%) The departure from the linear response expressed rated output pulse amplitude (I EC Publication 340). Integrated (pulse) (pulse amplifier jargon) A pulse that is passed through a low-pass network, cascaded RC network (I EC Publication 340). Integrating preampliJier A pulse preamplifier in which individual or active circuits (I EC Publication 340). Intrinsic semiconductor (Z-type) An effectively pure semiconductor in which, under conditions of thermal the charge carrier densities of each sign are nearly equal (IEV 391-05-02).
Abe. By extension, this term is incorrectly used to designate compensated semiconductors.

ionizing

radiation

does

not

as a percentage

of the maximum

such as a single RC network or a

pulses are intentionally

integrated

by passive

equilibrium,

Inversion layer For a given 391-10-57). type of semiconductor, a surface iayer of the opposite type (IEV

Ionization detector A radiation detector based detector (IEV 391-08X%). on the use of ionization in the sensitive volume of the

Junction (of a semiconductor radiation detector) A transition layer between semiconductor regions of different electrical properties, or between a semiconductor and a superficial layer of different type. This layer is characterized by a potential barrier impeding the movement of charge carriers from one region to the other (IEV 391-10-42) (IEC Publication 340). Junction depth (of a p-n semiconductor radiation detector) , The distance below the crystal surface at which the conductivity type changes.

7

Is 127s : 19W Ii!cPub759( N83) Leakage current (of a semiconductor radiation detector) The total detector Linear gate current flowing at the operating bias in the absence of radiation.

.

A gate whose presence does not affect the linearity ot the gated signal. Line-to-background ratio (of a spectral line) line to the intensity of the background

The ratio of the intellsity of a monoenergetic immediately adJacent to the line. Lithium drifted semiconduct&r detector

A compensated semiconductor detector in which tne compensated region is obtained by causing lithium ions to move through a P-type crystal under an applied electric field in such a way as to compensate the charge of the bound impurities (IEY 391-09-45). Load impedance (of a semiconductor raddation detector) The impedance shunting the detector, and signal is developed (I EC Publication 340). across which the detector output voltage

Load resistance (of a semiconductor radiation detector) The resistive component Modal channel The modal channel is that channel in the distribution counts. containing the largest number of of the load impedance (I EC Publication 340).

Multichannel anaIyzer (MCA) An analyzer with more than one channel, usually containing a sufficient number of channels to determine a distribution function of a group of signals by sorting the pulses into the various channels according to one of their characteristics (amplitude, duration, etc.) (IEV 391-1 l-32). Noise linewidth' The. contribution of noise to the width of a spectral peak.

Noneinjecting contact (oj' a semiconductor rodiation detector) A contact at which the carrier density in the adjacent semiconductor changed from its equilibnum value (I EC Publication 340). Non-linearity (of a pulse amplgying system) Distortion caused by a deviation from a desired linear relationship between measures of the ouptut and input pulse amplitudes of a system or device. specified material is not

IS 12737 t 1988 IBCPub759(1985) Ohmic contact (of a semiconductor radiation detector) A purely resistive contact, throughout its entire operating Overload pulse Any signal which drives a section of the amplifying Paralyzable system Any system or device whose response characteristics contain a region of output to input count rate decreases with increasing input count rate. Partially dead region or layer (of a semiconductor detector) Any region or layer on or in the detector which contributes less than the full energy beak for that incident radiation. Per cent energy resolution (see Energy resolution [per cent]) Pile-up (in a -counting assembly) A phenomenon where a pulse occurs on the tail of the preceding pulse so as to result in an incorrect indication ~of the pulse amplitude. The pile-up can also result in failure to resolve some pulses (IEV 391-15-15). Pile-up rejection A technique used to identify and reject pulses (signals) which are piled up. an output pulse which is where the ratio chain into saturation. i.e. one that has a linear range (I EC Publication 340) voltage-current &aracteristic

p-i-n detector A detector region. consisting of an intrinsic or nearly -intrinsic region between a p and n

Pole-zero cancellation A pulse-shaping method, usually by means of a differentiator, of long duration (IEC Publication 340). eliminating undershoots

Pulse decay time (td) The interval specified upper otherwise stated. CR-RC shaping, between the instants at which the instantaneous value last reaches and lower limits, namely; 90% and 10% of the peak pulse value unless (In the case of a step function applied to an amplifier that has simple the decay time is given by t,, = 3.36 CR.)

Rdse ampliJier An electronic amplifier designed to provide within the limits of its normal characteristics a single output pulse for each input pulse (IEV 391-1 l-02). operating

IS 127S7 : l968 lECPab759( 1983)

R&e rise time (tJ The interval between the instants at which the instantaneous value fast reaches specified lower and upper limits, namely, 10% and 90% of the peak pulse value unless otherwise specified. (In the case of a step function applied to an RC low-pass filter, the rise time is given by t, - 2.2 RC. In the case of a step function applied to an amplifier that has simple CR-RC shaping, i.e., one high-pass and one low-pass RC filter of equal time constants, the rise time is given by X, - 0.57 RC:)

Resolution, energy (per cent) -(see Energy resolution (uer cent. Semiconductor detector An ionizing detector using a semiconductor medium in which an electric field is. provided for the collection at the electrodes of the excess charge carriers produced by ionizing radiation (IEV 391-08-13). Space-charge generation (in a semiconductor radiation detector) I The thermal generation of free charge carriers in the space-charge region.

Space-charge region (of a semiconductor radiation detector)

A region in which the net charge density is significantly different from zero (see also
Depletion region). Spectral line

A sharply peaked portion of the spectrum that represents a specific feature of the incident radiation, usually the full energy of a monoenergetic radiation. Spectrum (radiation) A distribution of the intensity of radiation as a function of energy or its equivalent electric analog (such as charge or voltage) at the output of a radiation detector.
Standard srcrurcediameter The diameter of the X-ray emission source which is used to measure the response characteristics of the spectrometer. Unless otherwise specified, this is assumed to be a point source. Standard working axis (of a semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometer)

A straight line drawn between the centre of the entrance window on the detector and the specified location of the source of X-rays. Surface barrier contact A rectifying contact that is characterized by -a potential barrier associated wrth an inversion or accumulation layer; said inversion or accumulation layer being caused by surface charge resulting from the presence of surface states and/or work function differences.
St&ace barrier semiconductor detector

A semiconductor detector in which the potential .barrier due .to the junction results from a supeficial inversion layer (IEV 391-09-42).

10

I8 12737: IIitCPab7!B(1SU) Sweep-out time, charge (of a semiconductor radiation detector) (see Chage Tail or tailing (on a monoenergetic peak) Any peak shape distortion which does not comply with the limits defining the full energy peak intensity and which does not come from a source of radiation -other than the monoenergetic source in question. Total depletion voltage (of a semiconductor detector) The reverse voltage at which. the depletiqn thickness of the semiconductor. layer extends over essentially the whole collection time)

Total detector dead layer (of a semiconductor detector) All insensitive materials of the detector system which the radiation reach the sensitive volume (I EC Publication 596). Totally depleted detector A detector in which the thickness of the depletion thickness of the semiconductor material. Transmission semiconductor. detector A semiconductor detector sufficiently small to permit 391-09-47). whose thickness, including its entrance and exit windows, is the radiation to pass completely through the detector (IEV region is essentially equal to the must penetrate to

Window (of a semiconductor radiation detector) (see Dead layer thickness) Window amplifier (see Biased amplifier) Working distance The distance, measured along the working axis, between the source of X-rays and the outermost window on the detector; .

4.

Symbols

A

intensity of full energy monoenergetic energy peak number of counts in the background intensity of spectral peak at energy energy peak of energy E intensity of backscattered Mn K, peak

peak;

total number

of counts

in a full

%
AE

under a peak E, the total number of counts in the full

total peak area, number of counts in the full energy peak, plus background

11

38127s7:19111)
lBclPmbmD( 196s)

constants characterizing noise bandwidth electrical capacitance detector capacitance calibrated capacitor used to couple a pulse generator to a circuit under test

effective input capacitance of a preamplifier feedback capacitance in the integrating loop of a charge-sensitive preamplifier

total capacitance at a preamplifier input the average number of counts per channel in five contiguous channels centred around the energy of 5.4 keV in the tail of a Mn K, X-ray energy spectrum

same as C, except 4.5 keV same as C, except 1 keV FWHM of a monoenergetic spectral peak FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to amplifier noise FWHM, expressed in channels, due to amplifier noise FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to amplifier noise FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to detector noise FWHM, expressed in channels, due to detector noise FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to detector noise the maximum deviation, `in units of energy, between the measured linearity curve and the ideal linear. response curve a shift, expressed in channels, of the peak centre (modal) channel FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to all factors other than electrical noise FWHM, expressed in channels, due to all factors other than electrical noise FWHM for monoenergetic incident radiation, expressed in units of energy, including all spectral broadening effects

IS 12797 : 1988 EC Pub 759 ( 1983)
E

FWHM for monoenergetic incident all spectral broadening effects

radiation,

expressed

in channels,

including

=

FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to the combined and amplifier noise FWHM, expressed amplifier noise in channels, due to the combined effect

effect

of detector

=

of detector

and

F

FWHM, expressed in units of charge, and amplifier noise
-_

due to the combined

effect

of detector

E
&
=

energy of a particle or photon average energy required to form one hole-electron pair in a semiconductor

r
EF

P

electron

charge to the maximum linear output of a spectrometer noise voltage referred to the preamplifier input

a

the energy corresponding equivalent root-mean-square

%i

=

e"0
Q

=

root-mean-square root-mean-square

noise voltage noise in units of charge at the amplifier input of of

a

F

=

Fano factor, the ratio of the dispersion (square of, the standard deviation) real (or actual, true, empirical) statistics of charge carriers to the dispersion calculated Poisson statistics gain of a biased amplifier (dimensionless) noise spectral ~power density detector noise current

GB

=

9 i

E

Z zd

=

electric current detector leakage current Gaussian *

=

r,
INL

=

diode equivalent

noise current in a specified

frequency

band

=

integral non-linearity; the maximum deviation percentage of the maximum linear output Boltzmann's constant

from

linearity

expressed

as a

k K

c

=

constant relating FWHM in units of energy to FWHM in units of charge

I

differential

non-linearity

of an amplifier

13

IS 12727 : 1988 IEClPub759( tm3 ) integral non-linearity integral non-linearity channel peak number of a biased amplifier of an amplifier to the maximum of a monoenergetic spectral

corresponding

average number of analyzer spectrum equivalent

counts

in

all

channels

of

a multichannel

pulse-height

number of channels suppressed

by a biased amplifier of the Mn full

the total number of counts in the modal (peak centre) channel energy peak from a Mn & X-ray energy spectrum number of spectrum counts in channel X of a multichannel

pulse-height

analyzer

the peak-to-tail the peak-to-tail the peak-to-tail electric charge

ratio at 5.4 keV for a Mn K, X-ray energy spectrum ratio at 4.5 keV for a Mn K, X-ray energy spectrum ratio at 1 keV for a Mn K, X-ray energy spectrum

electrical resistance resistor used in parallel with C' to effect pole-zero cancellation point of the first

a resistor in parallel with C (used to stabilize the operating active element in a preamplifier) input data rate to a system or device detector load resistor

output data rate of a system or device output pulse-height'stability sensitivity of eV/channel MCA or ADUcomputer system expressed in energy units of

absolute temperature charge collection time in a detector

dead time in a device or system observed detector rise time due to the combined time and detector electrical rise time effects of the charge collection

_ 14

IS1275781999 IECPnb759(1995)
= detector
E

electrical rise time

rise time (10% to 90%) time constant

3

time constant of a CR network radiation detector decay time constant

used to simulate

the rise of a pulse from a

=

=

width of a pulse, in time units, at the baseline threshold level electric voltage amplitude detector depletion amplitude of amplifier bias voltage voltage output voltage

established

by the discriminator

=

x

=

B

=

of the voltage step impressed on C, by the pulse generator .

=

window attenuation index at energy standard target excited with SsFe channel number in a multichannel photon energy spectrum atomic number characteristic impedance wavelength associated

E as determined

by the spectrum

from a

=

analyzer

(MCA) or computer I

display

of a

=

E

=

the characteristic

with an X-ray photon expressed in units of energy,

=

FWTM for monoenergetic incident radiation, including all spectral broadening effects FWTM for monoenergetic incident all spectral broadening effects radiation,

=

expressed

in channels,

including

=

FWTM, expressed in units of energy, and amplifier noise FWTM, noise expressed
I

due to the combined
I

effect

of detector

=

in units of `energy, due to all factors

other

than

electrical

=

FWTM, expressed amplifier noise

in c&nnels,

due to the combined

effects

of detector

and

15

IS 12737 I19s9 IECPub759(19S3) 5. fntroduction 5.1 Detector system

.

A semiconductor detector is analogous to a gas ion chamber in which the gas has been replaced by a solid. Figure 1, page 41 illustrates this type of detector and its preiaraglifler configuration. The detector consists of a semiconducting crystal between two conducting electrodes. A potential difference is established between the electrodes thereby When an X-ray photon enters the producing an Selectric field in the semiconductor. semiconductor it produces free charge carriers in the crystal, the number of which is proportional to the energy lost by the X-ray photon. The charge motion resulting from the influence of the electric field produces an induced current pulse in the external circuit.\ This current represents the basic signal information and the integrated current pulse is proportional to the energy lost by the X-ray. The pulses are routed to a multichannel pulse-height analyzer (MCA) where they are sorted and stored according to the amplitude distribution to produce a pulse-height spectrum that corresponds to the X-ray energy spectrum. The MCA may be a dedicated instrument or an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) interfaced to a computer.

The semiconductor materials which are most frequently used for X-ray spectrometers (i.e., silicon and germanium) do not have sufficiently high resistivity to withstand large electric fields without excessive leakage currents. It is therefore necessary to use special techniques to limit the current flow through the semiconductor device. This is usually accomplished by utilizing the space charge regiqn of a reverse biased diode junction as are the only semiconductor the detector sensitive volume. Silicon and germanium materials which are presently available with sufficient crystalline perfection and purity to be generally useful for this type of device, although work is progressing on other semiconductors such as HgI,, CdTe and GaAs.

Although both Si and Ge crystals are available in very pure form, the electrically active impurity level is sometimes too high to allow fabrication of usefully large detectors. This limitation can be `overcome by using mobile lithium ions to compensate technique is used, the the electrically active impurities. If the lithium compensation device is subject to inherent stability problems since the germanium semiconductor compensation can be classed as highly unstable at room temperature and therefore lithium-compensated germanium devices must be stored at reduced temperatures. In silicon the compensation is quasi-stable, with the degree of stability depending on the presence of other impurities in the crystal and on the details of the device fabrication.

Since there is no internal gain in the type of semiconductor detector considered here, the problem of noise in the detector and in the preamplifier circuits is significant, both the semiconductor detector and particularly at low X-ray energies. Consequently, first stage of the preamplifier are usually operated at low temperature to reduce the thermal noise. Energy resolution is one of the most important characteristics of an X-ray energy spectrometer since it sets the limit on the ability to resolve closely spaced lines. Figure 2, page 42 shows the K, separation of adjacent elements as a function of atomic number.

16

IS 12797 I 1999
IECPmbJJ~(19S3)

In comparing instruments it is necessary also to, examine the other specifications, since improved energy resolution may be provided at the expense of other important parameters such as count-rate capability, gain stability, and detector size (efficiency). The limit resulting from the statistical uncertainty involved in the process whereby the incident X-ray energy produces free charge carriers is a fundamental limit on energy resolution and is discussed in detail in Sub-clause 5.2. Preamplifier and detector noise also affect the resolution -and are examined in Sub-clauses 5.3 and 5.4. Charge loss from trapping and recombination can also have significant effects on the spectral quality. The peak-width broadening from charge loss typically increases with increasing energy since the fluctuation in the amount of charge trapped usually increases with total charge. "Partially dead" regions or layers can also produce spectral distortion in the form of low energy tails, non-linearities, and loss .of detector efficiency at low energies. These effects are described in Sub-clause 5.5.

Electronic stability is an important variable which includes not only the stability of the preamplifier, but also that of other parts of the system, such as the main amplifier and the MCA. Effects of high count-rate such as pulse pile-up and d.c. level shifts are also important. Every time an event produces a pulse in the amplifying equipment, the d.c. levels throughout the system are perturbed and take some time to return to their original values. If another event occurs within this time interval, its effectrve output pulse height may be altered, thereby contributing to spectral distortion.

5.2 Statistical limit of resolution If Poisson (random) statistics are applied to the process of the X-ray energy loss mechanism by free charge carrier formation, then it would be possible to calculate the statistical broadening of a monoenergetic X-ray peak from FWHM - 2.35= where E is the energy of the incident radiation and E is the average energy required to create a free electron-hole pair. Frequently used values of E at 77 K are 3.8 eV/pair for silicon and 3.0 eV/pair for germanium. In fact, the charge production process does not follow Poisson statistics because the multiple events' that occur in the energy loss process are correlated. Therefore, the statistical formula is usually modified by inserting a correction factor F (called the Fano factor), resulting in the expression FWHM - 2.35v&m This corrects for the fact that the observed broadening is substantially less than that predicted by ~Poisson statistics. For Si and Ge, F is not accurately known, but measurements have indicated limits between 0.05 and 0.15. Since it is not possible to measure the Fano factor and the resolution broadening caused by charge carrier trapping independently, the two effects are frequently combined in the value assumed for F. This is equivalent to the assumption that the charge loss (trapping) is a constant fraction of the free charge created. 5.3 Reamplifier noise Preamplifier noise arises from a number of sources. One is the thermal noise in the input field effect transistor (FET) of the preamplifier (see Figure 1, page 41). This is usually minimized by cooling the FET and using selected FETs. With regard to the FET

17

IbU787~1888 Isc?uls759( 1983)
contribution, the signal-to-noise ratio (S/n) decreases with increasing total capacitance at the FET gate and therefore ~decreases with increasing detector area. Thus, there is an important compromise between detector size aid the observed S/n. Parasitic capacitance also affects S/n. Consequently, the physical configuration of the detector and preamplifier package is critical. The resistors Rf and R, shown in the circuit of Figure la, page 41P also can be important sources of noise. In order to minimize the effect of sway capacitance and resistor noise, C, and RL are usually eliminated by. d.c. coupling the detector to the gate of the first FET as .in Figure lb, page 4k. Hence all of the current caused by the radiation must flow through R, or the high impedance gate of the field effect transistor. This can change the FET operating point and the overall gain of the system, unless there is sufficient d. c. feedback via Z+ to provide the required count-rate .versus gain stability. The. greater the feedback resistance (4) the smaller the r&istor noise contribution but the poorer the count-rate energy product capability. This presents an important compromise consideration between noise broadening of the resolution and performance at high count-rates.

In this respect, it should be pointed out that it is not enough to specify just the simple count-rate capability because it is the product of count-rate and average radiation energy which is important, for example 100 keV X-rays present 20 times the count-rate problem of 5 keV X-rays. Other more sophisticated feedback mechanisms such as optical feedback, d.c. feedback, or pulsed dptical feedback can be used in place of R, and are in common usage as methods for reducing noise. However, these techniques also involve similar resolution versus count-rate compromises. Figure 3, page 43 shows the combined effects of preamplifier noise and statistics for two values of Eano factor, amplifier noise and E. The preamplifier contribution is independent of energy, while the statistical broadening varies as the square root of the energy. At a noise level of about 400 eV, the preamplifier noise dominate8 over the entire range of interest for the K-lines of the stable elements, while .with 100 eV noise, the noise and statistical effects are about equal at the photon energy of 3.7 keV.

5.4

Detector noise
Leakage current in the detector element and Johnson noise in the detector series resistance can also co&ibute to system noise and resolution broadening. In integrated X-ray spectrometer systems, it is usually not possible to distinguish unambiguously between series noise sources (e.g., the FET series noise) and parallel noise sources such as detector leakage current, feedback resistor,' and microphonics. Since the parallel noise predominates at lower frequencies, some indication of the presence of detector current noise or excess feedback noise can be obtained by examining the noise as a function of amplifier passband.

5.5

Charge loss Loss of free charge carriers because of trapping in the semiconductor crystal can be a significant source of spectral _distortion. The peak width broadening from this effect is proportional to the energy of the. X-ray and therefore more pronounced at higher energies. Charge trapping, which is a -function of detector bias voltage, frequently results

18

IS 12737 : 1333 IEC Pab 733 ( 1983) in low energy tails on monoenergetic spectral lines. The effect is therefore often more readily apparent in the full width at tenth maximum of the peak height (FWTM) than in the FWHM of the spectral peak. The peak-to-valley ratios of K, - Ks X-ray lines are also quite sensitive to this effect. The FWTM performance of the system is more important than it might appear on superficial examination. For example, if it is desired to determine a 10% X-ray fluorescence contribution from one element in the presence of a 90% contribution from the next higher element, the FWTM is more relevant than the FWHM. Windows and dead layers, even when not an intimate part of the detector element, contribute to loss of efficiency at low X-ray energies. In addition, charge loss in "partially-dead" layers in the portion of the detector adjacent to the entrance window can result in both a loss of full energy peak efficiency and in undesirable spectral distortion in the form. of a low energy tail, spurious peaks, and non-linearity. Since major charge loss problems frequently occur around the outer periphery of the detector active area, these problems tend to be very sensitive to the source-detector geometry employed in the measurement. Consequently, for specification parameters where charge loss is a key variable, it is essential to define the source-detector geometry. This geometry can be conveniently defined in terms of the standard working axis, standard working distance, and standard source diameter. For detectors used in microanalysis applications, the standard source diameter is negligible (a point source). / For the measurements described herein, it is desirable to make a distinction between background and non-ideal peak shapes such as asymmetries, tails, spurious peaks, etc. As used herein, the term background will refer only to non-ideal spectral response which results from radiation that is not a part of the monoenergetic X-ray line of interest.

5.6

Electronic stability and extraneous noise The gain stability of the system and excess noise from spurious electrical effects or from microphonics can affect the performance of the system. The FWTM is frequently more sensitive to these problems than the FWHM.

5.7 5.7.1

Count-rate effect. Pulse-shape considerations and distortion by pulse pile-up In order to optimize the signal-to-noise ratio as well a,s to provide reasonable count-rate capability, it is necessary to restrict both the upper. and lower limits of the amplifier passband. At any given count-rate, the width (in time) of the resulting pulse will determine the probability that the preceding or succeeding pulse will be distorted by pulse-on-pulse or pulse-on-tail pile-up. Choice of the type of pulse shaping and the time constants associated with the pulse therefore involves an important compromise between optimum energy resolution at low count-rates and the performance of the system at high count-rates. Preamplifier noise can frequently be minimized by using relatively long pulse shaping time constants (N `10us). However, the resulting optimum shaping time constant for minimum noise can be inconsistent with `the count-rate requirements of the user. Consequently, energy resolution specifications should always be accompanied by either the maximum applicable count-rate and detailed information on the pulse shape, or a detailed description of the change in FWHM and FWTM as a function of count-rate at a specified energy. The latter description of performance ,is particularly useful in cases

19

m lm? fml%h

t 1986 759( 1963)

where the instrument is to be used in quantitative analysis where changes in resolution with changing cuunt-rate wouid seriously complicate analysis of the resulting data,

The usual shaping time constant number -associated with the amp}ifier is by itself only \ marginally useful "in predicting count-rate capability. The pile-up limitation of the system is primarily determined by the width of the pulse near the baseline. For a given nominal time constant, this time interval can vary by a factor of two or mote, depending on the type of pulse shaping and the convention used for assigning a time constant value. .Although the attainment of low pile-up requires that the characteristic width of the pulse be small compared to the mean interval between pulses, it is also necessary that the pulse return cIosely to the baseline (average d.c. level) in a time interval small compared to the mean interval between pulses. Many preamplifieramplitier systems utilize a design principle referred to as pole-zero (PZ) cancellation to minimize undesirable undershoots. Failure to achieve accurate PZ cancellation can degrade the FWHM and FWTM and can also resuk in low or El@ energy tails on spectrai peaks, depending on whether an undershoot or overshoot exists. This source of distortion is particularly important at high count-rates.
5.7.2

Baseline (d.c. non-litrearifies

Ievef) shtjh,

baseline

(d.c.)

restoration,

count-rate

induced

gain

shl~ts qnd

A count-rate induced d.c. level shift anywhere within the electronic amplifying chain will introduce gain shifts and non-tinearities whenever the d.c. Ievel exceeds the linear dynamic range of that portion of the signal processing chain. Also, when the limit of the linear dynamic range is approached, statistically induced fluctuations in the d.c. ievel can exceed this lirni~ resulting in peak broadening and other related spectral distortions. In addition, a short-term d.c. level shift at the output of the amplifier system will produce an equivalent shift in the magnitude of the output voltage pulse presented to the ADC of the MCA or single-channel analyzer, thereby degrading the resolution. Customarily, these problems are reduced by using d.c. feedback and by using a baseline restorer (BLR) at the output of the amplifying chain. Baseline restoration can also add a noise contribution which depends on the restoration mode and restoration rate (time constant).

-Consequently, when specifying resolution, stability, gain shift, linearity, function of count-rate, it is essential that the foIlowing information be stated:
a) the energy for which the performance

etc.,

as i3

is specified.;

b) details of the pulse shaping;

c) details of restoration

mode;

d) details of pile-up rejection. Specifications as a function of conditions (e.g., same pulse shape, -requirement is particularly relevant the spectrometer system every time count-rate shall be obtained at the same operating feedback configuration, restoration mode, etc.). This to applications where it is not practical to reoptimize the product of the count-rate and the energy changes.

20

57.3

Overload recovery Overload pulses produced by high-energy radiation events which exceed the dynamic range of rhe amplifying equipment can produce undesirable effects such as baseline overshoot or undershoot and system paralysis (dead time). However, since good overload performance may compromise other system characteristics it should not be emphasized in those applications where overload signals are not a significant problem.

5.8

Detector material selection: germanium versus silicon The two semiconductor detector materials which are presently available for high-resolution X-ray energy spectrometers are germanium and silicon. The relative potential advantages and disadvantages of each are summarized as follows: Germanium Advantages

1) Higher atomic number (Z) which results in better efficiency at high energies. 2) The smaller value of E reduces the relative importance
and possibly the statistical contribution Disadvantages to the resolution of noise (see Sub-clause (see Sub-clause 5.2). 5.3)

1) Higher efficiency at high energy produces more background
sources.

problems

from high-energy to a much

2) An equal linear thickness -for the dead layer (entrance window) corresponds
greater efficiency 3) Worse low-energy 4) High efficiency loss at low energy. tailing on low-energy peaks. of amplifier overload. peak

at high energy increases the probability

5) High Z results in increased spectral complication by escape more complex relation between efficiency and energy. 6) Smaller band-gap increases the potential detector

problems

and

a

leakage current noise problems.

Silicon Advantages

1) Dead layer effects are smaller. 2) It exhibits relative freedom from escape peak complications
3) Silicon is less sensttive to high-energy background problems.

in complex spectra.

4) Silicon can be used at higher temperatures

with less detector

noise contribution.

Disadvantages 1) Efficiency is lower eat high energy (> 30 keV). to form an electron-hole pair (i.e., larger 6).

2) Higher average energies required

18 12737 : l!Ma

WPub759(
5.9

M6S)

Detector efficiency The full-energy peak efficiency of a semiconductor dependent. It is a function of the physical size and of windows or dead layers on the detector and its within the detector, the Z of the detector material, the semiconductor. X-ray energy spectrometer is energy, shape of the detector, the presence container, charge trapping problems and the energy of the KBbs edge of

Typical graphs of efficiency versus energy are illustrated in Figure 4, page 49 The low-energy response threshold is established by absorption in the window of the detector entrance surface. In addition, any partially-dead layer within the detector near its entrance window may contribute to the drop in efficiency at low energy and may also result in low-energy background counts for peaks at lower energies (i.e., a low-energy tail on a monoenergetic X-ray peak). Variations of full-energy peak efficiency as a function of energy are also caused by the sharp change .in the absorption coefficient near the Kabs edge. Since this sudden increase in cross-section results in a high probability of interaction near the entrance window on the semiconductor, dead or partially-dead layers adjacent to the entrance window can cause large drops in the full-energy peak efficiency at energies just above the Kabs edge.

The drop in efficiency at high energy depends on the sensitive depth and volume of the detector. The efficiency at high energies, as well was the spectral quality (low-energy tailing) can also be affected by the existence of a partially-dead layer near the back contact to the sensitive region, poor charge collection throughout the sensitive region, or by isolated partially-dead layers within the sensitive volume.

5.10

Resolution of adjacent lines and line-to-background ratio The question of when two adjacent spectral lines are "resolved" is somewhat subjective since it depends on the particular experimental conditions and performance criteria. For example, when attempting to analyze a line in the presence of a nearby much stronger line, it may be the FWTM of the more intense line that determines whether the lines are "resolved". When attempting to analyze a line in the presence of a much more intense higher-energy neighbour, it may be the low-energy tailing from the more intense line that establishes the sensitivity and accuracy of the measurement. This standard does not attempt to establish an arbitrary - and possibly misleading - definition to determine if two adjacent lines are resolved. Rather, the approach adopted in this standard is that of defining key characteristics of the spectral response so that the user can interpret the instrument specification with respect to his own needs. The concept of line-to-background ratio has traditionally been of considerable usefulness to the X-ray analyst. However, the line-to-background ratio in any particular application depends not only on the performance of the X-ray energy analyzer, but also on other factors such as the method of X-ray excitation (e.g. electron, heavy ion, secondary X-ray, radioactive source), the character of the fluorescing sample, and geometrical arrangement of the exciting source, target, and detector. Since these latter factors are frequently beyond the control of the X-ray energy spedrometer manufacturer, this standard does not include test procedures for line-to-background ratio determination.

22

IS r2737 I 1988 IEC Pmb 759 ( 1983 ) However, standards for specifying the characteristic spectrometer parameters such as and peak-to-valley ratios which directly affect the FWHM, FWTM, peak-to-tail, line-to-background ratio have been included (e.g. if the FWHM doubles, the line-to-background ratio will decrease to one-half, all other factors remaining constant)

5.11 5.11.1

Miscellaneous other effects Microphonics Micropnomc noise generation may be a serious source of resolution broadening. In relative to cryogenic systems, mechanical vibrations of the input circuit components surfaces at different potentials can introduce noise. Such vibrations can be produced by lrbulence from automatic nitrogen transfer systems, vibration bubbling of liquid nitrogen, of other equipment in contact with the detector cryostat, and environmental noise. A change of capacitance between the FET gate and the high voltage (detector bias 1 000 V) of only 5 x lo-' pF is sufficient to generate a microphonic signal equivalent to that of a 10 keV X-ray. Since the typical stray capacitances are of the order of 1 pF, mechanical motions (within. the frequency `pass-band of the shaping amplifier) of approximately one part in lo7 are significant. Since most of the vibration problems are at relatively low frequency, much of the microphonic noise is filtered out by the low-frequency response ~of the amplifier. Consequently, microphonic pr'oblems become more serious at long shaping time constants. This problem involves the excitation of internal mechanical resonances by internal or external vibrations and is quite complex. Microphonics problems can be studied in a qualitative way by exciting the `system with an audio speaker driven by a variable frequency generator.. However, because of the wide diversity of detector mechanical configurations available, it would be difficult to establish a standard for micro$honics. None the less, the user should be aware of this potential problem.

5.11.2

Secondary jluorescence Secondary fluorescence of metal parts of the the metal electrodes on the detector can cause peaks in the spectrum. Detector producers are the material, especially of related components, zone. Additionally, the geometry of the preamp needed to assess the influence of the secondary cryostat, detector, and preamp mount and spectral distortion in the form of spurious urged to give detailed information about the detector mount itself and the contact FET relative to the radiation main axis is fluorescence.

5.11.3

Liquid nitrogen loss rate Most semiconductor X-ray analyzers use liquid nitrogen for cooling the detector and preamplifier. The efficiency of the cryostat. design is directly reflected in the liquid nitrogen consumption rate. Excessive liquid nitrogen consumption aggravates microphonics, and increases the operating cost, inconvenience, and the chance of accidental warm-up. This performance parameter is usually covered by specifying the capacity of the liquid nitrogen reservoir and the minimum guaranteed holding time (of the temperature).

23

nm737d9m
IECPmb733(1333)
6.

General Definition of semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometer A semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometer is an instrument which utilizes the proportionality between the energy of an X-ray and the number of free electron-hole pairs created in a semiconductor radiation `detector by that X-ray as a means of measuring the energy of the X-ray. In this standard the spectrometer is assumed to consist of the. semiconductor detector, preamplifier, means for cooling, encapsulation, required vacuum and ~mechanical housings, amplifier, power supplies, and other required analog electronics. For the purposes of this standard, analog-to-digital data conversion and subsequent data-handling equipment are not considered to be ~a part of the spectrometer, even though it is recognized that they are an essential ingredient in establishing the total system performance. In addition, sample stages, the X-ray emitter, and means for exciting same (e;g., radioactive sources, electron beams, etc.) are considered to be ancillary equipment and not part of the spectrometer.

6.1

6.2

General precautions and speciJcations The following general precautions procedures described herein. and specifications are relevant `to all of the test

Maximum detector bias voltage, rate of bias voltage change, radiation flux ratings, line and other manufacturer's specification limits voltage, maximum detector temperature, should not be exceeded or permanent damage to the instrument may result. The values of the parameters specified should be reproducible within the precision of the measurements after the performance of any one or all of the tests performed. Care. should be taken to ensure that power-line noise, earth loops, mechanical vibration, and the characteristics of ancillary test equipment do not substantially influence the test results. Relevant test conditions such as pulse shaping (type and time constants), detector bias, etc,, shall be clearly stated. In no case shall performance data which require change in operating condition or mode be presented as a plotted envelope or table (e.g., if energy resolution versus count-rate is plotted, all data points must correspond to the same operating conditions). If it is desired to show results for several operating modes (e.g. time constants), then these should be shown as a family of curves with operating mode as a parameter.

Since the semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometer user seeks energy and intensity distribution information, it is reasonable to specify system performance in -terms of energy spectrum distortion and variations in the system detection efficiency as -a function of energy. Consequently, many of the performance parameters contained herein are described in terms of deviations from ideal behaviour. In order to establish standardized test procedures which are independent of the various sources of X-rays which might eventually be used with the instrument, readily available radioactive sources haye been specified for the test -procedures. Whenever possible, isotopes having simple energy spectra have been selected. This is particularly important in resolution versus count-rate tests where multiple lines greatly complicate the interpretation of the data. An attempt has been made to specify standard sources covering the energy

24

.

range of interest for both Si and Ge detectors when used with characteristic elemental X-rays. It is recognized that special applications or requirements may necessitate the use of additional X-ray energies to adequately characterize the instrument.

6.3

Simulating the signal pulse of a detector the electronic noise A pulse from a pulse generator is useful for measuring contribution to the resolution, electronic linearity, gain stability, and also for energy calibrations. In order for all sources of noise, drift, etc., to be sampled by the test pulse, the charge shall be injected into the input of the preamplifier as illustrated in Figure 5. page 45 The type of pulse generator shown in Figure 6, page 46, is frequently referred to as a tail pulse generator. Pulse generators which produce a square pulse are also occasionally used instead of tail pulse generators.

Test pulses applied by capacitive coupling cannot precisely simulate true signal pulses. The exponential decay rd shown in Figure 6 corresponds to an uncancelled pole which results in an undershoot at the amplifier output. Pole-zero cancellation of the charge coupling capacitance is not appropriate to this problem, since it would result in excess noise at the preamplifier input. For a. square pulse, droop in the pulse corresponds to a long time constant pole and, in addition, the negative going portions of the pulse will produce a pulse of the wrong polarity in the amplifier and possibly result in undesirable baseline shifts. Consequently, pulse generators should not be used to generate the high and variable count-rate required for count-rate effect measurements. In addition, it is preferable to turn the pulser &`f Auring X-ray resolution measurements, particularly if the measurements are pe#ormed at high count-rates and/or with long pulse shaping time constants. Some systems, for example amplifiers with gated BLR, may not tolerate the undershoot from a tail pulse generator or the opposite polarity signal produced by a square pulse generator '

7. 7.1

Energy resolution and spectral distortion Noise measurement by pulse-height distribution (preferred method) The electronic and detector noise contribution to the resolution width can be determined by this method only if the instrument is provided with a pulser coupling capacitor (CJ as shown in Figure 5. The spectrometer is connected to a multichannel analyzer as shown in Figure 5. With all elements of the system operating within their linear range and with the detector at its specified operating voltage, expose the detector to an appropriate X-ray source (e.g., 5.9 keV Mn K, from ssFe) and accumulate a spectrum. The system gain and pulse amplitude shall be such that the FWHM of the X-ray peak is at least eight channels and that of the pulser peak is at least five channels. (For MCAs with a small number of channels it may be necessary to use a biased amplifier or a digital off-set in the ADC following the main amplifier to achieve this condition.) Remove the X-ray source and calibrate the pulse generator by setting its output amplitude dial to the appropriate X-ray energy (e.g. 5.9 keV) and adjusting the calibration controls until the pulser peak and the X-ray peak have the same peak centre (modal) channel. With the source removed, and with the system gain such that the

25

IS 12737: 198b IEC Pub 759 ( 1983 )

tht: two pc,..~ FWHM of the pulser peaks is at least live channels, accumulate corresponding to pulse generator equivalent output energies E, and 4 in chaaaels X, a:;:: X2 as shown in Figure 7, page 47. The system total noise line width is defined as:

A; =

A'N

(11 to the full width of the

where A'N is the interpolated number of channels corresponding peak at one-half the maximum height of the peak. The FWTM is defined as: 6: =

(2)

where

S', is the

one-tenth

number of channels corresponding the maximum height of the peak.

to the full width

of the peak

at

If the pulse generator is triggered by line frequency, this technique may not detect the presence of noise which is correlated with line frequency. This problem may be avoided by using a pulse generator with an internal trigger which is asynchronous with line frequency. When stating the total noise line width, complete information on the pulse shaping (including the full-pulse width) shall be given (e.g. 2 us CR-RC, or semi-Gaussian with four 2 us CR integrations and one 2 us RC differentiation). If baseline restoration (BLR) and/or gating techniques are used, the characteristics of the BLR and/or gating shall also be stated (see Clause 5).

7.2 7.2.1

Alternate

techniques for noise measurement by oscilloscope and r.m.s. voltmeter

Noise measurement

An alternative method of measuring noise employs the systtln snown in Figure 8, page 88. The root-mean-square (r.m.s.) noise voltage level is indicated on an r.m.s. voltmeter having a flat-band frequency response extending to at least ten times the band centre frequency of the amplifier pulse-shaping networks. In addition, the amplifier incremental-gain shall be constant down to below the noise level (a biased amplifier, BLR, or gating can render this measuring technique useless). The same constraints regarding operating conditions and reference specifications outlined in Sub-clause 7.1 apply here also. The pulse generator is calibrated as in Sub-clause 7.1 except that the oscilloscope is used to compare the pulse heights of the source and pulser. A pulse generator-pulse equivalent to energy Z$, is applied and the resulting amplifier output V, is measured in the oscilloscope. The pulse generator is switched off and the r.m.s. noise voltage e,, is read from the voltmeter. The system FWHM noise linewidth is given by:

AZ = 2.35 *a *en0 F 0 & where a is 1.11 for a sine-wave-calibrated average-reading voltmeter and unity for a trui: r.m.s. voltmeter. The value of E$,/ V, can also be obtained by using a monoenergetic X-ray source of energy Ep

26

IS 12737 t 1988 IEC Pub 759 ( 1983)
:.2.2 Noise 7iTi: n!pproxzmation from X-ray spectral resolution

approx;ionated

to the resolution broadening can also be electronic noise contribution from the variation of X-ray peak width as a function of energy as given

b+ :

dT = Lq2*E2
E

- (AQ2*El 1'2
Ez - El >

(4)

where ;I$ is the FWHM noise linewidth of equation (3) and (A;,) and (d&) are the FWHM total linewidths for the peak at energies E, and 4, respectively (see also Sub-&ruse 7.4). Considerable caution needs to be applied to error for the following reasons:
a) the

in the use of equation

(4), since it is prone between large

value for A$ may be the result of taking a small difference numbers and therefore, the error propagation problem is significant;

b) equation

(4) assumes that the fractional charge loss effects are independent of energy, an assumption that is questionable below 3 keV or over a large energy range;

c) the X-ray peaks are multiplets (e.g. I&, Ka2). The separation of these multiplets is a fun&on of energy and whether the peak is a K or L or M line. This source of variable peak broadening has not been taken into account in equation (4). 7.3
Noise i'inewidth as a .function of amplifier time constants

'

Information concerning the series and parallel noise contributions can be obtained by plotting noise linewidth as a function of amplifier time constants. In addition, such a qlot <3r1 give important information regarding the count-rate versus energy resolution compr:?mise. To perform this measurement, the method of Sub-clause 7.1 or 7.2 is ernplnyI:d with an amplifier having adjustable shaping time constants. The results are displxynd as a ~plot of noise linewidth as a function of pulse-shaping time constants (with other pcxsible variables such as BLR as a parameter).

7.4

X-rc_y ?iPzewidth measurements

by pulse-height

distrzbution

;`h<`: fo\lowing resolut.i:;n :
tr,l bf)I:i:

radioactive

sources

are

recommended

for

specification

of

energy

5.9 kl.:V - Mn K,(K,r - 5.898, Kxi -- 5.887); 6) lYd 22.162 (K,I) and 21.988 (Kcr2)keV Ag K X-rays and 88 keV gamma-ray; ci ziC4.i r1.4 Fe E=, (&I - 6.403, K,2 - 6.390) and 14.4, 122, and 136 keV gamma-rays ; .xort:xznded for count-rate effect measurements).

(not

: j 1imlutioxl is specified at one energy only, s5Fe is the preferred source. The 5.9 keV & i'. .:, ray represents a reasonable compromise between amplifier noise broadening and other &rector resolution broadening effects. The lines above 30 keV are relevant most!; to !:1: detectors. To prevent spectral distortion from backscattered radiation, the sourct: backing thickness and Z should be kept as small as possible

27

IS 12737 :199i IECPab 759-(19U3)
If lower-energy lines are desired, they may be obtained target such as the standard glass described in Clause 12. by secondary fluorescence of a

In case a secondary fluorescent target is used as a source of X-rays for resolution the background from the continuum should be subtracted before measurements, determining Nx (the counts in channel X). A suitable technique for background subtraction is described in Sub-clause 12.1 of this publication and Sub-clause 4.1 of I EC Publication 340. 7.4.2 Spectral resolution These tests are carried out using the system of Figure 5, radiation sources listed in Sub-clause 7.4.1. The source is working axis of the detector at the standard working distance. source must not significantly exceed the standard working where the source is a true characteristic X-ray, the location of K, peaks can be used to -obtain the calibration: S -page 45 and one of the locatea on the standard ThZ: active diameter of the diameter. For those cases the centres of the K, and

(5)

For other cases, or if the & and K, are not sufficiently well resolved, the pulser technique of Sub-clause 7.1 may be used to obtain calibration. The results should be expressed as the FWHM and FWTM. The FWHM is obtained from the relation:

where A& is the full width (in interpolated fractional maximum amplitude. The FWTM is given by:

channels*

of the peak at one-half its

where S", is the full width (in fractional channels) of peak at one-tenth amplitude. For a Gaussian peak: 6% = 1.78 (A:), thus 6; = 1.78 (Ai). The FWHM must be at least ten channels peak centre (modal) channel. In reporting following shall -be noted: a) incident X-ray source and energy; ht count-rate
z

its maximum

with a minimum information on

of 40 000 counts in the the spectral resolution,

at which measurement geometry

was taken; distance and standard source diameter);

c) detector-source

(standard working

d) detailed e) detector

description operating

of detector bias;

and its collimator

(shape, area, depth, Si or Ge, etc.);

jJ system noise linewidth under the same operating g) amplifier pulse-shaping parameters). parameters (including

conditions; the full pulse -width and BLR

l

The method of interpolation shall be given by the manufacturer.

ls 12757 : 1989
lECPub759( 1995)

Another caused by problems). quadrature

set of parameters of interest are those contributions to the detector linewidth all factors other than electrical noise (e.g. statistical and charge collection These quantities are found by subtracting the noise linewidth contributions in according to the relationships,

LIE= I/(&)? - (dg2

(8)

and

SE= I/"(&;)' - (csg2
limit set by statistical considerations

(9) alone

It is relevant to point out that the resolution is given by:
where : As E E F = = = = FWHM linewidth in units of energy X-ray energy average energy to form an electron-hole pair Fano factor

lim (A$) = 2.35 v

(10)

The value of the Fano factor is not accurately established at the present time for either Si nor Ge. Existing experimental data establish only a probable upper limit for F; however, F = 0.1 is commonly employed as a useful estimate of F. 7.5 Peak-to-valley and peak-to-tail ratios Peak-to-valley ratios (Sub-clause 75.1) for two closely spaced peaks (e.g., the kT, and K,, of Mn from 55Fe) and peak-to-tail ratios (Sub-clause 7.5.2) can be very sensitive indicators of spectral distortions caused by a variety of factors ranging from charge collection problems in the detector (or its partially-dead windows) to baseline instability and other related count-rate effects in the electronics. Peak-to-tail ratios can also be sensitive indicators of the detector system's line-to-background ratio capability. When quoting peak-to-valley or peak-to-tail ratios complete details of the measurement conditions, including source-detector geometry (standard working distance and standard source diameter) amplifier time constant settings, input count-rate, and any other major variables which would significantly affect the measurement shall be clearly stated. The system parameter adjustments used for these specifications should be consistent with those used for specification of other performance parameters, such as FWHM, etc.

7.5.1

Peak-to-valley ratio The peak-to-valley ratio between two specified peaks is defined as the ratio of the height of the larger peak to the height in the minimum of the valley between the two peaks.

Specifications of peak-to-valley ratios should be based on sufftcient statistical information (i.e. number of counts per channel in the valley) to ensure a maximum statistical probable error of less than 5% in the speak-to-valley ratio. 7.5.2 Peak-to-tail ratio This test consists. of placing the active side of a standard 5sFe source normal to and centred on the standard working axis and located at the standard working distance, adjusting gains so that at least ten channels appear across the FWHM, and counting until Np counts (20 000 minimum) are accumulated in the peak centre channel (modal

29

18 12737 : 1988 IEC Pub 759 ( 983 ) channel) at 5.9 keV. The, number of counts in each of the groups of five contiguous around ,the."energies of 5.4 keV, 4.5 keV and 1 keV, respectively, are values C,, C, and C, respectively. k-to-tail ratios P,, Pz and P3 are calculated
Pl =

from:

/

N&i

Pa = ND/C2 .and

PS = ND/C3

Reductio n of the speak-to-tail ratio may result from deterioration in system performance from contributions due to backscattering from the surroundings or source backing, high count-rates, system noise (ground loops, a.c. noise, etc.), improper equipment settings (misadjusthrent in pole-zero cancellation networks, non-optimum shaping times, etc.) or the presence of other radiation sources in the vicinity. Background from origins other than the q5Fe source must be negligible in order to make this measurement meaningful. This method for. the determination of the peak-to-tail ratio can yield misleading results if there are other radionuclide impurities in the source which contribute to events in the tail. Errors resulting from impurities in the source, can be detected by remeasuring the peak-to-tail ratio with an absorber placed between the s5Fe source and the detector.

8. 8.1

Pulse-beigh( linearity

System X-bay linearity by pulse-height analyzer method (preferred method)
I

technique measures the combined integral non-linearity of the detector system and the pulse-height analyzer. To determine the integral linearity of any component of the instrument chain, the effect of the other components must be measured, and subtracted.
This

With the arrangement shown in Figure 5, page 45. the detector is exposed to a series of chaaaqteristic X-ray lines spanning the energy region of interest. Normally, a minimum of ten lines, more or less uniformly spaced over the region of interest is required for a good linearity check. These lines may be generated by secondary excitation induced with X-rays, gamma-rays, or charged particles. The lowest energy line should be less than 10% and the maximum-energy line greater than 90% of full-scale energy range of interest. Care should be exercised to use only lines whose characteristic energy is accurately establishcld (e.g. unresolved multiplets which result in significant resolution broadening should be avoided whenever, possible).

If these lines are generated sequentially rather than simultaneously, care should be exercised to ensure that the counting rate is low and comparable; otherwise, count-rate induced ~gain shifts. may be mistakenly interpreted as a pulse-height linearity problem. Also, care should be taken that equipment gain drifts are not mistakenly interpreted as non-linearities. The most reliable method is to generate all of the lines simultaneously. Integral non-linearity (INL) is defined as. the maximum deviation from linearity expressed as a percentage of the specified maximum linear output. When characterized ~by a si gle unqualified num,ber, INL shall not exceed that number anywhere within the specific 1 operation range of the instrument and shall be determined under the same conditioi h s (instrument settings, etc.) used to specify resolution performance. The IN&

30

IS 12337 : 1988 IEC Pub 759 ( 1983 )

rn::~,' 1'~ obtained from the previously described X-ray spectrum by plotting peak centre (ICV!:II:) channel number for each peak versus the X-ray energy of that peak as shown in Fl<;c~\,:I;, page $8
`dra! response curve is a straight line corresponding to a linear scrgression least :v:u~! 1, : ;i~ to the data points with the same statistical weight for all measurements. The ;I,,< I-s I ;:l?n-linearity, in per cent, is then defined by:
`1. , !1

i12)

whcrtf .4Emax is the maximum deviation (in energy ideai response, and EF is the energy corresponding

units) between the measured dnd the to the full scale of the energy range

of rn1L?i"est. 8.2
Integml linearity by the bridge method

This measurement (supplementary method) is described in detail in Clause 91 of 1 EC F'ubEication 340. It can be utilized only with detector systems that incorporate a pulser coupling capacitor as described in Sub-clause 7.1.

9. 9. I

Count-sate

effects arrangement

Exgtv-imental

Because most instruments which utilize gated baseline restoration do not tolerate the reverse polarity part of the pulse for a tail pulse generator or a square puls`e generator, techniques which rely on a pulse generator to measure count-rate effects are frequently not useful for X-ray spectrometers. The experimental arrangement for using a radioactive source to measure count-rate effects on spectral distortion is shown in Figure 10, page 49. The 55Fe source shown in Figure 10 is located on the working axis of the detector, and the source to detector distance is varied to change the counting-rate. Generally, it is preferable that the is radioactive source be sufficiently intense that the maximum desired counting-rate obtained at a source to detector spacing not less than the standard working distance. If the source to detector spacing is too small, spectral distortions from edge effects in the detector may be misinterpreted as count-rate induced distortions. All extraneous scattering materials shall be kept well away from the space between or adjacent to the source and detector to eliminate spectral distortion by Compton scattered photons, or by secondary fluorescence X-rays. In general, it is preferable to use an X-ray source that does not produce any high energy events which would overload the amplifier. It is essential that the input stages of the ADC be d.c. coupled.

The equivalent input count-rate (c) is measured by the fast amplifier, discriminator, and counting ratemeter. In preamplifiers which utilize pulsed feedback, the 5 shown in Figure 10 does not represent the true input rate: to obtain the true input rate in this case a correction must be made for the dead time caused by the gated-off periods. In some cases, this correction may be very significant. The fast filter amplifier chain shall

31

IS 12757 : 1998 IBCPub759( 1985) have a band-pass sufficient to ensure negligible counting losses or an accurate correction for the counting loss from pile-up must be applied. A good Iirst-order correction is given by the relation:

r, = ri * e-rttw where: `0 = unpiled-up output data rate q = input data rate a - width of -the pulse (in seconds) at the baseline established by the discriminator threshold level

(13)

If the arrangement shown in Figure 10, page 49 is operated in the ungated mode (i.e., with the gate by-passed) the observed countlrate effects will include the contributions from the MCA. The contribution from the MCA (and gate) alone can be approximated in the following way: Set the scaler ovefflow output to divide-by-one condition and the delay and the one-shot period long enough to gate the entire amplifier output pulse through the linear gate. Adjust the 55Fe source position to produce the maximum desired counting-rate. Vary the counting-rate into the MCA by switching the scaler overflow output to + 2, + 4, + 8, + 16, + 32, etc. The resulting shifts in resolution and peak shape can be attributed to the MCA and linear gate. The contribution from the linear gate can be minimized by using a good quality d.c. coupled linear gate.

Because of the derandomizing effect of the scaler, this technique will underestimate the count-rate effects in the MCA at low and medium count-rates. The main problems with count-rate effect measurements contribution system; of .are: any one component

tend

to

a) the difficulty of isolating the detector-preamplifier-amplifier-MCA
b) the

of

the

dependence of count-rate performance on many factors, such as signal energy, preamplifier noise, and amplifier shaping time constants. It is therefore necessary, in specifying the system performance, that all the relative operating conditions be clearly stated, and that the system parameters are selected so as to approximate the conditions under which the system will be used. When investigating count-rate performance, it is imperative that the pole-zero cancellation networks and baseline restorers be properly adjusted. the following shall be stated:

When specifying system performance,

whether the results include the MCA effects; energy range; amplifier shaping time constants, including BLR setting and pile-up rejection; low count-rate resolution;

energy at which the amplifier overloads; radiation source and energy used for random signal source (preferred source is m55Fe).

-L_

32

IS 12737 : 1999 IEC-Pub 759( 1999) When specifying performance as a function of counting-rate, the counting-rate specified shall always be the counting-rate at the input (detector) of the spectrometer. The output, counting-rate which corresponds to this input counting-rate shall also be stated.

9.2

Fulse-height distribution peak shift The peak location (centroid) of a pulse-height distribution may exhibit dependence on total counting-rate. The experimental `set-up shown in Figure 10, page 49, provides a means to measure pulse-height shift as a function of average counting?rate ifor random pulse spacing in time. The counting-rate is varied by adjusting the spacing between the radiation source and the detector and is measured with a count-rate meter. The Mn K, peak should be set at 90% of the maximum sped'fed linear output of the system. The counting-rate should then be varied over the entire,, range of interest, and the shift of the Mn & peak centroid plotted as a function of to@1 ipput count-rate.

9.3

Spectral resolution and line shape versus count-rate The set-up shown in Figure The FWHM, FWTM, and measured for each of several plotted as a function of input Sub-clause 9.2. 10 is also used for this measurement. peak-to-tail of the Mn & pulse-height distribution are counting-rates over the range of interest `and tabulated or count-rate. The Mn K, peak should be set as specified in

9.4

Counting losses At high counting-rates, pulse pile-up will cause a loss of counts from the peak as well as spectral distortion. In addition, systems which use gating techniques to eliminate spectral distortion or to effect pulsed feedback to the preamplifier will exhibit dead times during the gate closed periods. All systems are paralyzable; i.e., at some level of input count-rate, the output count-rate actually decreases with increasing input rate. Figure 11, page 50 illustrates this effect.

Either the arrangement shown in Figure 10 or that of Figure 12, page(5,11 may be used for this measurement. If the arrangement of Figure 10 is used, the counting-rate meter should be replaced with a counter-timer and the gain should be adjusted as in Sub-clause 9.2. If the arrangement in Figure 12 is used, the window widths in the fast single-channel analyzers should be set at six times the FWHM, and the centre of the window should corresponds to the peak centre (modal point of the peak) at low count-rate. The arrangement shown in Figure 12 can be used only under situations where the pulse-height distribution peak shift with counting rate will not shift the peak out of the window of the SCA. The fast filter amplifier chain shall have a band-pass sufficient to ensure negligible counting losses, although a small calculated dead-time loss correction for the fast filter amplifier chain may be required. The count-rate is increased by decreasing the source-to-detector distance, and the counting-rate of the analyzed pulses in the X-ray pezik is plotted as a function of total count-rate in the fast filter amplifier chain as shown in Figure 13, page 52.' The results of Figure 11 can be derived from those of Figure 13.

33

IS 12737 ; 1988 IECIPub 759-I 1963) Counting loss effects which are attributable to the MCA may be measured by disabling the coincidence gate input shown in -Figure 10, page 49 (as described in Sub-clause 9.1). The arrangements corrections. of Figure 10 or 12, page 51 can also be used to verify dead time

10. 10.1

Overload effects Genzrul The behaviour of an amplifier receiving an input pulse that drives the amplifier far into the overload region depends on many factors. The order in which different sections of the amplifier overload as the input amplitude is increased may depend on the gain control and time constant settings. All of the gain control settings and pulse-shape parameters shall be stated when the overload recovery time is specified; otherwise, the specification shall apply for all gain and filter network combinations available in the system. Amplifiers having adjustable pole-zero cancellation and baseline restoration networks must be properly adjusted before overload tests are performed.

10.2

Amplifier gain recovery time A system is defined as having recovered from overload when the output waveform returns to and remains within a band about the baseline of 1% of the maximum specified ~output voltage, and when the gain for small. signals has returned to normal. After an overload pulse, the output waveform of some amplifiers returns to the baseline sooner than the gain returns to normal. Return to normal gain may usually be judged by the reappearance of full noise or small signal response on the oscilloscope trace. The test arrangement shown in Figure 5, page 45 permits a quick measurement of recovery time after an overloading pulse. If the pulse generator is replaced with a sine-wave generator, working at low signal level, the reappearance of the sine wave can be used instead of the noise. An example of such overload behaviour is illustrated in Figure 14, page 52. Note that the small sinusoidal signal on the trace reappears when the amplifier gain has returned to normal. The waveform returns to the baseline very quickly after the overload pulse, but the gain does not recover until much later. Oscilloscope overload must be avoided. Amplifier gain recovery time shall be stated for overload factors of 10, 100, and I 000 at all relevant time-constant and gain settings.

11. 11.l

Pulse-height stability Line voltage variations The test set-up is identical variable for all parts of the analyzer, and oscilloscope. A X-ray line (e.g. s5Fe) may be with that shown in Figure 5 except that the line voltage is system except the precision pulse generator, multichannel pulse generator peak and/or a peak from a monoenergetic used to measure stability.

34

Is 12737 * IOBS lEcP8VD7!5!I( lslls) Set the line voltage at its nominal value and adjust the amplifier output so that the peak centre (modzl) channel of the peak 4 is at 90% of full scale on the MCA. Observe the maximum deviation of N, as the line voltage is varied over a range of 88 % to 110% of the nominal operating voltage while all other conditions are maintained constant. This variation is often expressed in percentage for a =given line voltage change and is obtained by the relation:
SL =

100 AN1 N1 (14)

A similar test may be performed with a biased amplifier in the system. In this case, the pulse generator and gains should be adjusted to give 90% of maximum rated output voltage from the biased amplifier at the desired gain and bias level setting. Spectra should be obtained at 88% and 110% of nominal line voltage. Output pulse height stability S, (pulse-height variation over a + lo%, - 12 % line voltage range) is given in per cent by:

.SL = 100'

ANI
NI + GN,

where AN, is the number of channels between the peak peaks, Gs the. gain of the biased amplifier and Ns is the suppressed by the biased amplifier. Measurement of pulse-height stability, can be accomplished by repeating voltage to the MCA only. 11.2 Temperature effects

centre (modal) channels of the equivalent number of channels the effect of the MCA on the above with variable line

For this test, the system shown in Figure 5, page 45; (except for the pulse generator, MCA, and oscilloscope) is placed in an environmental test chamber. The maximum change in pulse height produced by incremental changes of the ambient air temperature,. with other conditions maintained constant, is the temperature coeffmient of pulse height; for example, 0.011% per Kelvin. In amplifiers with d.c. coupling, pulse-height shifts can be caused by either gain changes or d.c. level shifts. When applicable, temperature induced pulse-height changes in both gain and d.c. level shall be measured and specified. When specifying the temperature coefficient of pulse height, the range over which the specification applies shall be clearly stated. The measurements shall be made over a specified temperature range and taken at no greater than 10 K increments. The specified temperature coefficient shall be valid for all increments within the specified temperature range. Care should be taken not to damage the system by operating outside the manufacturer's recommended operating temperature range.

11.3

Gain stability The test settup is identical variations can be determined MCA. Test conditions should noted over an extended period with that shown in Figure 5 and Sub-clause 11.1. Gain by observing the peak centre (modal) channel Shifi in the be maintained constant and the maximum gain variations, of time which shall be stated.

55

l9

12737 t lap
759'( l=)

,m Pub

12. Efficiency The efficiency of a semiconductor detector at a given photon energy is a function of a number of variables including the area, shape and depth of the active region, the presence of collimators, and the absorption in windows (or dead layers) between the source of X-rays and the active region. In addition, the presence of nearby extraneous scattering material can also bias the accuracy of efficiency measurement. In specifying the efficiency of the detector, it is also essential that the active area be specified. Since the periphery of the sensitive region is usually a charge collection problem area, many semiconductor X-ray spectrometers are constructed with internal collimation. Any description or specification of the active area of the detector should unambiguously specify the dimensions, shape, Z, and location of collimators. Other regions of low electric field in the device may also cause spectral distortions; therefore, in specifying the sensitive depth of the detector, the thickness of any non-depleted material shall be clearly stated. 12.1 Window attenuation measurements with glass fluorescent instruments intended for use below 5 keV) source (preferred method for

In this measurement, the ratios of the relative intensities of fluoresced X-rays from a standard glass with composition as in Table I are used to quantify the attenuation in the cryostat window and the detector dead layer. The standard glass shall be excited by 55Fe as illustrated in Figure 15, page 5%. The resulting X-ray spectrum obtained with the arrangement of Figure 5, page 45( is used to .characterize the window attenuation. Since the relative intensities of the fluorescent X-ray lines incident on the detector window are affected by absorption in the glass target, this measurement is sensitive to the source-glass-detector geometry. The geometric arrangement shown in Figure 15 has been selected to minimize the effect of small variations in the dimensions, while still maintaining a reasonable counting rate. With the geometry shown in Figure 15 and a 1.9 - 10g Bq (50 mCi) 551;e source, the data shown in Figure 16, page 51, (with 400 000 counts in the Mn & peak) can be obtained in about 5 h. Any portion of the structure, except the glass target, which could emit interfering secondary X-rays shall be shielded from the detector with plastic. Plastics containing catalysts or fillers which emit interfering X-rays shall be avoided. The typical spectrum shown in Figure detector in a cryostat with `an 8 u.m thick effect of interposing an additional 124 pm .the intensities of the low-energy lines backscattered Mn K, line. The composition of the standard 16a, page 54, was obtained Be window. Figure 16b, page thick Be absorber. The indices relative to the intensity of using a Si (Li) 54, shows the of interest are the coherently

glass is as in Table I.
TABLE I

Composition of standard glass
(Percentage of weight)

36

IS12737tl999 EEoPub759(1999)
Fluorescence of the standard shown in Table II. glass with a "Fe TABLE II Characteristic X-ray lines from the standard glass fluoresced by sJFe source Mn, K, 5.90 kcV (coherent backscatter) L,I4.47,tpla - 4.45,Lp.1 -.4.83; Lgz- 5.16;L, - 5.53 K, 3.69,Kg - 4.01, L - 0.34
1.74, Kg - 1.83 1.25, Kg - 1.30 L, 1.01, Lb - 1.03 K, 0.523 K, K,

source

produces

the prominent

lines

Ba, Ca, Si, Mg, Zn,

0,
B,

K, 0.185keV

Figure 16a, page 54, clearly shows Mn, Ca, Si and Mg lines, while the Zn-L line is barely detectable above the background. The window index (WJ at a given energy (E) is defined by the relationship:
AE WE = Annn

(16)

where A, is the total number of counts in the peak at energy E, and AM" is the intensity of the backscattered Mn & line. The procedure for determining A from a spectrum such as Figure 16. page 54, is described at the end of this sub-clause. Frequently, a single value for W, will adequately characterize the drop in efficiency at low energies. However, additional useful information about the origin of the window attenuations can sometimes be obtained by comparing values of W, at several energies. When an instrument is characterized by a single W, it should correspond to the lowest data of reliable statistical accuracy. Lines with energy line which will provide line-to-background ratios of less than 3 should normally not be used. If the propagation of statistical errors in the determination of W, exceeds f 3 % at the 90% confidence level, then the probable error (90% confidence limit) in the value of W, shall also be specified. Typical values of W, for the example shown in Figure 16, are illustrated in Figure 17, page 15 , which is included here only- for the purpose of illustrating the sensitivity of this technique. The procedures described in this sub-clause are also useful for "windowless" detectors where the vacuum-tight barrier between the detector and. source of X-rays is removed during operation. In this case, care must be exercised to ensure that the detector and/or preamplifier are not damaged by poor quality of the vacuum in the vicinity of the X-ray fluorescent source. The method for peak area and spectral background subtraction has been chosen for its simplicity and ease of computation, although in certain circumstances, such as in the presence of seriously distorted spectral peaks, the method could yield misleading results. For the analyses described below, a spectral peak shall be at least six channels wide at half-maximum and the total number of counts within the FWHM shall be at least 10 000. If computer fitting of the data is used, the 10 000 counts minimum need not apply, provided the result as calculated by computer is accurate to within + 3 % (90% confidence level).

IS 12737 : 1988 IEC Pub 759 ( 1983) Pulse-height spectral data should be plotted as the log of the number of counts N, in the channel x versus channel number X. On this plot, background under the X-ray peaks is determined by a linear lit to the average backgrounds on the upper and lower energy sides of the peaks of interest (see line B,B, of Figure 18, page 56) The counts within the peaks are determined as those above this background line up to clearly defined minima -between adjoining peaks. Background and peak defmitions are shown in Figure 18. Peaks not clearly defined shall not be used; peak-to-valley ratio shall be not less than 10.

12.2

Window

attenuation

measurement

with radioactive

sources

Some detectors not intended for operation below 6 keV may have a dead layer or window which is too thick to allow use of the techniques of Sub-clause 12.1. In this case, a similar procedure which employs a radioactive source with two or more lines whose relative intensities are well known can be used to specify W,. The intensity of the higher energy line is the denominator in equation 16. .The detector shall be thick enough to totally absorb the higher energy X-ray. ~For this measurement, the glass target and the s5Fe source are replaced by the appropriate radioactive source located on the working axis of the detector at the specified working distance. For example, if lo9Cd is used, the detector sensitive region shall be thick enough to totally absorb the 88 keV X-rays and the window thickness index is given by the ratio of A,, over A,,. For cases where the source has more than two characteristic lines care shall be taken to clearly specify which two lines are used to determine W,. Care shall be taken also to ensure that self-absorption in the source and its housing is negligible. Typical sources which are useful for this measurement
TABLE III

dare listed in Table III.

Radioactive

sources for characterizing
Radioactive
SOWCe

window
Probability per decay

thickness

Energy
(kW

wo

6.4 14.4 122.0 136.0 22.1 88.0 30.9 35.0 53.2 81.0 161.0' 21.2 27.5 31.0** 35.5

0.494 0.0954 0.866 0.1061

* f f !c

0.015 0.0013 0.019 0.0018 0.028 0.0006 0.02 0.006 0.0004 0.005 0.0004 0.014 0.025 0.010 0.0022

`09Cd

0.842 f ~0.0373 * 0.969 0.226 0.0217 0.335 0.0062 0.398 0.142 0.258 0.0667 f f f f f f rt f f

"JBa

q

* Avoid the use of the 161 keV line of *"Ba as a reference peak because of interference from sum peaks. ** Average of F+, lines.

38

IS 12737t 1988 IEC Pub 759 ( 1983 )

12.3

High energy efficiency measurements The drop in efficiency at high energies is a function of detector sensitive depth and diameter, the Z of the semiconductor, and the details of the collimation. The easiest way to measure most of these parameters is by direct physical measurement before the system is assembled. In addition, the sensitive depth of the detector element can usually be estimated by the capacitance (voltage characteristics of the diode before it is assembled with the preamp). Some verification of these parameters may be obtained by measuring the absolute efficiency at one qr more appropriate energies. Additional information may sometimes also be obtained by measuring the efficiency as a function of source to detector spacing. In these types of measurement, care should be taken to avoid the presence of extraneous scattering material that might scatter photons into the detector. In attempting to interpret these types of measurements, it is essential to know the relevant dimensions, positioning, and Z of the collimators since the collimators may not be totally effective at high energies. If the detector element is not totally depleted, then its efficiency will be a function of detector bias voltage for X-ray energies which are not totally absorbed by the sensitive region. Some available standard are listed in Table IV. sources which are useful for absolute efficiency measurements

39

I8 12737 I 1999 IEC Pmb 759( 1993)
TABLE

IV

Standard sources for efficiency measurements
SOttrCe

Half-life 2.1 yrs

Energy &eV) 5.89 5.90 6.49 21.2 21.5 31.0 35.3 22.1 24.9 88.0 121.8 244.1 344.3 411.1 444.0 719.0 964.0 1086.0 I 112.0 1 408.0 1 173.2 1 332.5 30.9 35.0 53.2 81.0 276.4 302.9 356.0 383.9

Probability per decay 0.082 0.163 0.033 0.398 0.742 0.258 0.0667 0.842 0.0604 0.0373 0.2838 0.0751 0.2658 0.02233 0.03179 0.1296 0.1452 0.1016 0.1356 0.2085 f f f f f f f f f f f f f f f f f f f f 0.007 0.012 0.003 0.014 0.025 0.010 0.0022 0.028 0.0023 0.0006 0.0023 0.0007 0.0019 0.000 13 0.00045 0.0007 0.0006 0.0005 0.0006 0.0009 0.000 20 0.000 005 0.020 0.006 0.0004 0.005 0.0013 0.0020 0.007 0.0010

`?Fe Mn&,K&)

60.1 days

464 days

13.3 yrs

*co

5.27 yrs

0.999 00 * 0.999 824 f 0.969 0.226 0.0217 0.335 0.0709 0.1840 0.621 0.0891 f f f f f f f f

10.74 yrs

40

IS 12737t ma IEG Pab 733r 1983)

t
detector

7-G 1
Rl
Preamplifier .

X-ray

. I
137/83

FIG. la. -

A.C.-coupled

configuration.

138/X3

FIG. lb. -

D.C.-coupled

configuration.

FIG. 1. -

Schematic of semiconductor

detector and preamplifier.

41

X812737:1988 IEChb759(1983)

Atomic

number

3.0

2.0

d(A)

12.4

E (keV)

. .
0.2

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

0.1

K, photon energy

(keV)

FIG. 2.-

Spectral line sephation

as a function

of energy and atomic number.

42

IS 12737L 1988 IEC Pub 759 ( 1983)

1OOeV _+L_ / --_/____ 76 eV ---

electronic

noise

--_

Photon energy

&eV)

FE. 3. -X-ray

energy line width as a function noise and Fano factor.

of energy

for several

values

of electronic

43

IS 12737 t 1999 EC Pub 759( 19951

Multichannel

pulse-height

analyzer

Precision pulse generator

v,

!

.

l

L ---II)---------

Main amplifier

Radiation source

Detector with bias

,

FIG. 5. -

Measurement of pulse-height

distribution.

45

1812737:1999 IECPub 759(1983)

Precision voltage SuPPlY 1, d 1 0 7 A Mercury relay

'

B-t

Direct output

$k *41

`w$

Attenuated

output

143/83

FIG. 6a. Precision

pulse generator.

"F
0,9

time~scale

change

v,
(single exponential decay)

tiY 2

>"

O,l

v;
Time FIG.6b. Waveform.
/44/83

FIG. 6. -

Precision pulse generator

and waveform.

46

IS12737r1999 IECPub759(1983)

Channel number

F1c.7. -

Typical noise measurement

pulse-height

spectruxk

en0

w
Cf Rf

I

True r. m. s. voltmeter

Amplifier

Preamplifier

I

.

-

Precision pulse generator

Oscilloscope output Z, ization

ZO
c Attenuated output

1
146/83

FIG. 8.- Noise measurement

by oscilloscope

and true root-mean-square

voltmeter.

47

IS 12737 t 1988 IEC Pub 759 ( 1983 )

b X-ray energy
EF 147/83

FIG. 9. -

Measurement and display of linearity.

48

.
6SFe source D. C. coupled linear bate (optional) a i,

v

l

MCA

Spectroscopy Detector bias supply I .

shaping amplifier

I

I

Fast filter amplifier

I

Fast discriminator b

Counter + 2.4,8, l&32,64 (optional) *

Une shot gate delay and shape generator (optional)

-I
FIG. 10. Experimental set-up usmg multichannel resulting from counting-rate effects. analyzer to measure spectral

Counting-rate meter or counter-timer

distortion

IS 12737 : 1988 IEC Pob 759 ( 1983 )

1.0 -

I

1
Lo

0.1

'

u.u

I

0,Ol

0.1

r,

td

FIG. 11. -

Output rate r, vxsus

input rate 4 for a paralyzable

system with a dead-time

td.

50

r
55Fe source b l-

-mm----k
l
Detector

System under test

1
,I * I Fast singlechannel analyzer Scaler \ 4

I

--

---w-m

-I

Charge sensitive preamplifier

Timer

FIG. 12. -

Experimental

arrangement

using single-channel

analyzers to measure counting losses.

IS12737_r 1988
IEC Pub 759( 1983)

10

102

103 Fast amplifier count-rate

1P 151/1

FIG.13..

Analyzed count-rate fast amplifier.

in Mn K, and K, peaks as a function

of the count-rate

from a

FIG. 14. -

Example of gain recovery after overloading

pulse.

52

1812737 1 lm8
EaPnb759(1~)

Diameter Thiciyers

m mm 3 mm

30mm

1537273

FIG.ISa . -

Apparatus for window thickness measurements.

High temperature epoxy seals

,
100 r:m beryllium window

FIG. ISb. -

Annular "Fe X-ray source

Frc. 15. -

Fluorescent

X-ray source assembly for window thickness measurements.

53

-IS 12737: 1988 IEC Pub 739 ( 1983 )

Mn Ka 5,9 keV Si Ku 1.74 keV

Ce Km 3.69 keV

I

__ ._

I
a

r\

I

A p!_

0 Energy (keV)
155/a-3

FIG. 16a. -

Spectrum

obtained

with an 8 pm beryllium

window.

Mn Ka 5,9 keV Ca K, -3.69 keV

I

.

. .

*

; . .*. .-9-w ".. .
l

l

0

2.0

I

I
3,o

I
4.0

I
5,o

I
6.0 Energie Energy (keV)
156/83

7,o

FIG. 16b. -

Spectrum

obtained

with a 132 Km beryllium

window.

FIG. 16. -Typical

Si detector

spectra for 55Fe-excited standard

glass.

IS 12757 t 1989 IlZCPnb759( 1995)

%a K, (3.69 keV)
Mn K,

Si K, (1.74 keV) Mn K,

\

50

100 Window-thickness

150 bm)

200

250

FIG. 17. -

Typical behaviour several energies.

of the window index,

WE,

as a function

of window thickness

at

55

IS 12737 t 1988 lEC Pub 759 ( 1983)

. . . .
l l

..

. . . . . .

.. .

. . . .
l

.**
.

-

.' . _
l

. .*

.

.

.

.

. ..
I

+. -.
l

.*
.
l *'

,. .
..

.

.

I
I

. ..
w

. .
la l*

*

.

l

m__ . .

._ -

l *
.

82

10'

-

l

Channel number x

FIG. 18. -

Background

subtraction

and pea.k area measurements.

Bnrean

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory harmonious

institution

established matters

under

the Bureau

of

Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote

development

of the activities

of standardization, in the country.

marking

and quality

certification

of

goods and attending
Copyright BIS has the copyright

to connected

of all its publications. the standard, relating

No part of these publications of BIS. of necessary details, such

may be reproduced and sizes, type

in or BIS.

any form without grade designations.
Revision

the prior permission Enquiries

in writing to copyright

This does not preclude as symbols 1 to the Director

the free use, in

the course of implementing

be addresse

(Publications),

of Indian

Standards

lndian

Standards

are issued from possession of the latest amendments to BIS giving Dot ; No. the following

are reviewed'periodically Users time to time. reference :

and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent

or edition.

LTDC

26 ( 1249 )

Amendments

Issued

Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Nlanak Bhavan, NEW DELHI 9 Bahadur 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

331 01 31 331 13 75 Maniktola 36 24 99 160036 2 1843 I 3 16 41
r41 24 42 ( 41 25 19 141 29 16

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Koad, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-~C, CHANDIGARH

Northern

Southern Western

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY

IV Cross Road, Marol,

MADRAS Andheri

600113

E9 MIDC, 400093

( East ) 6 32 92 95

Branches

: AHMADABAD. GUWAHATI. TRIVANDRUM.

BANGALORE. HYDERABAD.

BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. JAlPUR. KANPUR. PATNA.
Printed at Printograph, Delhi,
Indz

