INATA HATAR IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


SIE aaa AfA STT 
HUT Stren Tair HT TOST 
nT 1 amara gia Ar Romy 


(TEAT FRAT ) 


Determination of Particle Size 
Distribution by Gravitational 
Liquid Sedimentation Methods 
Part 1 General Principles and Guidelines 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 19.120 


© BIS 2023 


ARA AAA ii 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM a. 9 TEL ME HHL AMT, Ay fare - 110002 
ee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 


Gravitational sedimentation particle size analysis methods are based on the settling velocity, under a gravitational 
field of particles in a liquid. This method is widely used for determining size distribution of many particulate 
materials. Typically, the gravitational methods apply to samples in the 0.5 um to 100 um size range and where 
the sedimentation condition for a Reynolds number < 0.25 is satisfied. 


The choice of the most suitable method for determination of size distribution depends upon factors like: 


a) the purpose for which the analysis is required, 

b) the size range and density of particles, 

c) the important properties of powder, 

d) the amount available for test, and 

e) the method by which the gross sample has been collected. 


Due to the inherent characteristics of the different materials and the factor stated above, it is not possible to apply 
a single method of size analysis. This standard recommends procedures that may be applied in the majority of 
cases. The purpose of this standard is to provide uniformity in procedure for any gravitational method selected to 
facilitate comparisons of size analysis data. 


This standard was first published in 1969 with the title ‘Liquid sedimentation methods for determination of 
particle size of powders’. In this revision, to incorporate the latest advancement in gravitational liquid 
sedimentation methods for determining size distribution of particulate materials, the gravitational liquid 
sedimentation method has been grouped into four parts. This standard (Part 1) covers general principles and 
guidelines. The other parts in the series are: 


Part 2 Fixed pipette method 
Part 3 X-ray gravitational technique 
Part 4 Balance method 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this 
country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: 


ISO 13317 (Part 1) Determination of particle size distribution by gravitational liquid sedimentation methods: 
Part 1 General principles and guidelines 


ISO 13317 (Part 2) Determination of particle size distribution by gravitational liquid sedimentation methods: 
Part 2 Fixed pipette method 


ISO 13317 (Part 3) Determination of particle size distribution by gravitational liquid sedimentation methods: 
Part 3 X-ray gravitational technique 


ISO 13317 (Part 4) Determination of particle size distribution by gravitational liquid sedimentation methods: 
Part 4 Balance method 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


DETERMINATION OF PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION BY 
GRAVITATIONAL LIQUID SEDIMENTATION METHODS 
PART 1 GENERAL PRINCIPLE AND GUIDELINES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers general principles and 
guidelines for determining the particle size 
distributions of particulate materials, typically in 
the size range of 0.5 um to 100 um, by gravitational 
sedimentation in a liquid. 


1.2 The methods of determining the particle size 
distribution described in this standard are 
applicable to slurries or to particulate materials 
which can be dispersed in liquids. A positive 
density difference between the discrete and 
continuous phases is necessary, although 
gravitational photo sedimentation can be used for 
emulsions where the droplets are less dense than the 
liquid in which they are dispersed. Particles should 
not undergo any physical or chemical change in the 
suspending liquid. The usual precautions need to be 
taken with hazardous material, and explosion proof 
analysers are required when examining volatile 
liquids with a low flash point. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of the standard: 


IS No. Title 
IS 33 : 1992 Inorganic pigments and 
extenders for paints — Methods 
of sampling and test (third 
revision) 


IS 4124: 1981 Glossary of terms relating to 


powders (first revision) 


IS 4730 : 1994 
density of liquids (first revision) 


IS 4879 : 1994 Method of sub-division of gross 
sample of powder used for 


determination of particle size 


Method for determination of 


IS No. Title 
IS 5282 Determination of particle size 
distribution by gravitational 
liquid sedimetation methods: 


(Part 2) : 2023 Fixed pipette method (first 


revision) 


(Part 3) : 2023 X-ray gravitational technique 


(first revision) 
(Part 4) : 2023 
IS 8883 


Balance method (first revision) 


Methods of sampling: 


(Part 1) : 2005 Chemical and chemical 


product (first revision) 


(Part 2) General requirements and 
precautions Sampling 
equipment, 

(Sec 1): 1978 For solids 
(Sec 2) : 1978 For liquids 
(Sec 3): 1978 For gases 
IS 18100 : 2022 Sample preparation S 
Dispersing procedures for 


powders in liquids 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 4124 and the following shall apply: 


3.1.1 Analysis Sample — The portion of the 
laboratory sample which is used in the size analysis 
apparatus. 


3.1.2 Closed Pores — Cavities that are closed off by 
surrounding solid and are inaccessible to the 
external surface. 


3.1.3 Effective Particle Density — Particle mass 
divided by the volume of liquid it displaces. 


3.1.4 Laboratory Sample — The portion of the gross 
sample which is delivered to the laboratory for the 
determination of particle size distribution. 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


3.1.5 Open Pores — Cavities that are connected to 
the external surface of the particle either directly or 
via one another. 


3.1.6 Oversize — Portion of the charge which has 
not passed through the apertures of a stated sieve. 


3.1.7 Stokes Diameter — Equivalent spherical 
diameter of the particle that has the same density 
and terminal settling velocity as the real particle in 
the same liquid under creeping flow conditions. 


3.1.8 Terminal Settling Velocity — Velocity of a 
particle through a still liquid at which the force due 
to gravity on the particle is balanced by the drag 
exerted by the liquid. 


3.1.9 True Particle Density — Particle mass 
divided by the volume it would occupy, excluding 
all pores, closed or open, and surface fissures. 


NOTE — True particle density is sometimes referred to as 
the absolute particle density. 


3.1.10 Undersize — Portion of the charge which 
has passed through the apertures of a stated sieve. 


4 PRINCIPLES 
4.1 General 


Gravitational sedimentation methods are based on 
the settling velocity, under a gravitational field, of 
particles in a liquid. The relationship between 
settling velocity and particle size reduces to the 
Stokes Equation (1) at low Reynolds numbers. The 
Reynolds number should not exceed 0.25 if the 
inaccuracy in determining the value of Stokes 
diameter is not to exceed 3 percent. 


Stokesian sedimentation analyses depend on the 
applicability of Stokes law. This law defines the 
relationship between particle size and_ the 
change in height (within the suspending fluid) 
of the particle as a function of the time that the 
particle has fallen after reaching its terminal 
velocity. 


(psp gxst2t 
Aan = nr L 


Note that hran is defined so that it increases as the 


particle falls to lower positions in the sedimentation 
vessel. This equation may be expressed such that the 
Stokesian diameter of the particle may be inferred 
from the distance it has fallen in a given time, r. 


187 hfall (2) 


xX = 
SE (Ps-pı)gt 


where 
Xs, = Stokes diameter in m or um 
Ps = Effective particle density in kg.m or 


g.cm? 
pı = Liquid density in kg.m or g.cm? 
g = Acceleration due to gravity in m.s? 
t = Sedimentation time in s 


Sedimentation techniques may be classified 


as either incremental or cumulative. 
Incremental methods are used to determine 
the solids concentration (or suspension 


density) of a thin layer at a known height and 
time. Cumulative methods are used to determine 
the rate at which solids settle from the suspension. 
In both methods, the powder may be introduced 
either as a thin layer on top of a column of 
liquid (the line-start technique) or uniformly 
dispersed at the start of the analysis (the 
homogeneous technique). The cumulative 
method is not part of this standard. The 
incremental homogeneous technique is more often 
used in gravitational sedimentation (see Fig. 1) 
and is described in this standard. The line-start 
technique is more applicable to centrifugal 
sedimentation. 


4.2 Calculation of Particle Size 


Stokes diameters are calculated according to 
Equation (2). 


4.3 Calculation of Cumulative Mass Percentage 


The cumulative mass percentage according to the 
particle concentration gradient in the gravitational 
pipette method and in the gravitational X-ray 
method shall be determined according to 
IS 5282 (Part 2) and IS 5282 (Part 3), respectively. 


4.4 Effect of Measurement Zone Height on 
Resolution 


Effect of measurement zone height on resolution is 
given in Annex A. 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


0000000 
000000000 
000000000000 


Key 


t Time 
1 Settling height 
2 Measurement zone 


OS 
26 
Oo 
Oo 
OOo 


a 


FIG. 1 HOMOGENEOUS, INCREMENTAL, GRAVITATIONAL SEDIMENTATION 


5 PARTICLE SIZE, SHAPE AND POROSITY 
LIMITATIONS 


5.1 Upper Size Limit 
Stokes equation predicts that the terminal settling 


velocity that a particle will reach in a gravitational 
field is: 


G xst? 
P ... (3) 
where 
18n 
K = — ga 
1 (@s-p1) 9 g 


is expressed to solve the Stokesian diameter of the 
particle: 


Xst = YKıv ... (5) 


Since the terminal settling velocity is constant and 
attained quickly, hay = V. tray, the particle diameter 
can be estimated from the distance the particle falls 
during a given time: 


—  [Kıhraı 
Yer = I ... (6) 
tfall 


Upper size limit is defined by the largest particle 
having the terminal settling velocity, which satisfies 
the condition Re < 0.25. The Reynolds number is the 
ratio of inertial to viscous forces on the settling 
particle and is defined by the following equation: 


Re = = ss (7) 


Stokes equation is valid only under conditions of 
creeping (laminar) flow, for which the Reynolds 


number is less than 0.1 (see Annex B). Its predictions 
are increasingly inaccurate at higher Reynolds 
numbers. The inaccuracy in determining Yser from v is 
3 percent at a Reynolds number of 0.25 beyond this, 
Stokes law does not provide a good estimate of particle 
size based on sedimentation velocity. Substituting 
0.25 for Re in Equation (7), solving for v, and 
substituting in Equation (5) yields the recommended 
upper size limit of validity for the gravitational 
sedimentation method as: 


3 [0.25 Ku N 
Xstu = A e (8) 
Ñ Pl 


v = Terminal settling velocity in m.s or um.s”! 
K, = Grouped parameter in m.s 
Re = Reynolds number 
Xstu = Upper Stokes diameter in m or um 


where 


Example: 

A gravitational sedimentation measurement is 

carried out at 293.15 K using solid quartz 
spheres (9, = 2 650 kgm”?*) in 1-propanol 
(pı = 840 kg.m”? and n = 2.256 mPa.s). From 
Equation (4), K, = 2.24 x 1076 m.s, and from 
Equation (8), the maximum particle size for 
which Stokes law may be used (with an error of 
less than 3 percent) is Xstu = 116 um, for which 
v = 6.03 mm.s”?,. 


5.2 Lower Size Limit 


The lower size limit to which gravitational 
sedimentation methods can be applied is controlled 
by temperature variation, causing circulatory currents 
in the suspension, by flocculation of particles during 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


the progress of sedimentation and by diffusion or 
Brownian motion of the very small particles. 


Note that charged particles in weak electrolytes have 
associated with them an electrical double layer. 
When these particles settle, the double layer is 
distorted with the result that an electrical field is set 
up which opposes motion. These electro-viscous 
effects can be reduced by the use of non-ionic liquids, 
where possible. Information on the accuracy of Stokes 
law as a function of Reynolds number is given in 
Annex B. 


5.2.1 Thermal Diffusion (Brownian Motion) 


The random collisions of the molecules making up the 
liquid with a particle cause differences in the pressure 
on the particle from one part of the surface to another 
such that the particle is displaced (Brownian motion 
(see Annex C)). The equation which represents the 
statistical average change in position for a particle of 
diameter X along any one direction of motion in the 
absence of other forces (such as gravity) is: 


— [Ke trail 
Ahan > 72 ... (9) 
Kst 


where 


2 > 


2kT 
rr ... (10) 
Note that this is the statistical average of the changes 
in position in one direction for a large number of 
particles; some of the particles will travel farther 
from the starting point than this and some will travel 
a shorter distance than the average. If both gravity 
and thermal diffusion are considered, then a spherical 
particle that travels a distance larr downward in 
time, tfa, could be: 


a) A particle whose vertical thermal motion 
averaged out to zero and whose diameter is 
correctly determined from equation (6); 

b) A particle whose vertical thermal motion 
increased the vertical distance travelled 
and whose diameter is smaller than the 
value computed from Equation (6); and 

c) A particle whose vertical thermal motion 
decreased the vertical distance travelled and 
whose diameter is larger than the value 
computed from Equation (6). 


The ratio of distances travelled due to thermal 
motion and sedimentation is, from Equations (6) and 


(9): 


1/2 
faire = Ahaiff _ K | K2 | / (11) 
i Aral T vara uN 


The lower size limit Stokesian sedimentation analysis 
is generally taken as the size for which lar = 0.1. 
Using this value and solving Equation (11) for x 


gives: 
5 [100 K?Kz 
Xst = | . (12) 
tfall 


Ahaifr = Statistical average positional change in 
one direction for large number of 
particles due to thermal diffusion in m 


where 


or ym 

K, = Grouped parameter in m'as" 

k = Boltzmann constant in J.K! 

T = Absolute temperature K (Kelvin) 

fair = Fractional uncertainty of particle 
position due to thermal diffusion in 
dimensionless 

Xstu = Lower Stokes diameter in m or um 

Example: 


Using the same materials and temperature as 
the example given in 5.1, gravitational 
sedimentation occurs over a period of 
tfa 1 800 s (30 min). From Equation (10) 
K, = 3.81 x 10m? st and from 
Equation (12), the smallest particle size for 
which the thermal broadening is less than 
10 percent of the sedimentation distance is 
Yet = 0.64 um. 


5.3 Particle Shape 


At a low Reynolds number, the orientation of non- 
spherical particles is random, so a single particle will 
have a low range of settling velocities. As the 
Reynolds number increases, particles tend to align to 
give maximum drag and thus will settle at the slowest 
of the range of velocities possible with random 
orientation, so a particular particle may have a low or 
high velocity depending on its orientation. 


5.4 Particle Porosity 


It is recommended that the effective particle density 
be determined where possible, that is, the particle 
density be determined in the suspending liquid, plus 
dispersant that will be used in the sizing 
measurement. This will compensate for the presence 
of any closed porosity and also for open porosity to 
the extent that the chosen liquid penetrates the open 
porosity. For particles that are non-porous and of 
known composition, a density value may be taken 
from a handbook or determined experimentally. 
Information on the effect of open pores on the 
terminal velocity of spherical particles is given in 
Annex D. 


6 TEST CONDITIONS 
6.1 Temperature 


The analysis temperature affects the liquid density 
and viscosity and, less significantly, the solid density 
values in the Stokes equation. Consequently, it is 
also important that the sample temperature be 
maintained within narrow limits for the duration of 
the analysis. It is recommended that the 
temperature of the sedimentation vessel be kept 
constant to within + 1 K since the viscosity of 
some liquids can change significantly with 
temperature. If the temperature varies more than 
+ 1 K, then it is recommended that the temperature 
be noted at the beginning and at the end of the 
analysis and that the average value is used for 
viscosity calculation. To minimize convection 
currents, it is recommended that the rate of change of 
temperature be maintained at less than + 0.05 K.m". 


The temperature of the suspension may be controlled 
or the agitated suspension may be left standing until 
temperature equilibrium is attained. Temperature 
control requirements increase with increasing 
fineness of the powder. The lower size limit is due, 
in part, to the longer sedimentation times required for 
the particles and the requirement to maintain 
stable conditions in the sedimenting 
suspension. The sedimentation vessel should 
provide a covered system to minimize evaporation 
of the upper layer of the sedimentation liquid, 
which would give rise to convection currents. 


6.2 Concentration of Suspension 


Stokes equation applies to the sedimentation of a 
single spherical particle settling relatively slowly in a 
liquid of infinite extent. These requirements are 
never fulfilled in a sedimentation analysis where 
particles are separated from each other and the vessel 
walls by finite distances. This provides for a mutual 
effect of the particles on each other and also 
neighbouring surfaces. In order to minimize these 
effects, low concentrations are recommended, for 
example. 0.2 percent volume concentration. If the 
recommended maximum concentration has to be 
exceeded, then analyses should be carried out 
at two or more concentrations in order to 
determine if the concentration effects are 
negligible. Wall-to-wall distances should be at 
least 5 mm to reduce wall effects to an acceptable 
level. 


6.3 Sedimentation Vessel 


The vessel shall be vertical to avoid convection and 
be free from vibration to avoid disturbances on 
particle settling. Unstable conditions have been 
attributed to the walls of the sedimentation vessel, or 
elements (for example, stirrer) within the walls, 
being slightly out of vertical. Even for vertical 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


elements, there is an inherent instability because the 
return flow of liquid displaced by the sedimenting 
particles tends to be along vertically inclined 
surfaces. The vessel shall be vertical, otherwise 
convection currents are set up, flowing up the 
walls that are sheltered from sedimenting 
particles. These currents produce errors in the 
estimated size distribution. 


6.4 Transient Flow 


The time required for a particle to reach its steady 
(terminal) velocity is negligible, but excessively 
short sedimentation times should be avoided. 
Prior to particles attaining their terminal velocity, 
there are other local velocity fluctuations due to 
the sudden cessation of the initial agitation. 
These transient eddies and flows shall be allowed to 
subside. 


7 SAMPLING 


Controlled sampling is a necessary condition for 
obtaining analysis sample results for sedimentation 
tests. The sample shall be taken according to 
IS 8883. The sample division shall be according to 
the guidelines given in IS 4879. 


8 PREPARATION FOR A SEDIMENTATION 
ANALYSIS 


8.1 Density of Liquid and Particles 


The density of the liquid at the measuring 
temperature shall be determined in accordance with 
IS 4730 and the density of the particles in 
accordance with IS 33. 


8.2 Removal of Oversize Particles 


As indicated in 5.1, for a given liquid the largest 
particle of the analysis sample should not exceed a 
certain value. The size distribution of the oversize 
fraction can be found by repeating the analysis using 
a more viscous liquid such that the coarsest particle 
present in the sample is less than that given by the 
limiting Reynolds number. 


Oversize particles can be removed, by wet or dry 
sieving. Wet sieving should be carried out with the 
sedimentation liquid. Record the percentage residue 
on the sieve or sieves. The data from the sieve 
analysis, carried out on a separate portion of the 
laboratory sample, should be combined with the 
sedimentation data. 


8.3 Selection of Suspending Liquid 


Many powders may not always form a 
good dispersion in the suspending liquid alone. A 
suitable dispersing agent may be necessary to 
inhibit the formation of flocs or 
agglomerates during sedimentation. This agent 
may be incorporated in the suspending liquid or 
added directly to the powder. The suspending liquid 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


shall have negligible reactivity with the sample 
and shall satisfy the following criteria: 


a) The liquid shall have a sufficiently different 
density from that of the test powder to permit 
use of the method; 

b) The liquid shall have a viscosity to 
accomplish the analysis within an acceptable 
analysis time. It should not be too long for 
the finer particles and not too short for the 
coarsest particles; 

c) The liquid shall not swell or shrink the 
particles. If such an effect occurs, it should 
be determined that the effect does not exceed 
5 percent diameter; and 

d) The liquid shall not cause the sample to go 
into solution. If such an effect occurs, it shall 
not exceed 5 g powder per 1 kg of liquid. 


8.4 Dispersion of Sample 


If the particles do not readily wet in the liquid or if 
they form flocs under quiescent conditions, then a 
dispersing agent should be added to the system as per 
IS 18100 ‘Sample preparation — Dispersing 
procedures for powders in liquid’. 


9 TESTS IN DUPLICATE AND VALIDATION 
9.1 Tests in Duplicate 


Perform tests in duplicate on analysis samples taken 
from the same laboratory sample. The results for 
duplicate analyses should normally differ less than 
2 percent for the proportions of mass at the same 
stokes diameter. This figure would be expected to 
hold for the certified reference materials. A wider 
tolerance may be required for other sample types 
with narrower distributions. 


9.2 Validation 


The checking at regular intervals of both operator 
procedure and instrument performance is essential to 
validate the test results. Primary validation can be 
made with any suitable certified reference material. 
The total measurement procedure is examined when 
the reference material is analysed, including the 
sampling, the sample dispersion, the measurement 
and the subsequent calculation. The validation 
procedure will meet the standard if the mean value of 
the x19, the Xs 9 and Yan obtained from three 
independent measurements lies within the certified 
range of values of the reference material. It is 
recommended to use certified reference materials for 
validation. A record of all validation activities shall 
be maintained. 


10 REPORTING OF RESULTS 


The data shall be presented in graphical or graphical 
and tabular form. Results will typically be presented 
as Stokes diameter versus cumulative distribution by 
mass reported to the nearest 0.1 percent. In the case of 
a plot, the diameters will be placed on the abscissa and 
the cumulative mass percentage on the ordinate. The 
report shall state the following: 


a) Instrument type used; 

b) Test sample identification; 

c) The powder, its density and mass, where 
applicable; 

d) The suspending liquid, its temperature, 
density, viscosity and volume, where 
applicable; 

e) The dispersing agent and its concentration; 

f) The method of dispersion of the suspension, 
including the time of dispersion; 

g) The method of treatment of the test sample 
(drying, de-agglomeration), if any; and 

h) Any other information which could have an 
influence on the results. 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.4) 


THE EFFECT OF MEASUREMENT ZONE HEIGHT 


The detector in a sedimentation analyser measures the 
particle concentration in a thin horizontal slice of a 
column of sedimenting particles. This concentration 
does not distinguish between the large particles and the 
smaller ones, so the thicker the measurement window 
the lower the resolution. The zone-height-limited 
resolution (P,one) can be defined as the ratio of the 
diameters for particles just exiting the bottom of the 
measurement zone (Xst,) to the difference between 


that diameter and that for particles just entering the 
top (Xsth-an) of the measurement zone. 


Prone = TH — ... (13) 


XSth — XSt.h-Ah 


Substituting for xs; from Equation (6) and noting that the 
time at which the concentration measurement is made is the 
same at the top and bottom of the slice, gives: 


p = vh 
zone — Vh- [h-Ahzone 


The resolution ratio acceptable for Stokesian analysis is 
generally taken as 14. Equation (14) can be rearranged to 
determine the distance to the bottom of the measurement 
zone as a function of the measurement slice thickness and 
the resolution: 


ey (EAS 


hzoneP? 


Rzone,P = ET KAE (15) 
The minimum distance for acceptable resolution (Pin = 
14) in the gravitational sedimentation method is the 
hane, Pmin = 7.26 Ahzone- This Equation is valid whether 
the method uses a fixed position for the measurement zone 
or scans the zone upward at an ever-decreasing rate (a 
‘hyperbolic scan”) so that the position of the detector zone 
varies with time as: 


h os Kscan 
zone — t 


... (16) 


The time at which the detector passes hzone.p,,;, 18 the limit 
of scan time for which resolution is acceptable, so: 


Kscan 
7.26 Ahzone 


t = Kscan 
limit — 
Kzone.Pmin 


(17) 


Substituting this as tra in Equation (12) yields the lower 
limit of particle size for which gravitational measurement is 
acceptable for instruments using the hyperbolic scan 


method: 
_ 8/726 K2K2Ahzone 
Xst.L.Pmin 7 Recan 
(18) 
where 


Prone = Zone-height-limited resolution 
Xstn = Particle diameter exiting 
measurement zone in m or pm 
h = It is the height (to the bottom of 
the measurement zone) 
Ah = It is the thickness of the measurement 
zone 
Ahzone = Thickness of measurement zone in 
m or ym 
P = Resolution ratio 
Kscan = Hyperbolic scan constant in m.s 
P min = Minimum acceptable resolution 
K zone. pmin Minimum settling distance for acceptable 
resolution, Pmin in m or um 


Example: 


A gravitational sedimentation measurement is 
carried out at 293.15 K using solid quartz spheres 
(ps = 2 650 kg. m?) in 1-propanol 
(pı = 804 kg. m”? and y = 2.256 mPa. s). 
Measurement zone of height Ahzone = 100 um is 
scanned upward at an ever-decreasing rate with a 
hyperbolic scan constant Kscan = 2 m. s. From 
Equations (15) and (17), the height at which the 
resolution drops below 14 is hzone.Pmin = 726 um 
and the time the detector reaches this point is 
tiimit = 2755 s (49.3 min). From Equation (18), 
the minimum particle size for which resolution and 
thermal broadening are acceptable is 
XStL.Pmin = 9-98 pm. 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 5.1 and 5.2) 


ACCURACY OF STOKES LAW AS A FUNCTION OF REYNOLDS NUMBER 


In Fig. 2, the calculated particle size, 
making the assuming that Stokes law applies, is 
ratioed to the measured particle size for a range 
of Reynolds numbers. At a low Reynolds 
number, the particles settle in random orientation. 
At a higher Reynolds number, there is an 
increasing tendency for the particles to orientate 
to give maximum resistance to motion. Stokes 
law underestimates the drag coefficient as the 
Reynolds number increases. Thus the measured 


size will be larger than that estimated by using 
Stokes law. It would be necessary to apply diameter 
corrections at a higher Reynolds number, 
otherwise the determined diameter will vary with 
fluid density or viscosity. The gravitational 
methods are recommended to apply to samples 
where the sedimentation condition for a Reynolds 
number less than 0.25 is satisfied for the largest 
size of particle in the test portion. 


60 
x 
S 
8 
x 

60 
N 
D |N 
y GD 
SL 
KIS 60 
SI 
ola 
lao 
E 
gie 
SIE 
O 
E) a 60 
o|= 

60 

10? 2 5 10" 0.2 0.5 1 2 5 10 


REYNOLDS NUMBER , Re 


FIG. 2 ACCURACY OF STOKES LAW AS A FUNCTION OF REYNOLDS NUMBER 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.2.1) 


PARTICLE DISPLACEMENT DUE TO BROWNIAN MOTION 


Particle displacement due to brownian motion 
shows particle size (on the x- axis) versus the ratio 
of Brownian motion displacement to total particle 
displacement (on the y- axis). This is given for a 
range of particle-liquid density differences, at one 
minute after sedimentation has commenced and 
enables the potential error due to Brownian motion 
for a given particle size to be estimated for a given 


sedimentation time. The particle size of interest is 
selected and the time axis is extended to the desired 
time of analysis. The vertical intercept from this 
point to the appropriate density difference curve 
permits the potential error due to Brownian motion 
to be determined on the y- axis. 


x 100, % 


DISPLACEMENT DUE TO BROWNIAN MOTION 


TOTAL DISPLACEMENT OF PARTICLE 


10 PARTICLE SIZE, um 


FIG. 3 PARTICLE DISPLACEMENT DUE TO BROWNIAN MOTION 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEXD 
(Clause 5.4) 


EFFECT OF OPEN PORES ON THE TERMINAL VELOCITY OF 
SPHERICAL PARTICLES 


Particles may include porosity. This porosity can 
consist of open pores, where cavities are connected 
to the external surface of the particle, or closed 
pores, where cavities remain inaccessible to the 
external surface, or a combination of both porosity 
types. If all the pores are open, then it is possible to 
evaluate the particle size measurement error due to 
the presence of this open porosity. When a spherical 
particle of diameter, x, true density, Pp> and 
porosity, e, is filled with liquid of density, p}, to the 
fraction of f and sediments in liquid of density, p}, 
then its terminal velocity, v, can be determined as 
follows. Volume of the particle is given by: 


... (19) 


the result being that volume of the particle 
corresponds to the ‘envelope particle volume” that 
is, including the volume contributed by the 
open porosity. The mass of particle is given by: 


6) [1 pp, + me f] ... (20) 


the result being the “effective mass” of the particle, 
1.e. allowing for that mass of liquid inside the pores 
of the particle which during sedimentation moves 
wholly as if part of the particle itself. 


Gravitational force acting on particles is given by: 
ESTE —e)pp + pe f|- ald ..en 


and the drag force acting on the particle is given by: 


3TNXV ... (22) 
then terminal velocity is: 
_ Pa- Pptp Tl 019 
Rel pt T 23) 


In a measurement, however, this velocity is regarded 

as corresponding to a particle of density, pp, with no 

porosity. This measured diameter, x’, which makes 

no allowance for the presence of fluid-filled open 
porosity, can be expressed by: 


I2¢p 
=% (Pp-P1)9 ... (24) 
18n 

The ratio of the measured particle diameter, x’, to 
the true particle diameter, x, may be expressed as: 


T 


x _ adopto fe (25) 
x Pp - Pl = 


When the particle porosity is completely filled by 
sedimentation liquid (‘wet’ in Fig. 4) then the 
following relative particle size relationship holds: 


... (26) 


When no liquid enters the open porosity (“repel” in 
Fig. 4) then the relative particle size relationship is 
given by: 


... (27) 


where 


e = Particle porosity 

f = Fraction of open particle porosity filled 
with sedimentation liquid 

p = True particle density (no porosity) in 
kg.m” or g.cm 


The effect on the measured diameter of filling the 
particle void fraction, with water as the 
sedimentation liquid (9, = 1 x 10? kg. m3), is 
assessed in Fig. 4 for a range of particle densities. 


Note that the particle density, pp in the diagram is 
the ‘true’ density when there is no particle porosity. 
The curves in Fig. 4 consider the case only for the 
complete absence of filling, f = 0 (repel), and for 
the complete filling of open porosity, f = 1 (wet). 
Where f has some value between 0 and 1, then 
intermediate curves, corresponding to partial pore 
filling, would obtain between the ‘wet’ and ‘repel’ 
curves for a given particle density. 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


xs 
8 
x 
u 
N 
an 
ww 
o|N 
FIO 
= | 4 
a [a 
2 m la b IN 
i z 6 x 10° kg / mò 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
ur. VOID FRACTION IN A PARTICLE 
Key 
1 Wet 


2 Particle density 
3 Repel water 


FIG. 4 EFFECT OF OPEN PORES ON THE TERMINAL VELOCITY OF SPHERICAL PARTICLES 


11 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (90, Savita Vihar, Vikas Marg, 
Delhi - 110092) 


AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Associated Soapstone Distributing Co Pvt Ltd, Jaipur 


Cement Corporation of India Limited, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, 


New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Haver Standard India Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Industrial Wire Netting Company, New Delhi 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of Defence, 
New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Faridabad 


National Mineral Development Corporation Limited, 
Hyderabad 
National Test House, Kolkata 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Kolkata 


Ultratech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


DRR. P. SINGHAL (Chairperson) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
SHRI MADAN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKRAM GOLCHA 
SHRI DILIP JHA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SARASWATHI DEVI 
SHRI ANURAG KUMAR SANI (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK RAI 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARDEEP SINGH 
SHRI B. K. MUNZNI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
DR PRADEEP KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR SANJAY YADAV 
DR NITA DILAWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVEN H. SHAH 
SHRI VIKRAM D. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. G. RAUT 
SHRI V. A. SONTAKKEY (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI KESHAV GUPTA 
SHRI SANJAY GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. JAIN 
SHRI SOMESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI SURESH KUMAR 


SHRIG. J. NAIDU (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SHARMA 
SHRIG. V. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK SHARMA 
SHRIMATIMAYMOLE BOBEN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIPIN KUMAR GIRI 
SHRI SIBABRATA BASAK (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRAN K. P. 
SHRI DEVENDRA PANDEY (Alternate) 


IS 5282 (Part 1) : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (B- 129, F-2, Ramprastha SHRI VIRENDRA BABU 
Colony, Ghaziabad - 201011) 


In Personal Capacity (Indian Institute of Technology, PROF B. PITCHUMANI 
Hauz Khas, New Delhi - 110016) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 


SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 55 (18396). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


