IS 7784 ( Part 2/Set 3 ) : 1996
( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN OF CROSS DRAINAGE WORKS
PART 2 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS Section 3 Canal Slrphons (

First Revision )
ICS 93.140

,A',

0 BIS 1996

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR

NEW DELHI 110002 August `1996 Price Group 4

Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee, RVD 17

FOREWORII This Indian standard ( First ~evlsion ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the cross ~rainage works sectional committee-had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. IS 7784 has been published in two -pafis. pafi 1 of the standard covers general requirements of the design of cross drainage works, pafi 2 covers Specflc requirements and has been published in the following five sections: Section 1 Section 2 .Section 3 Section 4 Section 5 Aqueducts Superpassages Canal syphons Level crossings Syphon aqueducts

This standard (Section 3) covers specific design requirements for canal syphons. Canal syphon is a structure with a closed conduit designed to run full and usually under pressure, to transport canal water under the drainage channel or a road or a railway line. This standard was first published in the year 1980. This revision was taken up in view of the revision of Part 1 of the standard, which lays down general requirements for design of Cross Drainage Works. As modifications have been effected in Part 1 of the standard, this revision is intended to modifi the provisions of the exis~ingstandard so as to align the same with Part 1. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 7784 ( Part 2/Set

3 ) : 1996

Indian Standard CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN OF CROSS DRAINAGE WORKS
PART 2 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS Section ( 1 SCOPE 3 Canal Syphons

First Revision )
5 GENERAL DESIGN CONSIDERATION
5.1 Shape

This standard (Part 2/Set 3) deals with the specific requirements of design of canal syphons. 2 REFERENCES
2.1 The following standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements .based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated berow: IS No. Title

For syphoning of canal water circular, rectangular, horse shoe shaped, single or multi cell barrels can be adopted.
5.X.1

5.1.2 Precast RCC pipes may be economical for syphoning small discharges. For large discharges, keeping in view hydraulic considerations and convenience of construction, circular or horse shoe shaped conduits are more suitable. 5.2 Materials 5.2.1 For the construction of the syphon barrels, steel, prestressed concrete, RCC or masonry or a combination of these may be used depending upon the availability of materials, labour and relative economy. 5.3 Layout 5.3.1 Syphon barrel shall preferably be kept perpendicular to the drainage channel at the site of crossing. The barrel shall be founded below the anticipated/design scour level corresponding to design flood. Depth of barrel below the anticipated scour level shall be at least one third of the over all height of the%ir?el'!s. It shall also be seen that in order to provide an over burden cushion against abrasive damage to the syphon, top of the syphon is at least 300 mm to 750 mm below the drainage channel bed level (Fig. 1).
NOTE In case a bridge is provided monolithic with the syphon or very near to the syphon, anticipated/ design scour depth as applicable to piers/abutments as given in IS 7784 ( Part 1 )

456 : 1978

Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third
revision )

4410 Glossary of terms relating (Part 15iSec 5) : to river valley projects : Part 15 1992 Canal structure, Section 5 Cross drainage works 7784 Code of practice for design of ( Part 1) : 1993 cross drainage works/i Part 1 General features (first Levision) 10751 i 1983 11388 : 1985 Criteria for design of guide banks for alluvial river Recommendations for design of trash rack for intakes

3 TERMINOEOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 4410 (Part lS/Sec 5) : 1992 shall apply.

3.2 Wherever the term `canal' is used it should be taken to mean `canal/carrier channel'
`(

: 1993 shall be adopted.

4 DATA FOR DESIGN
4.1 For the design of canal syphon, data given in iS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993 shall be made available. I

5.3.2 In case the site conditions so warrant and keeping the overall economy in view, the barrels may be founded at levels higher than that required as per 5.3.1 above. This can be achieved either by providing upstream and downstream cut-off across 1

IS 7784 ( Part 2/&x 3 ) : 19% the drainage flow and penetrating the safe scour level, or by suitable combination of cut-offs, horizontal floor and apron/pitching desigued to take care of scour (Fig. 2). 5.3.3 Syphon barrels under deep bed portion of the drainage channel are generally kept horizontal. Barrels in slope at entry and exit on the upstream and downstream sides are provided to join the horizontal barrels. The barrels on sloping portion should not be steeper than 1 in 3 on the entry side and I in 4 on the exit side. A water seal of 1.5 times the change in velocity head, with a minimum of 150 mm should be provided over the crown of the barrels at start, to prevent air from entering the barrel (Fig. !). Instead of sloping portions, at entry and exit, wells may be provided. 5.3.4 The invert level of the canal syphon at the entrance is normally kept at the bed level of the carrier channel. The invert level at entrance shall be worked out by subtracting the proposed height of the barrel opening plus water seal plus the velocity head, from the total energy line in the channel at the entrance to barrel: 5.3.5 The invert level at the exit shall be kept lower than the level at the entrance to the barrels by the amount of loss of head through the barrels. 5.3.6 Cut off under the entrance and exit ends of the barrel shall continue under the wing walls. Cut off shall be designed to take care of exit gradient. In case of multi-barrel syphon, cut off depth at the entry and exit sides of the barrel may be reduced in the middle portion. In cases where.transition walls/ wing walls are long, cut off depth may be reduced along the wall.
i*t

the carrier channel banks, slopes, etc, should be drawn out on a contour plan of the site. 5.5.3 Transition walls should normally rest on natural ground. In exceptional cases, they may rest on made up soils, properly compacted. 5.5.4 The transition walls shall at their ends turn at right angles to the flow in the channel and shall extend for a minimum length of 1.Om into the bank, Suitable pitching should be provided, as necessary, beyond these transition walls depending upon site conditions. 5.5.5 The vertical transition in the bed profile at the entry and exit ends of the barrel shall be smooth to ensure gradual increase in the velocity while approaching the barrels and gradually decrease again to the design velocity dotinstream, in the carrier channel. The bottom grade at the entry shall be tangential to the invert of the conduit. The bottom grade at the exit need not be tangential, except where the velocity of flow in the syphon is high. 6 HYDRAULIC
6.1 Waterway DESIGN

The waterway required is calculated by dividing the full supply discharge by the velocity in the barrels which shall not exceed the permissible velocity given in IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993. 6.2 Entry Water Surface
Profile

The vertical profile of the syphon involves a change from steep to mild slope. At these points the formation of hydraulic jump at part discharges shall be examined and pressure accounted for while considering uplift. 6.3 Loss of Head The loss of head at the entry, at the exit and in the barrel due to friction and due to elbows and joints shall be;a&lated in accordance with IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993. Estimated losses shall be increased by 10 percent for use in design. 6.4 Cut Off The normal scour depth shall be computed for the :arrier channel flow in accordance with IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993. Depth of cut off below the entrance and exit ends of the barrel can be taken as 1.5 times the normal scour depth below full supply level. Cutoff shall then be checked for permissible exit gradient. The cut-off shall cater to the three dimensional flow patterns that exist at the following conditions: a) Drainage channel full and carrier channel dry, and 3

5.4 Pluming Fluming ratio shall be adopted as given in IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993. 5.5 Entrance
and Exit Transitions

5.5.1 Transition walls shall be long enough to cover the bank slope effectively. Splay of 3 : 1 on upstream and 4 : 1 on the downstream at full supply level (FSL),

with properly designed entry and exit transition curves to keep down the loss of head through the canal syphon, is preferable. Splay on upstream and downstream may be reduced if the same is justified.by the site conditions. 55.2 In order to align and design transition walls properly a complete layout plan of the work showing

TRANSITION `WALL

SPLAY 1 IN 3

SPLAY 1 IN b

ICUT OFF

abcdc

t

ON

U/S PLAN

AND

pq r stu

ON

D/S1

ANTICIPATED TOP,OF gk+K
/BR$ASl

SCOUR
WALL

LEVEL
BREAST WALL

D/S

TRANSITION

_____-

CUT OFF ----

WORKS
CUT OFF ACROSS DRAINAGE CHANNEL \ -I LOPE NOT STEEPER THAN 1 IN 4

'

LPARllflON WALLS OF BARREL

SECTION

AA
PARTITION WAL OF BARREL

RUBBER WATER STOPS AT TOP AND BOITOW MAY BE PROVIDED IF NUMBERS OF BARREL ARE LARBE

FIG. 2 PRO~LE OF TYPICAL CANAL SYPHONWITH BOTTOMABOVE DESIGN SCOURLEVEL

IS 7784 ( Part 2lSec 3 ) : 1996 b) Carrier channel dry. The worst case occurs along section x-x ( see Fig. 1 ). The depth of the cut off provided, shall be the greater of that obtained from the condition of scour and exit gradient. 6.5 Uplift 6.5.1 The syphon barrels shall be checked for selfflotation condition, that is, the condition obtained immediately after completion or part completion of the structure, should a flood occur. The barrels may be located deeper if reqmred and/or if found necessary extra dead load in the form of lean cement concrete, masonry, etc, shall be added on the top of the barrel. This extra load is taken into account while calculating the moments. 6.5.2 The calculations for uplift acting on the barrel shall be done for the following conditions: a) Drainage dry, and channel full and carrier channel full and drainage channel divided into two portions, one under the drainage channel bed and the other under drainage channel banks. The transverse analysis of barrels shall be carried out by any standard method for the following conditions to determine the worst moments, shear and thrust at any section. a) Portion under drainage i) chatmel bed

Carrier channel dry and drainage channel with maximum discharge and drainage

ii) Carrier channel runningfull channel dry. b) Portion under the drainage i)

channel

bank

Carrier channel dry and drainage channel with HFL. The saturation level for the earthfill may be properly accounted for with appropriate hydraulic gradient line from HFL of the drainage channel with regard to the type of soil composing the banks.

b)

Carrier channel full and drainage channel dry.

ii) Carrier channel running full and drainage channel dry. 7.2.2 Partition walls are the inside walls of a multicell barrel (see Fig. 1) The partition walls are not subject to any significant lateral pressure when all the barrel openings are running. The minimum thickness of the wall shall be 225 mm for RCC and 450 mm for masonry. Partition walls shall be designed to allow for differential head created due to an empty adjacent barrel. Reinforcement in partition walls shall be anchored into the slab. In case of RCC walls, suitable haunches in square or rectangular barrels with haunch reinforcement shall a.lso be provided. Masonry partition walls shall be adequately anchored to the top and bottom slabs to ensure that there is no separa;tio* * = 7.2.3 Barrels with RCC slab or arch roofing supported on masonry or plain concrete abutments and piers are designed for the same conditions as RCC barrels. The roofing is however, properly anchored down by means of anchor bolts in the case of slab roof, and straps in case of an arch roof, to make it safe against uplift pressure. 7.2.4 When pipes are used, they shall rest on 250 mm thick cement concrete .of M 15 grade ( see IS 456 : 1978 ), which shall be increased to 550 mm at joints. The end offsets and clear spacing between adjacent pipes shall be a minimum of 250 mm. Standard joints shall be used and these shall be properly 5

6.5.2.1 A factor of safety of 1.2 should be ensured against the worst of the above two conditions of uplift for which the barrel is designed. The barrels shall be checked for construction condition, that is, water table at the drainage bed with channel and drainage both dry and ton cover not in position with a factor of safety of not less than 1.2. 6.5.3 In case a bridge is provided monolithic with syphon, the traffic load should be ignored while checking for uplift. 7 STRUCTURAL DESIGN J"

7.1 The various loadings assumed in the design of barrels consist of the following : a) b) c) d) e) f) Self weight Super-imposed Surcharge; Full internal Soil reaction Earth pressure water pressure; and uplift pressure; of sides. and of the structure; loads;

The combination of loads which will result in the maximum stresses shall be carefully qnsidered. 7.2 Transverse Analysis of the structure can be

7.2.1 The length of barrels

IS 7784 ( Part 2/Set

3 ) : 1996 higher than that of the transition walls, the top of transition wall at entry is connected to the top of the face wall with uniform increase in height of walls. 7.4.2 The face walls shall be designed as masonry In the gravity walls for arch or flat slab roofing. case of RCC barrels these walls shall be constructed monolithic with the top slab. Adequate anchorage of reinforcement as well as reinforcement for proper transfer of loads and moments to the top slab, shall be provided. A minimum top width of 150 mm and 3 50 mm shall be provided in case of RCC walls and masonry walls respectively. 7.4.3 A smooth curve between the face wall and the top slab of the RCC barrel, and for cut water and ease water of partition walls, may be provided. 8 MISCELLANEOUS 8.1 Joints In case of RCC barrels, expansion/contraction joints with water stops around the periphery shall be provided not more than 20 m apart, while in case of plain concrete slab and masonry walls, the joints shall be provided not more than 10 m apart. The position and details of waterstops shall be in accordance with the provisions of IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993. In case of multi-barrel syphons, units of 3 or 4 barrels can be adopted side by side with longitudinal joints having water stops all around. 8.2 In case of barrels resting on compressible soils, collars encircling the plain joint shall be provided. This will protect the water-stop from vertical shear due to excessive settlement. The cross section of the collars shall be of size not less than 300 mm x 300 mm. In case of syphons of multiple barrels of more th,aqgne unit, the collars shall be designed to be flexible. 8.3 Drainage Protection DETAILS

grouted to make them water tight. At bends, walls shall be provided to receive the pipe ends. 7.3 Longitudinal Analysis

7.3.1 Longitudinal analysis shall be made in cases where loose soil, or various types of soils, are met with at the completed final level of the foundation. 7.3.2 In case a socket and spigot arrangement of collars is provided, the vertical displacement of one unit will cause extra loads and stresses in the other unit due to the restraining effect of the collar. For analysis of these loads the barrels in the longitudinal direction shall be considered as beams on elastic foundations. The analysis should be carried out according to the principles given by M. Hetenyi') or any other standard method of analysis. Certain simplifying assumptions as given below may be made while analysing for longitudinal moments:

a) The subgrade reaction throughout the length
of the barrels is constant. are free.

b)

Ends of the barrels

c) Entire cross-section
in resisting

of the barrel is effective the forces and moments are vertical.

d) Foundation

reactions

e) Self weight of barrels and weight of water
in barrels may be omitted, since this will not contribute to unequal settlement. 7.3.3 The restraining force of a collar can be determined by equating the deflection of the two units at the joint. The collar shall be designed for the cantilever moment due to this force. 7.3.4 The bending moment in the barrei in the longitudinal direction due to superimposed loads as well as collar reaction shall be calculated as per standard expressions for different loading conditions given by M. Hetenyi and the required reinforcement shall be provided. However, nominal reinforcement in accordance with IS 456 : 1978 shall be ensured. 7.4 Face Wall (Breast Wall)

7.4.1 This is sometimes called head wall or breast wall. Such walls are provided at the outer ends of conduits to support the outer slope of drainage channel banks. Their top may be kept level with top of the transition walls. Where the top of the face wall is
`) HETENYI M "Beams on Elastic Foundations" Messrs Cushing Malloy, USA.

Drainage channel slopes shall be protected by pitching for suitable length upstream and downstream of the site of crossing. In case barrels are founded above the anticipated scour, slope and bed protection as per 5.3.2 shall be given. 8.4 Wherever drainage channel is flumed at a carrier channel crossing (Fig. 3) suitable guide banks should be constructed for confining it in a reasonable width and guiding it smoothly near the syphon. The design of guide banks shall conform to IS 10751 : 1983. 6

IS 7784 ( Part 2&c 8.5 Bed Protection
for Canals

3 ) : 1996-

Beyond the ends of concrete masonry floor of the syphon/transitions, cement concrete or brick blocks or stone/stones in wirecrates over graded inverted filter shall be provided for a suitable length, to allow for the release of balance differential head of water without permitting the escape of fine soil particles from the bed. Similar protection should be provided along the length of transition walls. 8.5.1 The outer slopes of the carrier channel banks shall be adequately protected up to HFL. of the drain plus free board. 8.6 Stop Log Grooves In big syphons, stop log grooves may be provided on the upstream entrance end and at the downstream, to isolate one or more barrels for periodic inspectious, repairs and maintenance. 8.7
Trash Racks

syphon strmz&urewhere a large quantity of floating material is expected in the carrier channel water. Usually the racks are constructed of flat steel bars set on edge and are either joined by through bolts with pipe nipples for spacers, or welded to the edge ofcross bars. The racks are generally made in panels for ease in handling to facilitate cleaning; these are usually inclined at a slope of 1 horizontal to 4 vertical. ( see IS 11388 : 1985 )_ 8.8 Free Board in the Carrier
Channel

The free board for the carrier channel bank upstream of the transition wall shall be increased by 50 percent subject to a minimum of 0.3 m to prevent overtopping. The increased free board shall be extended to a minimum distance of 10 times the bed width of the carrier channel. 8.9 Dewatering In long syphons, it is desirable to provide a sump pit at a suitable location for ease of dewatering.

Trash racks may be provided at the entrance to the

DOWNSTNEbM
WIDE BUN0

ANAL SYPHON

PSTREAY GUIDE 0UND

PLAN

R = Radius of curvature of the guide bund on the u/s side. r = Radius of curvature of the guide bund on the d/s side.

SECTION XX

FIG.3 TYPICAL PLAN OFDRAINAGE FLUMING
7

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofIndian StandardsAct. 1986to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions', This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No. RVD 17 ( 170 ). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 83 75
_/;

Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone

Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol,,Andheri MUMBAI 400093 (East)

. . %- - I

32376 17 323 3841 337 84 99, 337 85 61 337 86 26, 337 86 62 603843 60 20 25
235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 15

8329295,8327858 8327891,8327892

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. HYDERABAD. GUWAHATI. GHAZIABAD. FARIDABAD. COIMBATORE. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. LUCKNOW. KANPUR. JAIPUR.

Pmted

at New Indm Prmtmg Press, Khurla, India

