IS 7332 ( Part 2 ) : 1993
( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

SPHERICALVALVESFORHYDROPOWER STATIONSANDSYSTEMS
PART 2 SELECTION ( OF CONTROL EQUIPMENT

First Revision )

UDC

621'646'22 : 621'2?4-225'12

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK December 1993

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG Price Group 1

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

Hydraulic

Gates and Valves Sectional Committee,

RVD 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft linalired by the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Projects Division Council. Spherical valve is a shut-off device most commonly used in hydropower stations for a head 200 m These valves may be used at lower heads also. Its use is favoured at high heads as and above. there is no hydraulic loss due to valve itself when valve is open and provides a better tight sealing when valve is closed. It serves the following purposes: a) Stops the water entry to the turbine when the later is stopped to decrease the water leakages. and to protect the guide vanes against slit cavitation and slit erosion; b) Stops the water entry in case of emergency, that is, non-closure of guide apparatus or in the event of low oil pressure in the system; c) Unit isolation in multi-unit plants where one penstock feeds more than one unit; and d) To facilitate inspection of water path passages. Basically spherical valve consists of spherical valve, air valve and water/oil pressure system or any other control system which is required for operation of spherical valves. This standard covers only the guidelines ( criteria > for structural and hydraulic design of valves so as to permit necessary flexibility in their detailed design as per requirements of the designer. These guidelines are based on the available expertise and the practices prevailing in this field at present so that the same could be utilized. As and when some more information is available the same will be incorporated in the standard. Therefore, these are expected to be used by those designers who have sufficient knowledge in tbis field. This standard is being published in three parts. Part 1 deals with structural and hydraulic aspects of design. This standard ( Part 2 ) deals with the guidelines for the design and selection of the control equipment used in spherical valve. Part 3 deals with the operation and maintenance of spherical valves. This standard ( Part 2 ) was first published in 1974. This revision has been taken in hand so as to up date its provisions based on the experience of the users in the past years and to keep in line with its basic standard, that is, Part 1. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this `standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding of numerical values ( revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded of value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

]~ 7332 ( Part 2 ) :199$

Indian Skmkwd
SPHERICAL VALVES FOR WY DROPOWER STATIONS AND SYSTEMS
PART 2 SELECTION ( OF CONTROL EQUIPMENT

First Revision)
2.3.3 OH: or more servomotors operation of a spherical va!ve. may be used for

1 SCQPE 1.1 This stacdard ( Part 2 ) gives guidelines for t~?e de~igrl and sejecti~n of the control equipment used in spherical valves. 2 VALVE KIPERATQJ-K3

2.3.4 The servomotors shoald be either fixed or swiveling mounted and should be sized to transmit the required operating torque through levers to the valve trunnioris. 2.3.5 The operating pressure for the oil operated servomotors Hmy be obtained from a hydraulic power pack with or without accumulator or a separate oil pressure unit for the valve or from the oil pressure unit of the turbize depending upon the service requirements. 2.3.6 When using water opemted servomotors, the operating pressure may be cb!a ined from the penstock. The pressure connection for closing the valve should always be taken from the pipe or upstream of the valve. The pressure connection for opening may either be taken on upstream or downstream of the valve. 2.3.7 All bearings and pivots of the servomotors should have bushes and wiH be lubricated, if necessary. 2.3.8 Suitable arrangement should be provided for controlling the speed of actoation. Total time of actuation may be selected on the basis of the service conditions of the valve. Maximum time of closing the valve should be taken from 1 to 3 min and should depend on allowable time of running the generator at maximum permissible speed, Minimum time of valve closing should be taken on the basis of allowed pressure-rise in the penstock. Opening time may be kept same as closing time, 3 CONTROL EQUIPMENT

2.1 Depending upon tl.c purpose of the valve and type of energy available suitable mechanism fc)r operation of rotor ~]fvalve may be selected. 2.2 T'kc operator shou,.1 be capable of closing and openirlg the v;~lve under most adverse cc~ditioms, A by-pass device should be used for b:d:,ncing the prmsu -:$ between the upstream alld dow;l~tream ~f"t~+:l~;,lve to reduce the size of the oper:~tor. 2.2.1 The theoretical torque required to operate the rotor is the sum of the hydrodynamic torque erid friction torque,

2.2.2 The hydrodynamk: torque is the function of flow velocity and d:ameter of the valve. The designers should ob!tiin the same through appropriate model tests or previous experience. 2.'2.3 The friction torque is the sum of the bearings and seal torques at the trunnion friction. For design purposes, the value of friction coefficient should be chosen depending upon the frequency of operation and service conditions of the valve. 2.3 Servomotors The operators should servomotor type.
2.3.1

be

of

the

hydraulic

The hydraulic servomotors oil operated or water operated.

may be either

2.3.2 All materials used for manufacture of these servomotors should be suitable for the operating media.

3.1 Control equipment should consist of slide valves with electromagnets and flow control valves or diaphragms for the operation of arrangement, suitable servomotors, by-pass pressure indicator for indicating differential pressure on upstream and downstream of valve. Sufficient number of limit switches and auxiliary

1

IS 7332 ( Part 2 ) : 1993 switches should be provided cn the spherical valve operating_ mechanism in order to energise the following stgnalling and trip circuits. a) Indications for spherical valve `open' and `closed'; b) Indications of by-pass `open' and `closed'; c) Indication and alarm failed to close; and for spherical valve

d) The control equipment should be arranged for local control and remote control, if required, to open and close the valve in normal as well as emergency condition.

2

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Srandurds Act, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all any form without the prior the course of implementing grade designations. Enquiries Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Doc:RVD12(85) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue! Text Affected its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications ), BIS.

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadut Shah Zsfar Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Offices: Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI

110002

331 01 31 1 331 13 75 37 84 99, i 37 86 26, 53 38 43, t 53 23 84 235 02 16, i 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91. 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road,

160036 600113

MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 40093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Paragon Enterprises, Delhi, India

