WAT HAP IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


an P TA wl Tas Ei mida 
UTT 1 AM P RA Pi ST A TU 
( TET JIET ) 


Methods for Splicing of Wire Ropes 
Part 1 Hand Splicing of Wire Ropes 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 77.140.65 


© BIS 2022 


Rda mAP MI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAP Yo, 9 TIGR Mle THX AMI, HS EC - 110002 
Vs MANAR BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110 002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2022 Price Group 10 


VVire Ropes and VVire Products Sectional Committee, MED 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Second revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards, after the draft finalized by the Wire Ropes and Wire Products Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first issued in 1969. This standard is being revised again to keep pace with 
the latest technological developments and international practices. In this revision, the 
following major changes have been made: 


1) A reference clause has been added mentioning the latest version of all the referred 
standards. 


2) Editorial corrections have been done. 


Splicing is securing the ends of a rope into its own parts by interweaving the strands in such a 
way as to maintain the rope diameter and to preserve the rope strength, like forming an eye or 
loop at the rope end. 


While bending the wires during the process of splicing, necessary precautions should be 
taken to prevent the possibility of the galvanized surface being injured. The ends of the 
strands should be properly seized. 


This standard has been prepared to unify the different practices of hand splicing of ropes 
prevailing in mining, shipbuilding, navigation and other purposes. 


This standard on splicing of wire ropes is one of the series of standards on splicing. Other 
part of this standard is: 


IS 5245 (Part 2) : 2013 — Wire rope sling legs with ferrule — Secured eye terminal (First 
Revision) 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in 
Annex J. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied 
with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be 
rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (second 
revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be same 
as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


Indian Standard 
METHODS FOR SPLICING OF VVIRE ROPES 
PART 1 HAND SPLICING OF VVIRE ROPES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) covers 
different types of hand splicings, methods 
of hand splicings and tools for splicing. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain 
provisions which, through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. 
At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed below. In case the 
standards are to be referred in this clause 
they are to be listed as follows : 


IS No Title 


2363 : Glossary of terms relating to 
1981 wire ropes (first revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the 
definitions given in IS 2363 shall apply. 


4 TYPES AND METHODS OF 
SPLICING 


4.1 Bordeaux Connection Splicing 


The method of splicing for Bordeaux 
connection for six stranded ropes shall be 
as specified in Annex A. 


4.2 Flemish Eye Splicing 


The method for flemish eye splicing shall 
be as given in Annex B. 


4.3 Liverpool Splice 


The method for liverpool splicing shall be 
as specified in Annex C. 


4.4 Long Splice 


The method for long splicing shall be as 
given in Annex D. 


4.5 Plain Eye and Thimble Splice for 
Multi-stranded Non-rotating Ropes 


The method for the plain eye and thimble 
splices for wire ropes of 17 x 7, 18 x 7 and 
31 x 7 constructions shall be as given in 
Annex E. 


4.6 Plain Eye and Thimble Splicing for 
Six Stranded Ropes 


Tile method shall be either of a five-tuck 
splice or four-and-a-half-tuck splice as 
described in Annex F. 


4.7 Splice for Endless Rope 


The methods of splicing for endless rope 
shall be as given in Annex G. 


4.8 Splice for Grommet 


The method for splicing for grommet shall 
be as given in Annex H. 


5 TOOLS FOR SPLICING 


5.1 The tools used for splicing are steel 
block, core knife, cutting pliers, marline 
spike. Flat spike, spoon spike, nipper, 
blacksmith’s hammer and dagger. 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX A 


(Clause 4.1) 


BORDEAUX CONNECTION SPLICE FOR SIX-STRANDED ROPES 


A-l The end of the rope shall be prepared 
as described in Annex F. Seizing for 
securing the rope in grooves shall be 


TAIL No. 2 


TAIL No. 6 ——G 


TAL No. 1 —È— 


passed over the rope and the casting of the 
Bordeaux connection (see Fig. 1). 


A F 


MAIN PARTS 


TAIL No. 3 


TAIL No. 4 


~ TAIL No. 5 


FIG. 1 BORDEAUX CONNECTION SPLICE 


A-2 The length of the tails shall be not less 
than 60 times the diameter. 


A-3 A fibre core shall be tucked with tail 
No. 1, for one tuck only; the core shall be 
cut off where it emerges from the rope. 


A-4 A wire main core shall be split up and 
the strands or, the wires shall be 


distributed among the tucking tails, and 
tucked with them for five full tucks, then 
the core shall be broken off at the 
completion of the fifth series. 


A-5 The different series of tucks shall be 
as specified below: 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


SI First Series Second Series Third Series 
di Tail No. Inat Outat Tail No. Inat Outat TailNo. Inat Outat 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) — (10) 
i) 1 B A *] B A *] B A 
ii) 6 C B 6 C B 6 C B 
iii) 2 B C 2 D C 2 D C 
iv) 3 C D 3 E D 3 E D 
v) 5 D E 4 F E 4 F E 
vi) 4 D F 5 A F 5 A F 
< Fourth Series Fifth Series Sixth Series 
0. 


Tail No. Inat Outat Tail No. Inat Outat TailNo. Inat Outat 


(1) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 


i) *] B A +1 B C +1 D E 
i) 6 C B 6 C D 6 D F 
iii) 2 D C 2 D E 2 F A 
iv) 3 E D 3 E F 3 A B 
v) 5 F E 4 F A 4 B C 
vi) 4 A F 5 A B 5 C D 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


SI Seventh Series 
Tail No. Inat 


(1) 2) (3) (4) (5) 


Eighth Series 


Out at Tail No. 


Ninth Series 


Inat Outat TailNo. Inat Out at 


(6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 


i) fl F A t1 
ii) 6 A B 6 
iii) 2 B C 2 
iv) 3 C D 3 

v) 5 D E 4 
vi) 4 E F 5 


B A tl B A 
C B 6 C B 
D C 2 D C 
E D 3 E D 
F E 4 F E 
A F 5 A F 


A-6 The ends shall be broken off and 
slightly hooked so as to give enough 
holding power to secure them when bent 
over pulleys. The tucks shall be hammered 
down and the taper rounded up. 


A-7 When protection during handling is 
required against the wire ends, these may 
be served over, preferably with spun-yarn. 


A-8 Where one rope's length has to be 
increased so that when the splice taper is 
unfit for further service, the rope should be 
cut off and the Bordeaux connection re- 
spliced. 


* The number of wires shall be reduced in each tail by one-third. Thus leaving two-thirds of the 
original number, and the tucks are hammered down. With a rope having wire main core, the number of 
core wires shall not be reduced at this stage. This should be included in the fifth series and then broken 


off. 


t The number of wires in each strand shall be reduced to one-third of the original number. 


i Break off wire ends. 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.2) 


FLEMISH EYE SPLICE FOR SIX-STRAND VVIRE ROPE RIGHT HAND 
ORDINARY LAY 


B-1 FLEMISH EYE SPLICE 


In case of Flemish eye splice, minimum of 
12 times the diameter of the rope should be 
left for splicing. The correct splicing 
length for the size involved shall be 
marked with chalk from the end of the 
rope. 


B-2 For a length of 50 mm, the rope shall 
be tightly tied with a string. The rope at its 
chalk mark shall then be gripped in a vice 
in a horizontal position. Each of the six 
strands of the rope shall be unlaid up to the 
chalk mark. The cover wires of each strand 
shall be taken out and twisted in the same 
direction as the strand while the inner 
wires shall be split; just near the chalk 
mark. The main rope core (hemp) shall be 
split; one of the strands shall be retained 
and the other two removed by cutting them 
near the chalk mark. 


B-3 Now the six split strands shall be 
passed through a rope former with six 
equally spaced holes, and the split main 
rope core through the central hole of the 
die plate. The die plate shall then be 
rotated in the direction of the lay of the 
rope to give the split strands the form of 
the rope. The end of the rope shall then be 
tightly lashed with a string. 


B-4 The appropriate thimble shall be fixed 
at another chalk mark given at a distance 
equal to 50 mm more than half the distance 
of the previous chalk mark from the 
splicing end of the rope. The rope shall he 
gripped in a vice in a vertical position with 


the tail end of the rope placed at the left 
side of the main rope. The strands in the 
tail end shall be unlaid from the rope one 
by one up to the ‘neck’ of the thimble 
taking care that all the strands are 
untwisted equally in order that there shall 
be no crossed strands. 


B-5 Now, as in the case of a five tuck 
splice, each strand should be tucked once 
and there should be a strand protruding 
from each groove in the body of the rope. 


B-6 All the strands shall be pulled down 
starting from the lowest strand then 
proceed with the second tuck by passing 
each strand over the adjacent rope strand 
and under the following strand going 
against the lay of the rope. 


B-7 The strands shall be pulled down and 
repeated to complete the third tuck. All the 
strands shall be pulled down. Starting from 
the lowest strand, each strand should be 
tucked over the adjacent rope strand and 
then render over the same rope strand 
(round and round) with the lay of the rope 
to the right till the strands cover the 
required length. 


B-8 The splicing shall be now finished and 
should be gently hammered from the throat 
forward, the rope being continuously 
rotated during this process so that the 
splice sets are hammered all around. This 
will bring out any slackness in the splice. 


B-9 Finally, the splice shall be served with 
wire. 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.3) 
LIVERPOOL SPLICING 


C-1 This type of splicing shall be done 
similar to plain eye splicing (see Annex 
D). In this, tucks shall be laid around the 
lay of the rope. This consists of keeping on 
twisting each of the loose strands in turn 
around one of the neighbouring strands of 
the stranding part of the rope. 


C-2 The Liverpool splice shall never be 
used in a rope which is free to spin as the 
tucks are not firmly held, and the 
untwisting at the rope’s end may cause 
these tucks to draw out. 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.4) 
METHOD FOR LONG SPLICING 


D-I LENGTH 


D-1.1 The length to be taken for splicing 
shall be not less than 960 times the 
diameter of the rope. 


D-2 METHOD 


D-2.1 The two rope ends shall be placed 
alongside each other at a distance equal to 
half the intended length of splicing, a 
temporary binding on each rope end those 
points shall be made (see Fig. 2). 


D-2.2 Each rope end up to the temporary 
bindings shall be unstranded and each 
alternate strand shall be cut to within a 
short distance of the bindings; each rope 
end shall now have three long strand ends 
and three short strand ends. 


FIG. 2 BINDINGS FOR LUNG SPLICE 


D-2.3 The two rope ends shall be joined 
together as shown in Fig. 3 with each 
strand from one rope end lying between 
two strands from the opposite rope and 
with the long strand ends and short strand 
ends from opposite sides lying adjacent to 
each other (see Fig. 3). The two fibre core 
ends shall be protruding from the centre of 
the rope through the same strand space. 


Fic. 3 JOINING FOR LONG SPLICE 


D-2.4 The temporary bindings shall be 
removed and the two rope ends are forced 
into each other until each falls into the lay 
of the other. This is important, otherwise, 
the lay of the rope may be lost at the joint 
and may spoil the whole splice. 


D-2.5 The short strand end 1 shall be taken 
and unlaid from the rope, at the same time 
the long strand end A shall be laid into the 
space vacated. This shall be continued 
until within a short distance of the end of 
strand A, that is, until the whole length of 
A, except the length to be tucked, has been 
used up. 


D-2.6 The same procedure shall be 
followed with strand ends 2 and B for a 
distance equal to two-thirds of XY, and 
again same procedure shall be repeated 
with strand ends 3 and C for a distance 
equal to one third of XY. 


D-2.7 The same procedure, as described in 
D-2.5 and D-2.6 shall be repeated in the 
opposite direction along the rope and 
strand pairs F and 6, D and 5, E and 4, 
shall be used. 


D-2.8 The excess length from the long 
strands shall be cut off leaving free only 
the length to be tucked and the rope shall 
appear as shown in Fig. 3. 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


D-2.9 Now each strand pair shall be taken 
in turn, and the ends shall be immersed at 
strand A and 1 (Fig. 4). This shall be done 
to expose the fibre core and this shall be 
cut through. The marlin spoke shall be 
used to lift out the core ends. 


Fic. 4 LONG SPLICE 


D-2.10 The strand ends are now ready for 
tucking or binding, which may be achieved 
by recrossing the strands after cutting the 
fibre core and then making the tuck. 


D-2.11 The flat spike shall be forced 
between the two strands through which the 


tucks axe to be made, and the spike shall 
be passed under two strands. The spoon 
spike shall be placed on the bottom strand 
of the two strands, raised by the flat spike, 
then with the strand end to be tucked 
between the spikes, the spikes shall be 
used as levers to force the strand end into 
the centre of the rope. Now the spoon 
spike shall be discarded and by rotating the 
flat spike with the lay of the rope, the 
tucked end of the rope shall be run along 
the centre of the rope until it is covered, 
and finally, the core shall be cut so that it 
butts up to the end of the tuck. 


D-2.12 The procedure mentioned in D- 
2.11 shall be repeated with the opposite 
strand end and the tuck shall be completed. 
The same procedure shall be repeated with 
each of the remaining strand pairs; finally 
the two ends of fibre core shall be cut off 
at the point of ‘joint’ and the splice 
completed. 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 4.5) 


PLAIN EYE AND THIMBLE SPLICING FOR MULTI-STRAND NON-ROTATING 
ROPES 


E-I NON-ROTATING SPLICE FOR 17 
x 7 CONSTRUCTION 


E-l.1 The end of the rope and its terminals 
shall be prepared and assembled in a 
manner similar to that described in Fig. 5. 


TAIL OF TUCKING 
STRAND 


MAIN PARTS 


FIG. 5 TAIL AND MAIN WIRE ROPE FOR 
NON-ROTATING SPLICE OF 17 x 7 
CONSTRUCTION 


E-l.2 The tucks shall be made only under 
the outer strands of the main part of the 
rope. The inner strands or inner rope shall 
not be pierced with a spike or disturbed in 
any way. 


E-1.3 The first series of tucks shall be as 
given below : 


SI No. Group No. Tail No. In at Out at Direction 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) One 3, 4, 14 A E Clockwise 
i) Two 1, 2, 13 A C Clockwise 
ili) Three 5, 6, 15 A G Anti-Clockwise 
iv) Four 7, 8, 16 A J Anti-Clockwise 
v) Five 9, 10, 17 A L Anti-Clockwise 
vi) Six 11, 12 C A Anti-Clockwise 


E-1.4 For ropes having a wire strand core, 
the core shall be grouped with tails No. 11 
and No. 12, that is, group six. 


E-1.5 The second and third series of tucks 
shall be as given below : 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


SI No. Group No. Second Series of Tucks Third Series of Tucks 

In at Out at In at Out at 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) One E G J L 
i) Two G J L A 
iii) Three J L A C 
iv) Four L A C E 
v) Five A C E C 
vi) Six C E G J 


E-1.6 Fourth and Fifth Series of Tucks 


These shall be done on the same principle 
as before. The splice shall be removed 
from the vice and partially made splice 
shall be hammered down, starting from the 
terminal. One strand from each group shall 
be removed (excepting 6, if this is only a 
two-strand group). Again, the splice shall 
be replaced in the vice. 


E-1.7 Sixth and Seventh Series of Tucks 


These tucks shall be done on the same 
principle as before. One strand from each 
group shall be removed leaving one strand 
in each group. 


E-1.8 Eighth and Ninth Series of Tucks 


These series of tucks shall be done on the 
same principle as before. Splice shall be 
removed from vice. All the tucks shall be 
hammered down, starting from the 
terminal, and the taper shall be rounded 
off. Surplus ends of the tucking strands 
shall be broken off and served over the 
taper or the portion thereof which contains 
the wire ends. 


E-1.9 A tighter splice shall be made when 
at the first series of tucks the outer strands 
are tucked first, for example, No. 3 and 


10 


No. 4, then No. 1 and No. 2, then No. 5 
and No. 6, and so on; the inner strands 
shall be turned separately into the 
interstice given in the table, that is, No. 14 
with No. 3 and No. 4, No. 13 with No. 1 
and No. 2, etc. It is usual to splice a 
Bordeaux connection with 9 tucks as 
described herein, but for thimbles which 
are not, intended to run over sheaves, 7 
tucks are sufficient. In this case, one strand 
would be removed after the fourth series of 
tucking and another after the sixth. 


E-1.10 When removing strands during the 
splicing, the cut should be made as close to 
their emergence as possible. The wires 
should be broken out separately. 


E-1.11 When fitting a thimble, same 
procedure shall be followed when 
preparing the rope for a five-tuck splice in 
six stranded ropes. 


E-2 NON-ROTATING SPLICE FOR 18 
x 7 CONSTRUCTION 


E-2.1 The splicing for 18 x 7 construction 
shall be the same as for 17 x 7 rope 
construction, except for the following 
group arrangements (see Fig 6). 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


TAIL OF TUCKING 
STRAND 


MAIN PARTS 


Fic. 6 TAIL AND MAIN WIRE ROPE FOR NON-ROTATING ROPE OF 18 x 7 CONSTRUCTION 


E-2.2 The first series of tucks shall be as given below : 


SI No. Group No. Tail No. In at Out at Direction 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Two 3, 4, 15 A E Clockwise 
il) One 1, 2, 14 A C Clockwise 
ili) Three 5, 6, 16 A G Anti-Clockwise 
iv) Four 7, 8, 17 A J Anti-Clockwise 
v) Five 9, 10, 18 A L Anti-Clockwise 
vi) Six 11, 12, 13 C A Anti-Clockwise 


E-2.3 For ropes having a wire strand core, 
the core shall be grouped with tails, No. 
11, No. 12 and No. 13, that is, group six. 
The remaining tucks shall be the same as 
in the case of wire rope of 17 x 7 
construction. 


E-3 NON-ROTATING SPLICE FOR 34 
x 7 CONSTRUCTION 


11 


E-3.1 The tucks shall be made under the 
outer strands only of the main part of the 
rope. The inner strands of inner rope shall 
not be pierced with a spike or disturbed in 
any way. The length of the tails for tucking 
shall be at least 60 times the diameter of 
the rope (see Fig. 7). 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


P N 


TAILS OR TUCKING i 
MAIN PART 


STRANDS 


FIG. 7 NON-ROTATING SPLICE FOR WIRE ROPES OF 34 x 7CONSTRUCTION 


E-3.2 The first series of tucks shall be as given below : 


SI No. Group No. Tail No. In at Out at Direction 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Three 5, 6, 22, 29 A G Clockwise 
i) Tvvo 3, 4, 20, 21 A E Clockwise 
ili) One 1, 2, 18, 19 A C Clockwise 
iv) Four 7, 8, 23, 30 A J Anti-Clockwise 
v) Five 9, 10, 24, 31 A L Anti-Clockwise 
vi) Six 11, 12, 25, 32 A N Anti-Clockwise 
vii) Seven 12, 14, 26, 33 A P Anti-Clockwise 
viii) Eight 15, 27, 34 A S Anti-Clockwise 
ix) Nine 16, 17, 28 B A Anti-Clockwise 


E-3.3 The second, third, fourth and fifth series of tucks shall be as given below : 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


SI No. Group Second Series Third Series Fourth Series Fifth Series 


da Inat Out Inat Outat Inat Out Inat Out 
at at at 

DN DD (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
i) One E G J L N P S B 
ii) Two G J L N S B C 
iii) Three J L N P S B C E 
iv) Four L N P S B C E G 
v) Five N P S B C E G J 
vi) Six P S B C E G J L 
vii) Seven S B C E G J L N 
viii) Eight B C E G J L N P 
ix) Nine C E G J L N P S 

E-3.4 After completion of the fifth series, E-3.5 Eighth and Ninth Series 


one tail from each group shall be removed 
except in groups eight and nine, to provide 
nine groups each with three tails. For the 
sixth and seventh series the method of 
operation is same as before; one tail from 
each group shall be removed. 


This series of tucks shall be done on the 
same principle as before. Broken off ends 
shall be hammered up and served over. 


13 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX F 


(Clause 4.6) 
METHODS FOR LONG EYE AND THIMBLE SPLICE FOR STRANDED ROPES 


F-1 FIVE — TUCK SPLICE 


F-1.1 Proper method of splicing shall be 
followed so as to ensure that after the first 
series of tucks, the tucking strands or tails 
shall emerge from the main part of the 
rope in their correct positions. In the case 
of a six stranded rope, one tucking strand 
shall emerge from each interstice, or 
gusset of the main part. 


F-1.2 The wire ropes shall be prepared in 
the following way before splicing is done. 


F-1.2.1 The rope shall be measured and 
marked where it has to form the centre of 
the crown of the eye making due 
allowance for the loss in the straight length 
caused by the curving of the rope for 
making a loop. 


F-1.2.2 The rope shall be fixed in a vice 
and bent to form a loop so that the mark 
comes at the crown part of the loop, the 
length of the short end of the rope left 
protruding shall not be less than 32 times 
the diameter of the rope. 


F-1.2.3 The two parts of the rope shall be 
forced close together at the loop points and 
the rope shall be marked where the short 
end leaves the loop points. 


F-1.2.4 These two parts shall be firmly 
seized together with strong wire so that 


14 


they are in direct contact. This seizing 
shall only consist of two or three turns of 
wire. 


F-1.3 During the preparation and prior to 
making the tucks, no strand should be 
removed from the wire rope. 


F-1.4 The loop shall be placed in the vice 
with the rope leading vertical and the short 
end on the left hand side. 


F-1.5 The end bindings shall be removed 
and the short end of the rope shall be 
unlaid to provide the tails for splicing. 


F-1.6 The fibre main core shall be tucked 
into the main part together with tail No. 1 
during the first tuck and the core shall then 
be cut off where it emerges from the main 
part. 


F-1.7 In the case of the wire ropes with 
wire cores, the wire core shall never be cut 
from the rope. This shall be split up and 
wire or strands shall be distributed among 
the tucking tails, and shall be tucked with 
them for at least 3 tucks. 


F-1.8 When the rope is not preformed the 
ends of each tail shall be bound separately. 


F-1.9 The first three series of tucks shall 
be as shown below (see Fig. 8 and Fig. 9). 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


SI First Series of Tucks Second Series of Tucks Third Series of Tucks 
No. 
Tail No. Inat Outat TailNo. Inat Outat TailNo. Inat Outat 


(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 0) (8) (9) (10) 


1) 1 B A 1 1 B 1 D E 
ii) 6 C B 6 6 C 6 E F 
iii) 2 B C 2 2 D 2 F A 
iv) 3 C D 3 3 E 3 A B 
v) 5 D F 4 4 F 4 B C 
vi) 4 D E 5 5 A 5 C D 


FOURTH TUCK FIFTH TUCK SIXTH TUCK 


FIG. 8 FIRST SERIES OF TUCKS 


o 
Ono 


TAIL MAIN PART 


FIG. 9 DIAGRAM SHOWING THE EMERGENCE OF TAILS AFTER 
THE FIRST SERIES IS COMPLETED 


15 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


F-1.10 After the third series, the ‘wires of 
a wire main core may be broken off, and 
the number of wires in each of the main 
tails shall be reduced to half of the original 
number, preferably by breaking off. The 
remaining wires shall be twisted up to a 


rough strand formation, and at the same 
time the cut ends shall be enclosed in the 
centre. 


F-1.11 The fourth and fifth series of tucks 
shall be as shown below : 


SI No. Fourth Series of Tucks Fifth Series of Tucks 
Tail No. In at Out at Tail No. In at Out at 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 1 F A 1 B C 
ii) 6 A B 6 C D 
iii) 2 B C 2 D E 
iv) 3 C D 3 E F 
v) 4 D E 4 F A 
vi) 5 E F 5 A B 


F-1.12 The splice shall be removed and the 
taper shall be hammered down, starting 
from the eye end and working down the 
taper, so as to tighten up the tucks and to 
round up the taper. The protruding wire 
ends shall be removed preferably by 
‘breaking off, and again rounded up over 
the broken-off ends. The taper (or at least 
that portion containing the wire ends of the 
tails) shall be served with spun yarn or 
wire strand to give protection to the user 
when handling. 


F-1.13 The tails should be pulled down in 
line with the centre line of the loop. To get 
the tuck tight and short, it should be beaten 
by means of a mallet or hammer, so as to 
get the tuck as nearly as possible at right 
angles to the axis of the rope. The 
hammering should start on the position of 
the tails before its entry into the rope, and 
shall be continued on the tuck itself. 


F-1.14 Instead of loop, when thimble has 
to be spliced, the method for splicing shall 
be as given below. 


16 


F-1.14.1 The thimble shall be placed with 
its crown on the mark made on the wire 
(see F-1.2.1) and short end of the rope 
shall be bent around in the groove of 
thimble, the short end of the rope shall be 
left protruding therefrom, and this will 
provide the length for tucking tail. This 
length shall be not less than 32 times the 
diameter of the rope. 


F-1.14.2 The two parts of the rope shall be 
forced close together at the thimble points, 
and where the short end leaves the thimble 
points the rope shall be marked B. 


F-1.14.3 Where the short end is longer 
than is necessary for the tails, the required 
length shall be measured and marked C. 
The thimble shall be removed. The rope 
shall be bound firmly at mark B with fine 
fibre, working away from the short end for 
a distance equal to two-and-a-half times 
the diameter of the rope. When necessary, 
cutting bindings shall be put on each side 
of mark C and rope shall be cut off. 


F-1.14.4 The thimble shall be re- 
assembled at its appropriate position, the 
rope shall be bent around and the two parts 
of rope forced together at the points of the 
thimble. These two parts shall be firmly 
seized together with strong wire so that 
they are in direct contact. This seizing 
shall only consist of two or three turns of 
wires. 


F-1.14.5 The rope and thimble shall he 
tightly bound together at the crown of the 
thimble and again on each flank, serving 
towards the point of the thimble and as 
close as possible thereto so that the rope is 
in solid contact with the groove of the 
thimble and that the two parts of the rope 
are together at the crutch (see Fig. 10). 


auld 


gon 0 


Fic. 10 PREPARATION FOR THIMBLE SPLICE 
(SIX-STRANDED ROPE) 


F-1.14.6 Tucking procedure in case of 
fitting a thimble at the end shall be the 
same as for making the plain loop (see 
Annex E). 


F-2 ALTERNATIVE METHODS 


F-2.1 One of the alternative methods of 
splicing is to have the first series of tucks 
as given below (see Fig. 11). The fibre 
main core shall be tucked into the main 
parts together with the tail No. 2 for the 
first tack and core shall then be cut off. 


17 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


The other series of tucks shall be as given 
in F-I. 


SI No. First Series 
Tail No. In at Out at 

(1) 2) (3) (4) 

i) 1 B D 
il) 2 B E 
iii) 3 B F 
iv) 4 B A 

v) 5 C B 
vi) 6 D C 


F-2.2 Another method of splicing is to 
have the first series of tuck as given below. 
The other series of tucks shall be as given 
in F-2.1. 


SI First Series 
No. 
Tail No. In at Out at 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 1 A B 
ii) 2 A C 
iii) 3 A D 
iv) 4 A E 
v) 5 A F 
vi) 6 B A 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


Fic. 11 DIAGRAM SHOWING THE 
EMERGENCE OF TAILS AFTER THE 
FIRST SERIES IS COMPLETED 


F-3 FOUR-AND-A-HALF-TUCK 
SPLICINGS 


18 


F-3.1 The preparation of the rope shall be 
done in the similar manner as already 
described in the case of five-tuck splice. 
The first, second and third series of tucks 
shall also be done in the same manner as 
specified in the case of five-tuck splice. In 
the fourth series of tucks, the strand ends 
shall be tucked as usual without cutting the 
half number of wires, which is being done 
in case of five-tuck splice. 


F-3.2 The half-tuck shall be done by 
passing the alternate strands over the 
adjacent rope strands and under the 
following two strands going against the lay 
of the rope. 


F-3.3 After the splicing is complete, it 
shall be hammered and served in the same 
manner as described in case of five-tuck 
splice. 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 4.7) 
ENDLESS ROPE 


G-I BUTT SPLICE 


G-I.1 The two ends of the rope shall be 
joined together by two five-tuck splices. 


G-2 NUMBER OF TUCKS 


G-2.1 The splices shall be tucked three 
times with the full size of the strand, a 
fourth time with the strands each reduced 
to half the original number and a fifth time 
with the strands each further reduced to 
one third the original number. The heart 
strand is to be rowed in during tucking so 
that a double heart is produced for at least 
the length of the first three tucks in both 
directions. 


G-3 METHOD OF TUCKING 


G-3.1 The tucks of the splice shall be 
made over one strand and under one strand 
against the lay of the rope. The heart 
strand of the rope shall not be removed 
when the strands are opened out for 
tucking, but maybe cut to a suitable length. 


G-3.2 First Three Tucks 


After marrying the rope so that the two 
heart strands emerge at opposite sides, the 
first tuck is to be made as follows. 


G-3.2.1 The spike shall be inserted in the 
stranding rope immediately to the left of 
the heart strand of the rope being tucked. 
The strand next on the right of the heart 
strand shall then be tucked through, the 
heart strand being forced in as the spike is 
rowed. Then the strand to the left of the 
heart strand shall be tucked and so on, 
working round from right to left 
completing the tuck. After a tuck has been 
completed, the strands should be hoved 
well home, so that a neat lay of tuck 


19 


without kinks is formed. The tuck shall be 
beaten down and a good whipping shall be 
put on to prevent back spring of the 
strands whilst making the next tuck. The 
second and the third tucks are to be made 
in the same manner as the first tuck. 


G-3.3 Fourth Tuck 


The wires in each tucking strand shall be 
reduced to half of the original number of 
wires. Any length of heart strand 
remaining outside the stranding rope shall 
now be cut off and the end rowed in as 
before. Tucking shall then proceed up to 
the first three tucks. 


G-3.4 Fifth Tuck 


Wires in the tucking strands are again 
reduced to half of the numbers which they 
had after fourth tuck. These shall then be 
finally tucked, over one and under one, 
and the tuck shall be beaten down, as in 
the previous tucks. 


G-4 FINISHING OF THE SPLICE 


G-4.1 On completion of tucking, the rope 
shall be stretched and the ends of all wires, 
including those which have to be laid back 
and stopped down, shall be broken off 
close in the nip of the lay of the rope by 
twisting. 


G-5 FINISHING 


G-5.1 The ends of the splice in way of the 
twisted-off ends of wire, that is, between 
the end and the third tuck, shall be tightly 
served with seizing wire, after parceling 
with canvas, hessian or wax paper. 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX H 
(Clause 4.8) 
GROMMET 


H-I A grommet consists of an endless rope 
having 6/1 construction and is used where 
high ultimate breaking strength of the rope 
is required beyond the limits of a single 
part rope. 


H-2 A strand of sufficient length to 
complete the grommet shall be obtained by 
either of the following methods : 


Method A — An outer strand shall 
be unlaid from a specimen of 6/1 
rope conforming to the 
requirements of the customer. 


Method B — Unlaying from a 
specimen of 6/4 rope having 
strands in all respects equivalent to 
that obtained by method A above. 


Method C — Using a virgin strand 
either preformed or post-formed 
and in all other respects equivalent 
to those obtained by Methods A 
and B above. 


H-3 During the course of construction of 
the grommet the preformed lay of the 
strand shall be maintained and shall not be 
interfered with, except when laying in the 
core, for which purpose lengths of strand 
left to form the core should be 
straightened. 


H-4 The length of the strand required to 
form a grommet shall be equal to about 
seven-and-a-half times the perimeter of the 
grommet. If the bearing length and the 
sizes of the eye at each end of the grommet 
are known, then the .perimeter of the 
grommet shall be calculated as follows 
(see Fig. 12): 


20 


Perimeter i of I grommet 
= (2 xX)+ (24 x ¥)+ (22 xZ) 


=2¥ +2-5(¥+2Z) 


Fic. 12 PERIMETER OF GROMMET 


H-5 To form a grommet, the appropriate 
length of the strand shall be taken and its 
two ends shall be tightly secured with flax. 
The whole length of the strand shall be 
formed into a coil SO that it is, easy to 
handle. 


H-6 Depending upon the size of the 
grommet, a circular ring of a rod or strand 
(of band wires) equal to the diameter of 
strand required for the grommet shall be 
taken. One of the ends of the strand shall 
be tied securely with flax at any point on 
the circular ring. The strand shall then be 
turned round and round about the circular 
ring in proper direction, care being taken 
to see that the torsion of the strand is taken 
out after each turn and the strand shall be 
tightly laid. This operation is repeated till 
the strand is wound six times round the 
ring and the starting point is reached. At 
this point, the rod shall be lifted and cut. 
Then the rod shall be removed from one 
side and its place shall be gradually 
occupied by the starting end of the strand. 
Similarly, the other half of the rod shall 
also be removed, and its place shall be 
gradually occupied by the finishing end of 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


the strand. The finishing end of the strand between the starting and the finishing 
shall then be cut off in such a way that ends. 
there shall be a gap of about 6 mm 


21 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX J 
( Forevord ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Wire Ropes and Wire Products Sectional Committee, MED 10 


Organization 
Directorate General of Mines Safety, 


Dhanbad 


Bharat Coking Coal Limited, Dhanbad 


Bharat Wire Ropes Limited, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
New Delhi 


Directorate General FAC Advice Service 
and Lab Institute, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Aeronautical 
Quality Assurance, New Delhi 
Eastern Coalfields Limited, Kolkata 


Hindustan Zinc Limited, Dariba 


Maccaferri Environment Solutions Pvt. 
Limited, Navi Mumbai 


Representative(s) 

SHRI D B NAIK (Chairman) 

SHRI VIJAY BARAPATRE (Alternate) 
SHRI P. K. SINHA 

SHRI R. K. MUNSHI (Alternate) 
SHRI MAHENDER SINGH ARORA 

SHRI MAYANK MITTAL (Alternate) 
DR MANOJ KUMAR SINGH, 

DR DEBASISH BSSAK (Alternate) 
COL K. SURESH 

LT COL JA VORA (Alternate) 
SHRI B N JHA 


SHRI AMIT GOLA 


SHRI SANTOSH INGOLE 


DR MANAS KUMAR 
SHRI RAKESH SINGHVI 

SHRI SUFAL MEHROTRA (Alternate) 
SHRIMATI MINIMOL KORULLA 


SHRI RUDRA 


(Alternate) 


22 


BUDDHABHATTI 


Organization 


Manganese Ore Limited, Nagpur 


Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 


Nanda and Miller Co., Kolkata 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Oil and Natural Gas Commission, New 
Delhi 


Orient Wire Ropes, Indore 


South Eastern coalfields Limited, Bilaspur 


Tata Steel Limited, Dhanbad 
The Shipping Corporation of India Limited, 
Mumbai 


Usha Martin Industries Limited, Ranchi 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 5245 (Part 1) : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRIS C RAI 
SHRI ATUL SHARMA (Alternate I) 
SHRI ASHWINI BAGHELE (Alternate IT) 


SHRI RUDRA BUDHBHATTI (Alternate 
IIT) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI J P GOENKA 


SHRI SURESH PARWAL 

SHRI ANGAD VERMA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAKESH KUMAR SRIVASTAVA 

SHRI RITUJIT HAZARIKA (Alternate) 
SHRI SAMEER GOLWELKAR 

SHRI SHISHIR AKARTE (Alternate) 
SHRI KAPIL K. RAI 

SHRI D. BHATTACHARJEE (Alternate) 
SHRI SOUMENDU MAJHI 
SHRI G. S. BHALLA 

CAPT R.MODI (Alternate) 
SHRI SUBRATA DUTTA 

SHRI SANDEEP JAISWAL (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, Scientist ‘E’ And 


Head (MED) [Representing Director General 
(Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Shri Sandeep Keshav 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


23 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 10 (18865). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central —: 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 84 Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


