INATA Ah IS 6480 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ate Ud cae a ISAAC 
SORT À taifa — roarai 


(FET FIAT ) 


Terms Relating to Domestic and 
Commercial Gas Burning 
Appliances — Glossary 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 75.160.30; 97.040.20 


© BIS 2023 


SUGE Aah at 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WMS WH, 9 TT Me TH AM, Ag feet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


STS 


July 2023 Price Group 8 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee, MED 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalised 
by the Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances (Pressure Type) Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard is intended to make available simplified definitions of terms used in the production and trade of 
domestic and commercial gas-burning appliances. The definitions are given in a manner so that they are generally 
understood by a user of this standard. 


This standard was first published in 1971 and subsequently revised in 1988. This standard is being revised again 
to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international practices. Also, in this revision, the 
standard has been brought into the latest style and format of Indian Standards. Some new terms related to gas- 
burning appliances have also been added with this revision. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding-off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded-off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


TERMS RELATING TO DOMESTIC AND 
COMMERCIAL GAS BURNING APPLIANCES — GLOSSARY 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard defines the term relating to domestic 
and commercial gas-burning appliances. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 
A 


2.1 Aeration-Adjuster — A device, such as shutter, 
screw, clip or vane for regulating the amount of air 
entrained by a jet of gas (air adjuster in case of a 
furnace). 


2.2 Aeration Number (ATB No.) (A No.) — The 
measure if the flame speed of a gas obtained by the 
use of an aeration test burner, indicative of light- 
back tendency on aerated burners. 


2.3 Aerated Burner — A burner in which the 
primary air has been mixed with the gas before it 
leaves the burner port’s. 


2.4 Air-Gas Ratio — The ratio of the volume of 
primary air to the volume gas in a gas air mixture. 


2.5 Air Heater — An appliance for heating air to be 
used for space heating. 


2.6 Air Port — An aperture for admitting 
combustion air to a burner. 


2.7 Air Shutter — An adjustable device for varying 
the size of the primary air inlets. 


2.8 Airing Cupboard Heater — A heating unit of 
a low heat output designed for installation in a 
ventilated cupboard or other suitable small enclosed 
space to enable it to be used as a airing clothes or 
household linen, or for similar poses. 


2.9 Ambient Temperature Error — The change in 
the controlled temperature produced by a given 
change in the temperature of the parts of the 
thermostat other than the sensing element. 


2.10 Anchor Block — A block surrounding or 
attached to a pipe to prevent movement of the pipe 
due to pressure or thermal stress. 


2.11 Appliance Base — The lowest supporting frame 
or structure of the appliance, exclusive of legs. 


2.12 Appliance Governor — A governor installed 
in or before an appliance to control burner output. 


2.13 Atmospheric Burner — An aerated burner 
where the combustion air is entrained at atmospheric 
pressure. 


2.14 Automatic Boiler — An appliance with 
automatic water feed which can give a continuous 
supply of boiling water. 


2.15 Automatic Ignitor — An automatic device 
which ignites the gas in a burner when the valve 
controlling the gas to the burner is turned on and will 
relight the flame when the burner gets accidentally 
extinguished at any setting. 


2.16 Automatic Valve (for Gas Control) — The 
automatic device consisting essentially of a valve 
and operator that controls the gas supply to the 
burner(s) during the normal operation of an 
appliance. 


2.17 Axial Tap — A tap in which one or more valve 
or pistons moves axially to open and close the ports. 


B 


2.18 Backlash — A control knob movement that 
does not transmit an effect through the mechanical 
linkage to the control element of a thermostat. 


2.19 Baffle — An object placed in an appliance to 
change the direction of, or retard, the flow of air-gas 
mixture, or flue gases. 


2.20 Bain Marie — An appliance for keeping 
cooked food in bulk in hot condition: 


a) Open Wall Bain Marie — A shallow 
receptacle containing water and heated from 
below. Post and pans containing cooked 
food are stored in to kept hot; 


Fitted Container Bain Marie (Wet) — A 
shallow receptacle containing hot water and 
having a top provided with containers in 
which cooked food is stored for being kept 
in hot condition; and 

Fitted Container Bain Marie (Dry) — As (b) 
but without a water well, in which the 
containers are kept hot by the circulation of 
thermostatically controlled hot air. 


b 


wm 


c 


< 


IS 6480 : 2023 


2.21 Balanced-Flued Appliance — A room-sealed 
appliance in which the combustion air inlet and 
products outlet are so disposed that wind effects are 
substantially balanced. 


2.22 Balanced Flue Duct — The duct within a 
balanced flue terminal assembly carrying products 
of combustion from the combustion chamber to the 
outlet. 


2.23 Balanced Flue Nozzle — The nozzle forming 
the outlet end of a balanced flue duct. 


2.24 Bar Burner — A burner in the form of a length 
of tubing with a series of burner ports or jets in one 
or more parallel straight lines. 


2.25 Bio-gas — Fuel gas produced from cattle dung 
and/or other biomass. 


2.26 Boiling Table — An appliance of following 
types, with one or more individually controlled 
burners for heating cooking utensils. 


a) Open Top Boiling Table — A boiling table 
in which cooking utensils stand on open 
metal grids over individual burners and are 
heated by direct flame contact; 

Solid Top Boiling Table — A boiling table 
consisting of smooth metal plate(s) heated 
by burners underneath; and 


b 


wm 


c 


S 


Stockpot Stand/Stove — A low-level boiling 
table usually having one burner, with open 
or solid top, primarily for use with stockpots 
or for urns, vegetable pans or similar large 
utensils. 


2.27 Bottled Gas — Liquefied petroleum gases 
marketed in pressure containers. 


2.28 Branched Flue System — A common open 
flue system in which the products of combustion in 
each appliance discharge by way of a substantially 
vertical subsidiary flue into the main flue. 


2.29 Breakfast Cooker — A small appliance 
consisting of an oven surmounted either by two 
boiling burners or by one boiling burner and a grill. 


2.30 Bubble Leak Indicator — An apparatus for 
measuring gas leakage rate. 


2.31 Built-in Appliance — An appliance designed 
to be used only when installed in another structure 
or fitment. 


2.32 Burner — A device for the final conveyance 
of the gas or a mixture of gas and air to produce a 
suitable flame which is maintained on or in it. 


2.33 Burner Body — A main casting or pressing of 
a burner. 


2.34 Burner Box — A box in which a burner is 
situated. 


2.35 Burner Head — The part of a burner that 
incorporates the burner ports. 


2.36 Burner Mixing Tube — A tube connecting the 
injector and the burner ports, in which the mixing of 
air and gas takes place. 


2.37 Burner System — The burner(s) and all 
controls downstream of a gas isolating valve of the 
plant or appliance. 


2.38 Burner port flame port — An aperture in a 
burner through which gas or a gas/air mixture is 
discharged for combustion. 


Cc 


2.39 Cafe set — A hot beverage appliance 
comprising an automatic boiler or pressure boiler 
with attached heated side urns for the storage of hot 
milk and coffee. 


2.40 Calibration Point — A point within the 
working temperature range used for the purpose of 
checking temperature calibration. 


2.41 Calorific Value (Heat of Combustion) — The 
number of heat units liberated by the complete 
combustion of unit volume or mass of gas under 
specific conditions. 


a) Gross Calorific Value — The sum of the 
number of heat units liberated by the 
complete combustion of the unit volume or 
mass of gas and heat released by 
condensation of water vapour produced 
from the condition; and 


b) Net Calorific Value — The gross calorific 
value minus the heat released by the 
condensation of water vapour produced 
from combustion. 


2.42 Cap — An external fitting used to close an 
outlet. A pipe or fitting so treated is termed capped. 


2.43 Central Heating System — A fixed system for 
warming a building from a single source of heat, 
with manual or automatic control of the operation of 
the whole system and of the temperatures in the 
heated spaces. 


2.44 Chimney — A conduit or structure enclosing a 
flue connected to the outside air for discharge of 
combustion products. 


2.45 Closed Position of Thermostat — That end 
position of the thermostat setting which results in, or 
tends to result in the smallest flow of gas through the 
thermostat. 


2.46 Cock — A type of valve, used to stop the main 
supply of a fluid, that is operated by rotation of a 
drilled or slotted plug and that is normally left in the 
‘N’ position. 


2.47 Cold Condition — A condition of an appliance 
required for some tests in which the cold appliance 
is in thermal equilibrium with its surroundings and 
in which the gas has not been lit. 


2.48 Combined Appliance — A combination of 
two or more appliances having separate functions, 
each with its own burner and control system, but 
designed to be installed as a composite unit. 


2.49 Combustion — A phenomenon of rapid 
oxidation of fuel accompanied by the production of 
heat or heat and light. 


2.50 Combustion Chamber — The portion of an 
appliance within which the main combustion of fuel 
occurs. 


2.51 Combustion Characteristics — Properties of 
fuel (gas) which influence the behaviour of 
flame when fuel is burnt. 


2.52 Combination Firing Burner — A burner 
system with two or more fuels firing simultaneously 
on the burner(s). 


2.53 Combustion Products — The constituents 
resulting from the combustion of a fuel with oxygen 
of air. 


2.54 Commercial Butane — The liquefied 
C4 hydrocarbon gases consisting mainly of butanes 
and/or butylene. 


2.55 Commercial Butane-Propane Mixture — A 
liquefied C3 and C4 hydrocarbon gas mixture 
consisting mainly of butanes and or butylene with 
propane and/or propylene. 


2.56 Commercial Propane — The liquefied 
C; hydrocarbon gases consisting mainly of propane 
and/or propylene. 


2.57 Common Flue System — A share open flue 
system including branched flue system, serving two 


IS 6480 : 2023 


or more appliances installed in the same room or 
separate rooms or space(s). 


2.58 Concentric Burner — A burner having 
concentric rings of different ratings operated by 
separate gas taps. 


2.59 Condensate — The liquid which separates 
from a gas, including flue gases due to cooling 
effect. 


2.60 Contact Grill/Fry Top/Fry Plate — A solid 
metal plate grill heated from below, used for frying. 


2.61 Continental Type Burner — A burner having 
burner ports near to the surface being heated and 
giving flames which extend radially. 


2.62 Controls — Devices designed to regulate the 
gas, air, water or electrical supplies to a gas 
appliance. These may be manual, semi-automatic or 
automatic. 


2.63 Conventionally-Flued Appliance — A flued 
appliance in which the air for combustion is taken 
from the room in which the appliance is installed and 
in which the provision is made for the diversion of 
down draught. 


2.64 Convector — An air heater that discharges 
heated air only into the space in which it is installed. 


2.65 Cooking Range — A heavy-duty cooker 
designed for domestic or commercial cooking. 


2.66 Cooking Range Back — An outer panel 
forming the back of a cooking range. 


2.67 Cooking Range Side Panel (Left Hand, Right 
Hand) — A panel forming an outer side of a 
cooking range. 


2.68 Cooking Space — The space within an 
appliance that may usefully be employed for the 
cooking of food. 


2.69 Crown — The outer top panel of a cooker 
oven. 


2.70 Crown Tray/Crown Plate — A separate 
enamelled tray having an opening to accommodate 
burner heads, covering the crown of a cooker oven. 


2.71 Cluster Burner — An inverted burner in 
which more than one mantle is fitted. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


D 


2.72 Damper — A device used to vary the volume 
of air passing through a confined cross-section by 
varying the effective sectional area. 


2.73 Deep Fat Fryer — An appliance for cooking 
food by immersion in hot fat or oil. 


2.74 Delay-off Timer — A control device used in 
conjunction with an appliance which, when 
operated, will give a pre-determined period of 
operation and then switch off. 


2.75 Delay-on Timer — A control device used in 
conjunction with an appliance which, when 
operated, will give a pre-determined period of delay 
and then allow gas to flow to the appliance. 


2.76 Direct-fired Oven — An oven in which the 
products of combustion how through the oven 
compartment. 


2.77 Direct Gas Thermostat — A thermostat in 
which the main supply of gas to the burner is passed 
between the valve and valve seating, and is, 
therefore, directly controlled by the sensing element. 


2.78 Direct Heating — A method of heating 
furnaces and ovens in which the hot products of 
combustion come into contact with the stock. 


2.79 Distant Control/Remote Control — A device 
which enables a gas flame to be ignited, 
extinguished and sometimes controlled from a 
position distant from the consuming appliance. 


2.80 Door Catch — The fitting on a cooking range 
into which the door latch fits when the door is 
closed. 


2.81 Door Insulation — A means of reducing the 
heat flow through the walls of a heated space of 
object: 


a) Air Space Insulation — Insulation 
consisting of two adjacent surfaces 
constructed to prevent the full circulation 
of the air held between them; and 


b) Solid Insulation — Any solid material used 
to obstruct the flow of gas. 


2.82 Door Latch — The fitting on the cooking 
range which engages the door catch when the door 
is closed. 


2.83 Draught — A pressure below atmospheric at 
the base of a chimney or in a waste gas flue. 


2.84 Draught Diverter — A device for preventing 
conditions in a secondary flue from interfering with 
the combustion performance of an appliance. 


2.85 Draught Hood — A device built into an 
appliance, or made part of the flue pipe from an 
appliance which is designed to (a) assure the ready 
escape of products of combustion in the event of no 
draught, back draught or stoppage beyond the 
draught hood, (b) prevent a back draught from 
entering the appliance, and (c) neutralize the effect 
of stack action of the chimney or gas vent upon the 
operation of appliance. 


2.86 Draught Stabilizer — A flue break, the area 
of which increases with increasing flue draught. 


2.87 Drilled Burner — A burner giving a multiple 
number of small flames from individual drilled 
burner ports. 


2.88 Drying Cabinet — A cabinet containing 
heating until for drying or airing of clothes or 
household linen. 


2.89 Drying Cupboard Heater — A heating unit 
specially designed for drying rather than airing, and, 
therefore, of higher heat output than of airing 
cupboard heater. 


2.90 Duplex Burner — A burner designed in two 
independent sections to be operated as a whole or in 
part by a single gas tap. 


2.91 Drip Tray — A tray beneath the evaporator for 
collecting condensate and sometimes defrost water. 


2.92 Drip Trays — A tray beneath the evaporator 
for collecting condensate and sometimes defrost 
water. 


2.93 Dual Burner — Two burners fabricated in one 
unit. 


E 


2.94 Egg Bar — A bar to keep eggs in place in a 
storage space. 


2.95 Excess Air — Air in excess of the theoretical 
requirement for combustion fuel. 


F 


2.96 Facia — A panel on an appliance through 
which the control operating mechanisms pass. 


2.97 Family of Gases — A range of gases 
characterized by having a wobbe number within 
specified limits. 


2.98 Flame Blow-off — Separation of a flame from 
burner port resulting in extinction. 


2.99 Flame Check — A gauge, grid or any other 
portion of the burner assembly used to avert flash- 
back. 


2.100 Flame Detector — The part of the flame 
failure device which is responsive to flame 
properties and signals the presence of flame. 


2.101 Flame Failure — The loss of flame from the 
normally detected position due to any cause other 
than the deliberate de-energising of the safety shut- 
off valve. 


2.102 Flame Failure Device (Flame Safeguard) — 
A control responsive to flame properties, detecting 
the presence of a nominated flame and, in the event 
of ignition failure or subsequent flame failure, 
causing safety shut down. 


2.103 Flame Lift — Separation of a flame from the 
burner port, whilst continuing to burn with its some 
distance from the port. Excessive lifting is termed 
flame blow-off. 


2.104 Flame Speed — The rate of linear 
propagation of flame through a gas-air mixture. 


2.105 Flame smother — Defective combustion 
arising when insufficient air reaches a flame and/or 
the flame burns in vitiated air. 


2.106 Flame Reversal — The pulling downwards 
of gas fire flames caused by excessive flue-induced 
suction through the low-level ventilation opening in 
the closure plate. 


2.107 Flame Roll-out — The occurrence, at the 
moment of ignition, of a transient flame outside the 
combustion chamber. 


2.108 Flash-Back (Light Back) — Transfer of 
combustion from burner port to a point upstream in 
the gas/air flow into the mixing tube and usually to 
the injector: 


a) Direct Flash-Back — Flash-back through 
the burner itself; and 

b) Indirect Flash-Back — Flash-back by a 
flame not passing through the burner itself, 
that is, roll over. 


2.109 Flashing Pilot — A pilot with means of 
projecting a burst of flame to reach a burner port for 
ignition purpose. 


2.110 Flash Tube (Lighting Tube) — A device for 
igniting gas burner in which a flame is made to travel 
to the burner ports through a tube in which an 
inflammable mixture of gas and air has been induced. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


2.111 Flat Flame Burner — A burner which 
produces a flame resembling the shape of a fan. 


2.112 Flow Straightener (Eddy Filter) — A 
perforated gauge in a burner mixing tube or burner 
port. 


2.113 Flue — A passage or port for conveying 
products of combustion or waste gas outside air. 


2.114 Flue Break — An opening into the secondary 
flue in the same room as, an additional to, the 
opening at the draught diverter. 


2.115 Flue Collar — A projection or recess 
provided to accommodate the flue pipe. 


2.116 Flue Gases — Products of combustion 
including unused air. 


2.117 Flue Gas Baffles — A baffle incorporated to 
control (the flow of products of combustion and air 
through the heating body). 


2.118 Flue Lining — A coating on the internal 
surface of a flue pipe or tiling on the internal surface 
of a chimney to provide protection against 
condensation. 


2.119 Flue Losses — The sensible heat and latent 
heat of the flue gases leaving the appliance at above 
room temperature. 


2.120 Flue Main — A flue carrying products of 
combustion from two or more appliances. 


2.121 Flue Nozzle (Flue Spigot) — A nozzle 
forming the outlet end of a balanced flue duct. 


2.122 Flue Outlet — The opening of a gas 
appliance through which the products of combustion 
are discharged. 


2.123 Flue Subsidiary — In common flue system, 
a flue connecting an appliance with the main flue. 


2.124 Flue System — A complete assembly of flue 
components from one or more appliances to a single 
terminal including primary fuel(s) and draught 
diverter(s), if any. 


2.125 Flued Appliance — An appliance designed 
for connection to a flue for venting the products of 
combustion outside the room in which the appliance 
is situated. 


2.126 Flue Less Appliance — An appliance 
designed for use without connection to a flue 
system, the products of combustion being allowed to 
mix with air of the room or space in which the 
appliance is situated. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


2.127 Flue Pipe — A pipe enclosing a flue; for a 
double-walled type it is the inner pipe. 


2.128 Forced Circulation — Movement of air, 
water or other fluid by or with the assistance of 
mechanical means. 


2.129 Forced-Draught Burner — A burner in 
which the combustion air is provided under 
pressure, usually from an air fan. 


2.130 Furnace — A heat treatment appliance in 
which the stock can be heated to temperatures above 
incandescence. 


G 


2.131 Gas — Fuel gas as normally manufactured 
and/or distributed through the mains of a gas- 
undertaking. 


2.132 Gas Appliance — An appliance where gas is 
consumed under control. 


2.133 Gas Igniter — An ignition device built into 
an appliance. 


2.134 Gas Injector (Injector Jet) — A jet 
removable and/or adjustable by means of which a 
calibrated amount of gas is allowed to pass through 
an orifice. 


2.135 Gas Iron — A hand-held flat iron designed to 
be heated by gas. 


2.136 Gas Manifold — The component of an 
appliance carrying gas to a number of separate 
burners. 


2.137 Gas Meter — An instrument for meaning, 
indicating and sometimes recording the volume of 
gas which passes through it without interrupting the 
flow of gas. 


2.138 Gas Piston Lighter — A lighting device 
attached to a cooking range incorporating its own 
gas supply and means of ignition. 


2.139 Gas Solenoid Valve — An 
electromagnetically operated valve for opening and 
closing the gas supply. 


2.140 Gas Taper — A lighting device, attached to 
a cooking range, incorporating its own gas supply 
but not its own means of ignition. 


2.141 Gas Thermostat — A thermostat 
incorporating a gas valve for maintaining a desired 
temperature. 


2.142 Gasket — A suitably cut-out sheet of material 
inserted between joint surfaces to act as a seal. 


2.143 Grill (Griller) — An appliance for cooking 
food by means of radiant heat. 


2.144 Grill Area — The area over which 75 percent 
of the browning is uniform. 


2.145 Grill Fret (Grill Deflector) — The part of a 
grill designed to emit radiant heat. 


2.146 Grill High Level — A grill above the hot 
plate of a cooking range. 


2.147 Grill Inner Cover — The part of a grill which 
fits inside-the grill outer cover. 


2.148 Grill Outer Cover — The part forming the 
outer top section of grill. 


2.149 Grill Pan — A shallow container in which 
food is cooked under a grill the food being placed 
either in the grill pan or on the grill pan grid. 


2.150 Grill Pan Grid — A grid which supports the 
food being cooked in grill pan. 


2.151 Grills — A non-closable fitment for an 
opening through which air passes. 


2.152 Grilling Hearth (Solid Brander) — A solid 
metal plate located below a grill burner on which the 
food is placed for simultaneous cooking on both 
sides. 


2.153 Grind Runners — Projections inside a gas 
cooking range which support shelves. 


H 


2.154 Hearth — A floor-level slab of non- 
combustible material to prevent overheating of the 
floor beneath a heating appliance. 


2.155 Heating Surface — All surfaces which 
transmit heat from flames or flue gases to the 
medium to be heated. 


2.156 Hob — It is same as a cooktop. A single-unit 
array of gas burners, trivets and gas control knobs. 
A gas hob is typically mounted within a cut-out on a 
kitchen bench top. 


2.157 Hot Condition — A condition of an appliance 
required for some tests in which the appliance has 
recently been brought to thermal equilibrium but is 
no longer alight. 


2.158 Hot Food Cabinet — An appliance in the 
form of cupboard in which plates may be heated or 
food stored in covered containers, with or without 
hearted top. 


2.159 Hot Food Cabinet Warming Space — The 
total of the space in all compartments that can be 
usefully employed for stacking plates in cubic 
meters. 


2.160 Hot Plate (Hob) — Stove having a solid plate 
which is heated by burners underneath, and on 
which the vessels to be heated rest. 


2.161 Hot Water Cylinder — A closed cylindrical 
vessel used for storage and circulation of hot water. 


I 


2.162 Ignition Burner — A removable burner 
incorporated as an integral part of a liquid ‘or’ solid 
fuel appliance, for igniting the fuel. 


2.163 Independent Flue System (Additional Flue) 
— A flue system that is not built into a structure of 
a building but may be supported by attachment 
there, too. 


2.164 Indirect Oven — An oven in which the 
product of combustion do not flow through the oven 
compartment. 


2.165 Indirect Oven Thermostat System — A 
control system of two or more integrated automatic 
devices to maintain an oven temperature as selected 
by the operator. That portion of the system 
responsive to oven temperature causes operation of 
another portion of the system to turn on or shut off 
the gas supply to the oven burner. 


2.166 Induced Circulation — Movement of air 
water or other fluid by or with the assistance of 
mechanical means. 


2.167 Injector — A device in which gas (or air) 
issuing from a jet entrains and mixes with some or 
all the air (or gas) required for combustion. 


2.168 Injector Jet — A jet, forming part of an 
injector, that may be removable and/or adjustable. 


2.169 Inner Cone — The blue or green region 
within the flame produced on a burner supplied with 
an air/gas mixture. Combustion commences at the 
surface of this region. 


2.170 Input, Cold Rated — The manufacturer's 
maximum recommended input when the appliance 
is cold and before ignition, this rate will adjust itself 
to the hot rated input at thermal equilibrium. 


2.171 Input, Hot Rated — The manufacturer's 
maximum recommended heat input at thermal 
equilibrium. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


2.172 Input Rating — The gas burning capacity of 
the appliance in kilocalories per hour as specified by 
the manufacturer, tested at ambient temperature and 
pressure. 


2.173 Instantaneous Water Heater — An 
appliance in which water is heated only as it flows 
to the point of delivery. 


2.174 Insulation — A means of reducing the heat 
flow through the walls of a heated space or from a 
heated object. 


a) Air Space Insulation — insulation 
consisting of two adjacent surfaces 
constructed to prevent the full circulation 
of air held between them; and 


b) Solid Insulation — Any solid (not liquid or 
gaseous material) used to obstruct the flow 
of heat. 


2.175 Indirect Heating — A method of heating 
furnaces and ovens in which the hot products of 
combustion do not come into contact with the stock. 


2.176 Interchangeability of Gases — The 
suitability of gases of different combustion 
characteristics for use in existing appliances without 
unacceptable changes in performance. 


J 


2.177 Jet — A device containing one or more 
orifices from which a stream of gas and/or air is 
discharged. 


2.178 Jet Burner — A self-contained aerated 
burner adapted for screwing into a gas manifold. 


K 


2.179 Knob — A gripping component attached to a 
control (gas tap, thermostat, etc) for manually 
rotating it. 


L 


2.180 Leak Clamp — A clamp used to press a 
gasket against a spigot and socket joint to prevent 
leakage. 


2.181 Limited Main Flame Establishing Period 
— A period during which the main burner safety 
shut-off valve is permitted to be open before the 
pilot is extinguished and the flame safeguard is 
required to supervise to main flame alone. 


2.182 Lineal Seal — The distance measured along 
the sealing surface of a tap in which the closure 
rotates. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


2.183 Lint — A mixture of dust, fluff, fibres and 
droplets of grease, which can collect in the airways 
of the burner. 


2.184 Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LP Gas or LPG) 
— A mixture of certain light hydrocarbons of the 
type of commercial butane, commercial propane and 
commercial butane-propane mixture gaseous at 
normal ambient temperatures and atmospheric 
pressure but may be condensed to liquid state at 
normal ambient temperature and moderate pressure. 


2.185 LPG-Air Mixture — Liquefied petroleum 
gases distributed at relatively low pressures and 
normal atmospheric temperatures which have been 
mixed with air to produce desired heating value and 
utilization characteristics. 


2.186 Low-water Cut-off — A device to cut off the 
gas flow in the event of the water level in an 
appliance falling below a predetermined level. 


M 


2.187 Main Control Valve — A valve in the gas 
line before all regulating devices and the branch to 
the pilot(s) except when the pilot(s) are equipped 
with independent shut-off valves, to completely turn 
on or shut off the gas supply to the appliance. 


2.188 Mixer — The combination of mixer throats, 
mixing tube and mixer head. 


2.189 Mixer Face — The air inlet end of the mixer 
tube. 


2.190 Mixer Head — The outlet end of the mixer 
tube of an injection type burner usually enlarged into 
which the primary air mixed with the gas stream 
flows. 


2.191 Mixer (Mixing) Tube (Burner Tube) — A 
tube connecting the injector and the burner ports in 
which mixing of gas and air takes place. If 
frequently commences as converging section 
leading in succession to a throat and a diverging 
section; it is then often erroneously called at the 
venturi tube. 


2.192 Mixer Throat — The inlet end of the mixing 
tube which has the smallest cross-sectional area. 


2.193 Mobile Appliance — An appliance mounted 
on wheels or skids so that it can be moved from 
place to place as required. 


2.194 Multipoint Water Heater — An 
instantaneous or storage water heater designed to 
deliver hot water at several points. 


N 


2.195 Natural Circulation — The movement of 
heated or cooled air, water or other fluid unassisted 
by mechanical means. 


2.196 Natural Draught — The air supply induced 
by the lowering of pressure due to warmed air 
arising in a chimney. 


2.197 Natural Draught Burner (Atmospheric 
Burner) — An aerated burner where the 
combustion air is entrained at atmospheric pressure. 


2.198 Natural Gas — The gaseous hydrocarbons 
produced from the underground deposits of oilfields. 
The gas is described ‘wet’ or ‘dry’ according to 
association of liquid hydrocarbons with it. 


2.199 Natural Gas Liquids (NGL) — Natural gas 
liquids is the natural gas condensate produced from 
natural gas processing. Natural gas liquids include 
the LPG gases propane and butane, as well as the 
heavier liquid hydrocarbons — pentanes, hexane, 
heptane, octane and nonane. 


2.200 Niting — (a) parts integral with, or fitted to, a 
valve, cock or tap to limit the turning angle of the 
plug, also (b) limiting the turning angle by such 
means. 


2.201 Niting Washer — Niting by means of a 
washer moving with the plug lugs which engage 
stops on the body of cock or tap at the limits or 
angular movement of the plug to coincide with the 
ON and OFF positions. 


2.202 Nominal Flow Ratio — The flow rate of a 
fluid at a specified pressure loss as claimed by the 
manufacturer. 


2.203 Non-return Valve — A device that allows 
flow in only one direction through it. 


2.204 Normal Cold Pressure — The pressure 
required at the test point to give the cold rated input. 
This pressure will adjust itself to the normal hot 
pressure at thermal equilibrium. 


2.205 Normal Hot Pressure — The pressure at the 
test point which gives the hot rated input. 


2.206 Normal Test Pressure — The pressure 
specified for testing purposes at which adjustment of 
burner ratings and primary air adjustments are made. 


2.207 Nozzle — It is generally the inlet nozzle of a 
defined shape where a flexible tubing is connected 
carrying the gas supply to the appliance. 


(0) 


2.208 Operational Torque — The torque to turn a 
directly operated tap at any temperature over the 
range of working temperatures declared by 
manufacturer when the tap is operated at an angular 
velocity of 3 rad/sec. 


2.209 Orifice — The opening in an orifice cap, 
orifice-spud or other device whereby the flow of gas 
is limited and through which the gas is discharged. 


2.210 Oven — An appliance for baking and roasting 
of food items. 


a) Directly Heating Oven (Internally Heated 
Oven) — An oven in which the burners are 
situated, and the products of combustion 
circulate, inside the oven space; 


Indirectly Heated Oven (Externally Heated 
Oven) — An oven in which the burners are 
situated outside the oven space and the 
products of combustion do not enter it; and 


b 


ma 


c) Semi-Directly-Heated Oven (Semi- 
Externally Heated Oven) — An oven in 
which the burners are situated outside the 
oven space but the products of combustion 
pass into it. 


2.211 Oven Deck — The surface of an oven on 
which cooking pans or materials, to be cooked are 
placed during the cooking process. 


2.212 Oven Roof Removable — A panel forming 
the inner roof of an oven which can be removed by 
cleaning, etc. 


2.213 Oven Wall Removable (Left Hand, Right 
Hand, Back) — Panels forming the inner side of an 
oven which can be removed for cleaning, etc. 


2.214 Overhead Radiant Heater — An appliance 
designed for mounting above head level to heat the 
space beneath it by radiation. 


2.215 Oven — A heat-treatment appliance that heats 
the stock to a temperature below incandescence. 


P 


2.216 Pan Boiling (Directly Heated/Jacketed) — 
An appliance either incorporating a single directly 
heated vessel generally of more than 45 litres 
capacity, for boiling food in bulk or a coiling pan 
with a second pan of slightly smaller size fixed 
inside to which heat is transferred from hot water or 
steam in the outer pan. 


2.217 Pan Brat — A heated tilting pan of about 
13 cm depth used for bulk shallow frying of, for 
example, eggs, bacon, sausages, etc. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


2.218 Pan Supports — A framework of the 
appliance on which the cooking vessels rest. 


2.219 Pastry Oven — A shallow oven, usually 
taking trays at only one level, designed to give very 
even temperature conditions. Several units may be 
arranged one above the other, or a number of 
compartments or decks may be incorporated in a 
deeper oven. 


2.220 Pre-Ignitable Burner — A burner in which 
a flame initiated at the air inlet part passes to the 
burner parts where it continues to burn. 


2.221 Permanent Pilot — A pilot which is intended 
to be kept permanently alight and is controlled 
independently of the main gas burners. 


2.222 Pilot — A small gas flame for igniting gas at 
the burner ports. (In specific circumstances the main 
flame at low rate may be used in order to obviate the 
need for a pilot flame.) 


2.223 Pilot Flame Establishment — The 
establishment of a proved and supervised pilot 
flame. 


2.224 Pilot Flame Ignition Period — The period 
through which the ignition spark remains energized 
and during which the pilot safety shut-off valve is 
permitted to be open before the flame safeguard is 
required to supervise the pilot flame. 


2.225 Pilot Flame Proving Period — The period 
during which the pilot flame is supervised following 
the cessation of the spark and before the opening of 
the main gas safety shut-off valve. 


2.226 Pilot Fully Protected — The pilot protected 
against the flame failure by a flame failure device. 


2.227 Pilot Interrupted/Pilot Transient — A pilot 
which is automatically ignited each time the burner 
is started up and which is extinguished automatically 
at the end of the main flame-establishing period. 


2.228 Pilot Ladder — A bar burner of small gas 
consumption, providing pilot ignition for a number 
of space burners. 


2.229 Pilot Pressure Protected — A pilot protected 
against failure of the gas supply by means of a low 
pressure cut-off valve of the manually re-set type. 


2.230 Pilot Semi Permanent — A pilot which 
comes on with the main burner and remains alight 
during the whole of their period that the main burner 
is on. 


2.231 Pilot-Turn-Down Test — A test conducted 
to determine whether the main flame ignites reliably 


IS 6480 : 2023 


and smoothly when the pilot flame is turned down 
to one-half of the flow rate at which it will just 
continue to actuate the flame detector. 


2.232 Pinhole Burner — A burner assembly of 
which the burner ports are a number of very small 
holes. 


2.233 Piped Natural Gas (PNG) — When natural 
gas that is methane (CH4) is delivered through pipe, 
it is called as piped natural gas (PNG). 


2.234 Piezo unit — A spark ignition device in 
which electric current is generated by the stressing 
of ceramic material. 


2.235 Plate Air Guide — A plate designed to 
control the flow of secondly air for combustion, 
fitted below the radiants and in some instances used 
to support the radiants. 


2.236 Plug Tap — A tap that is operated by rotating 
a taper plug in a mating bore. 


2.237 Poppet Valve — A valve in which the seal is 
achieved by the axial movement of a closing 
member against a scaling face substantially at right- 
angles to the direction of the axial movement. 


2.238 Portable Appliance — An appliance 
designed to be carried by the user, from place to 
place as required. 


2.239 Power Burner — A burner in which either 
gas or air or both are supplied at a pressure 
exceeding the line pressure (for gas) and the 
atmospheric pressure (for air); this added pressure 
being applied at the burner. 


2.240 Pre-aerated Burner — An aerated burner to 
which the gas and primary air supplied are already 
mixed. 


2.241 Pre-mix Air-Gas System — A pre-aerated 
burner system in which gas is mixed in a 
predetermined and adjustable ratio with part or all of 
the air for combustion. 


2.242 Premixing Burner — A power burner in 
which all the air for combustion is mixed with gas 
as primary air. 


2.243 Pressure Burner — A burner which is 
supplied with an air-gas mixture under pressure 
usually from 0.175 kN/m? to 2.450 kN/m? (1.75 
gf/cm? to 24.50 gf/cm? approximately) and 
occasionally higher. 


2.244 Pressure Regulator — A device used for 
controlling and maintaining a uniformed gas supply 
pressure at its outlet. 


2.245 Pressure Relief Valve — A valve in an oven 
or flue system designed to yield safety to an 
abnormal increase of internal pressure. 


2.246 Pressure Valve-Differential — A gas control 
on an instantaneous water heater operated by the 
pressure difference created by water flow through a 
venture throat or an orifice. 


2.247 Primary Air — Air introduced into gas steam 
before it leaves the burner port. 


2.248 Primary Circuit for Water — The flow and 
return circuit through which water circulates 
between the water-heater and the cylinder, tank or 
calorifier. 


2.249 Primary Flow — The pipe conveying water 
from the heater or boiler to the cylinder or tank. 


2.250 Primary Flue — A flue connecting an 
appliance to a draught diverter. 


2.251 Products Deflector — An attachment which 
guides in a required direction the products of 
combustion from a flue less appliance. 


2.252 Proving Oven — A low-temperature oven of 
high humidity for proving yeast foods. 


2.253 Purge — To free a gas conduct of air or 
mixture of gas and air. 


2.254 Push Button — A component that is pushed 
in order to operate a control. 


R 


2.255 Rack Bottom — The bottom part of a plate 
rack. 


2.256 Rack Lower Plot — A grid below the stove 
of a cooking range. 


2.257 Rack Upper Plot — A flat shelf above the hot 
plate of a cooking range. 


2.258 Radiant Convector Gas Fire — A gas fire 
designed to emit heat by both radiation and 
convection. 


2.259 Radiant Cup Burner — A cup-shaped 
refractory heated by an aerated spreading flame 
burner positioned at its centre. 


2.260 Radiant Gas Fire — A gas fire designed to 
emit heat mainly by radiation. 


2.261 Rating — The nominal maximum volumetric 
gas rate which a component is designed to control. 


2.262 Ratio Aspect — The ratio of the major axis 
to the minor axis of the cross-section of the flue. 


2.263 Reversion Pressure — A measure of the 
resistance of a gas to flame lift, indicated by the gas 
pressure at which a flame which has lifted at higher 
pressure returns to the burner port of a standard 
burner. 


2.264 Ribbon Strip Burner — An aerated bar 
burner fitted with a metal ribbon insert forming lines 
of burner ports. 


2.265 Ring Burner — A burner in the form of a 
toroid with series of burner ports or jets in it. 


2.266 Rod Thermostat — A thermostat in which 
the sensing elements consist of a rod and a 
concentric tube of materials of dissimilar 
coefficients of expansion. 


S 


2.267 Safety Shut-off Valve — A valve designed to 
stop gas flow automatically in response to a signal, 
primarily for safety purposes. 


2.268 Safety Tap — A tap that cannot be turned on 
without first performing a deliberate additional 
manual operation. Such operations generally include 
pressing against a spring, raising a hinged member, 
inserting key, etc. 


2.269 Salamander — A grill used for browning 
mellets, etc. A form of contact grill. 


2.270 Self-Extinguishing Burner — A burner 
designed so that the flame is unstable at the injector 
if it lights back, or if a light is supplied there. 


2.271 Scale — Crust deposit on the surface of water- 
ways. 


2.272 Secondary Air — Air admitted to the 
combustion zone after combustion with primary air 
has commenced. 


2.273 Secondary Circuit of Water — A subsidiary 
circuit in which hot water circulates between the 
cylinder or tank and the draw-off branches. 


2.274 Secondary Flue — The part of an open flue 
system connecting a draught diverter to the terminal. 


2.275 Securing Rods, Wall Plate — The rods by 
which the outer wall plate is attached to the inner 
wall plate of a balanced flue terminal. 


2.276 Semi-Automatic Valve (for Gas Control) — 
A valve that is opened manually and closed 
automatically, or vice versa. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


2.277 Semi-Rigid Connection — A readily 
manipulated tube to facilitate the quick installation 
of an appliance in a fixed position. 


2.278 Service Suitability Number — It is a number 
of a tap which designates the degree of severity of 
service for which the tap is intended. 


2.279 Simmer Burner — A burner designed for 
simmering, often thermostatically controlled. 


2.280 Simplex Burner — A burner which can be 
operated only as a whole a burner gas tap. 


2.281 Single Point Water Heater — An 
instantaneous or storage water heater designed to 
deliver hot water at one point. 


2.282 Size Piping — The size of the nominal 
diameter of piping attached to the largest 
connection. 


2.283 Snap Acting Thermostat — A thermostat 
working at two positions may be high/low or 
ON/OFF. 


2.284 Socket — A cylindrical pipe fitting having 
two female ends into which pipes or fittings may be 
connected to effect a joint. 


2.285 Soot — Un-brunt carbon particles present in 
a flame. 


2.286 Sooting Number — A measure of the sooting 
propensity of a gas obtained by determining the 
volume rate of flow of air required to prevent soot- 
tailing of the flame of the gas in a standard sooting 
test burner. 


2.287 Soundness — Absence of external leakage 
greater than the permissible limit. 


2.288 Soundness Test — A test to check that 
leakage does not exceed a specified limit. 


2.289 Spark Ignition — Ignition of an air/gas 
mixture by means of an electrical discharge from a 
sparking plug or suitable electrode or flint stone. 


2.290 Space Heating — The heating of one or more 
rooms or other spaces to produce a desired 
temperature therein. 


2.291 Specific Gravity (Relative Density) — The 
ratio of the mass of unit volume of dry gas to that of 
unit volume of dry air under the same conditions of 
temperature and pressure. 


2.292 Spillage Tray — A tray located under 
burner(s) for collection of spillage from cooking 
vessels. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


2.293 Splash Back — A vertical panel mounted 
along with back edge of a hot plate. 


2.294 Stoichiometric Mixture — Mixture of gas 
and air in proportions determined by the theoretical 
air requirement. 


2.295 Storage Water Heater — An appliance in 
which a volume of water is heated under 
thermostatic control and stored for use when 
required. 


2.296 Stove — An assembly of one or more burners 
forming a separate unit allowing direct contact 
between the flames or hot gases from the burners 
and the vessel above them. 


2.297 Stove Bars — Bars on a stove which support 
the vessels being heated. 


2.298 Surface Combustion — Combustion with an 
almost imperceptible flame on an incandescent 
surface achieved by passing a mixture of gas and air 
through a porous or perforated surface. 


T 


2.299 Tankless Water Heater — As the name 
implies, a tankless water heater does not have the 
traditional large storage tank. These units only heat 
the water as it passes through. These systems are 
also called ‘continuous flow’ or ‘instant’ hot water 
heaters. 


2.300 Tap — A type of valve on an appliance that 
controls fluid flow and will be liable to be kept in off 
positon when appliance is not in operation. 


2.301 Temperature Range — The difference 
between the controlled temperatures of the sensing 
element at the maximum and minimum scale 
positions. 


2.302 Terminal — A device fitted at the end of a 
flue to allow or assist products of combustion to 
escape, minimize down draught and prevent entry of 
material which might block the flue. 


2.303 Theoretical Air Requirement — The 
calculated volume of air required for complete 
combustion of unit volume of a gas (also called 
stoichiometric air). 


2.304 Thermal Differential — For a snap-acting 
thermostat at a particular setting, the difference 
between the temperatures at which the valve opens 
and closes. 


2.305 Thermal Log — The difference between the 
effective temperature of the sensing element and that 
of the medium in which it is located. 


2.306 Thermostat — A thermally actuated control 
device for maintaining a desired temperature. 


2.307 Thermostat Adjustment — The regulation 
of thermostat, normally by the manufacturer, to 
ensure correct calibration. 


2.308 Thermostat Gas — An automatic device 
actuated by temperature change, alone without 
auxiliary power, designed to control the gas supply 
to a burner or burners, in order to maintain 
temperature between predetermined limits and in 
which the thermal actuating element is an integral 
part of the device. 


2.309 Thermostat Gas, Snap-Acting — A rapidly 
acting thermostat that switches the gas flow rate 
instantly between closed and open position. 


2.310 Thermostat, Graduating — A thermostat 
which changes from the completely open to 
completely closed position or vice versa quickly but 
not with a snap. 


2.311 Thermostat Hysteresis — The difference 
between the equilibrium temperatures in the 
controlled environment when the same thermostat 
setting has been made from opposite directions. 


2.312 Thermostat Setting — A position on the 
thermostat scale selected by the user. 


2.313 Toasted Area — The area of the grill grid 
over which bread can be toasted. 


2.314 Tunnel Burner — A burner in which 
combustion takes place inside a refractory or 
metallic duct. 


U 


2.315 U-Duct — A duct in the form of a ‘U’, the 
ends being open and adjacent one limb of which 
provides combustion air whilst to the other limb are 
fitted room sealed appliances. 


2.316 Union — A composite fitting, incorporating a 
fastening but to facilitate the connection and 
disconnection of pipes, fittings and appliances. 


2.317 Upright Burner — A lighting burner in 
which the gas flame is above the burner port. 


A4 


2.318 Valve — A device used to stop or regulate the 
flow of fluid by the closure or partial closure of an 
orifice. 


2.319 Vapour Pressure — The pressure created by 
the vapour of a substance in an enclosed space 
containing the particular substance. 


2.320 Vent — A non-adjustable purpose-made 
opening or duct that is designed to allow the passage 
of fluid at all times. 


2.321 Ventilation — The process of supplying fresh 
air to, and removing vitiated air from, a room or 
internal space. 


2.322 Vitiation — Contamination of air, specially 
by combustion products, with consequent reduction 
of oxygen content. 


W 


2.323 Wall Plate, Inner — The internal component 
of a balanced flue terminal adjacent to the appliance. 


2.324 Wall Plate, Outer — The external 
component of a balanced flue terminal through 
which air is drawn from combustion and the 
products of combustion are passed. 


2.325 Water Circulator — A water heating 
appliance primarily designed for the supply of 
domestic hot water in conjunction with a separate 
storage vessel. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


2.326 Water Governor — A device for automatic 
regulation of water flow rate. 


2.327 Weep Tube — A small diameter tubing for 
conveying a weep flow or gas operating a relay 
valve. 


2.328 Wobbe Number — The heat release when a 
gas is burned at a constant gas supply pressure, 
expressed by: 


gross calorific value of the gas 


relative density of the gas 


2.329 Working Pressure — The minimum pressure 
at the inlet of an appliance which will ensure that the 
rated heat input is achieved. 


Y 


2.330 Yellow Flame Burner — A burner in which 
secondary air only is depended upon for combustion 
of the gas. 


2.331 Yellow Tipping — The appearance of a 
yellow colour at the top periphery of a flame. 


IS 6480 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Domestic and Commercial Gas Burning Appliances Sectional Committee, MED 23 


Organization 
L.P.G. Equipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 
Agnisumukh, Bengaluru 


Ariston Thermo India Private Limited, Pune 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Private 
Limited, Chennai 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Delton Industries, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (Stores), 
Kanpur 


Gorani Industries Limited, Indore 


Goyal Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 
Indian Oil Corporation (R and D Centre), Faridabad 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 

L.P.G. Equipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 


LPG Gas Stoves Association, New Delhi 
Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Rama Domestic Appliances, New Delhi 


Shri Krishna Test House, New Delhi 


Sunflame Enterprises Private Limited, Faridabad 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ASHISH BERA (Chairperson) 
SHRI HARI RAO 


SHRI ABHIJIT BANSHELKIKAR 
SHRI MAHESH BHANGALE (Alternate) 


SHRI HARI BABU BANOTH 
SHRI MOHIT RANE (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR LOGANATHAN 


SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR ARYA 


SHRIMATI PRAVATANALINI SAMAL 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. C. NANGIA 
SHRI VIVEK NANGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI H. H. P. TIWARI 


SHRI ANIL GORANI 


SHRI AJAY GOYAL 
SHRI NEERAJ GOYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH G. KHADE 


SHRI SUBRAMANI SIVA SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI MUTHU KUMAR 
SHRI J. SHYAM SWAROOP 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR 
SHRI ANUPE FRANCIS (Alternate) 


SHRI P. R. DEODHAR 
SHRI YUGAL MALHOTRA 


SHRI NAVEEN GUPTA 
SHRI B. RAM SUDHEER (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJEET SINGH KOHLI 
SHRI MANMOHAN KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL TALWAR 


SHRI K. L. VERMA 
SHRI SANDEEP JUNEJA (Alternate) 


IS 6480 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune SHRI A. A. TAMBOLI 
SHRI V. N. PUJARI (Alternate) 


In Personal Capacity S-139, Greater Kailash-I (1 & 2" SHRIM. K. GUPTA 
Floor), New Delhi - 110048 


BIS Directorate General SHRI NAVINDRA GAUTAM, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SANDEEP KESHAV 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 23 (20618). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


