(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS : 11315 ( Part 6 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTIONS OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES
PART 6 APERTURE

Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee,
Chairman

BDC 73
Roorkee of Uttat Station,

Representing

DR BHAWAN~SINGH
Members

University

of Roorkee,

ASSISTANTRESEARCHOPFICER D!,`,Rcic!~ ( CW & PRS )

Irrigation Department, Government Pradesh, Roorkee Central Water and Power Research Pune

SHRI S. L. MOKHABHI ( AIternate ) Central Soil and Materials Research Station, DIRECTOR New Delhi Karnataka Engineering Research Station, DIRECTOR( CHIEF ENGINEER) Krishnarajasagara SHRI R. NARASIMHAIYENGAR ( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), DR A. K. DUBE Dhanbad ( Bihar ) Irrigation and Power Department Amritsar SHRI P. S. GOSAL ( Punjab ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay DR UDAY V. KULKARNI Centr;~~;;~ng Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR G. S. MEI~ROTRA
SHRI A. GHOSH ( Alternate SHRI M. D. NAIR

) )

PROF T. S. NAGARAJ SHR~ P. L. NARULA SHRI T. K. NATRAJAN

( Alternate

Associated Tnstrument Manufacturers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Geological Survey of India, Calcutta Central Road Research Institute New Delhi Indian Institute of Technolcgy,

( India )

( CSIR ),

SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate
PROF T. RAMAMUR~HI DR G. V. RAO ( Alternate

) )

New Delhi

( Continued on page 2 )
@ Copyright 1987 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under thelndian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the oublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11315 ( Part 6 ) - 1987
( Continued from page 1 ) Members DR Y. V. RAMANA DR G. V. RAO RESEARCHOFFICER ( MERI ) SECRETARY DIRECTOR (C) ( Alternate SHRI C. D. THATTE SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Crv Engg ) ) Representing Research Institute National Geophysical ( CSIR ), Hyderabad Indian Geotechnical Society, Delhi Government of Department, Irrigation Maharashtra, Nasik Centr;Llfroard of Irrtgation and Power, New Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat Director General, BIS (Ex-oficio Member >

Secretary SHRI K. M. MATHUR Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

Rock Slope Engineering, Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee, BDC 73 : 4
Convener PROF L. S. SRIVASTAVA Members DR R. K. BHANDARI SHRI A. GHOSH SHRI B. D. BALIGA Central Building Roorkee Centr&ayIall;g Cemindia ) Jaiprakash Research Research Limited, Institute ( CSIR Institute Bombay >, University of Roorkee, Roorkee

( Alternate )

( CSIR ),

SHRI A. P. BAHERJE~ SHRI D. J. KET~AR ( Alternate SHRI D. G. KADKADE SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) SHRI T. K. NATARAJA~ SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) DR T. RAMAMURTHY DR K. G. SHARMA (Alternate DR Y UDHDIR

Company Associate

Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Institute ( CSIR I,

Central Road Research New Delhi Indian Institute )

of Technology,

New Delhi Kanpur

Indian Institute of Techology,

IS : 11315 ( Part 6 ) - 1987

.

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTIONS OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES
PART 6 APERTURE

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 6 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards

Institution on 30 January 1987, after Mechanics Sectional Committee had Engineering Division Council.

the draft finalized by the Ros:k been approved by the Civil

0.2 In view of the advencement in the Fie!d of Rock Mechanics, a number of methods for assessing the strength characteristics of the roeks and rock masses are being formulated by Rock Slope Engineering and Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee, of The majority of reek masses, in Rock Mechanics Sej:tional Committee. partireular, those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is therefore essential that the structure of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantifed to have a complete and unified description of rock masses and discontinuities, and it may be possible to design engineering structures in rock with a minimum of expense in-situ testing. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in situ tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolat:on of results will be made more reliable.

0.3 Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistocity pianes, weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistance roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number of sets, and block size. These parameters are also eva!uated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 0.4 It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard covering various parametres to 3

IS : 11315 ( Part 6 ) - 1987

describe discontinuities in rack masses is being formulated in various parts with each part covering one parameter. This part covers aperture. 0.5 Aperture describes the perpendicular distance between a!jacent rock walls of a discontinuity, in which the intervening space is air or water filled. 0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final Ialue, observed or calcu?ated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS :
1. SCOPE

( Part 6 > covers the method for quantitative description of aperture indicating the Ferrendicular distance between adjacent rocks wall of a discontinuity. 2. TERMINOLOGY
2.1 For the purpose of this IS : 11358-1986t shall apply.

1.1 This standard

standard,

the definitions

of terms given in

3. GENERAL
3.1 Aperture

is tte perpendicu'ar distance separating the adjacent rock walls of an open discontinuity, in which the in!ervening space is air or waler filled. Aperture is thereby distinguished from the width of a fil!ed discontinuity ( Fig. 1 ). Discontinuities that have been fiJ!ed ( that is with c!ay ) also come under this category if filling material has been washed out locally. 3.2 Large aperture can result from shear dispJacement of disconlinuities having appreciab!e roughness and waviness, from tensile opening, from outwash, and frcm solution. Steep or vertical discontlnuitics that have opened in tension as a result of a valley erosion or glacial retreat may have very large apertures. 3.3 Jn most sub-surface rock masses apertures are small and wi:l probably be less than half a mi'limetre, compared to the tens, hundreds, or even thousands of millimetres width of some of the oulwash or Unless discor,tinuities are exceptionally smooth and extension varieties. planar it will not be of great significance to the shear strength that a `closed' feature is 0'1 mm wide or 1 mm wide. However, indirectly as *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised),
fGlossary of terms and symbols relating to rock mechanics, 4

IS : 11315 ( Part 6 ) - 1987

1A CLOSED

DiSCONTlNUlTY

APERTURE-+-

16

OPEN

DISCONTINUITY

WIDTH -d-b-

1C FILLED

DISCONTINUITY

FIG. 1 DIAGRAMS SHOWING TMESUGGESTEDDEFINITIONS OF THE APERTURE OF OPEN DISCONTINUITIES AND THE WIDTH OF FILLED DISCONTINLJITIES 5

IS : 11315 ( Part 6 ) - 1987

a result of hydraulic corducrivity, even the finest may be significant in changing the effective r.ormal stress and therefore also the shear strength. 3.4 Visual observation of sma!l apertures is inherently unreliable since, with the possible exception of drilled holes and bored tunnels, visible apertures are bound to be disturbed aperiures, either due to disturbance by blasting, or due to surface weathering effects. The influence of apertures is best assessed by water permeability testing. 3.5 Apertures are recorded from the point' of view of both their loosening and conducting capacity. Joint water pressure inflow of water and outlow of storage products ( both liquid and gas ) will all be affected by aperture. 3.6 The adjacent aperture giving the Ferpendicu!ar distance separating the rock wails of an open disco!;tinuity is described as closfd. gapped and open based on the width of the aperture. Measuring tape of at ltast 3 m length calibrated in mm is used to determine the width of aperture over the sets of disconlinuitics. Feeler gauge is used for estimating width of fir.e aperture. White spray paint after washing the dirty rock exposure is used to make discontinuity se!s more visible. 4. PROCEDURE
4.1 Dirty urderground

exposures should be washed clean. It is helpful to spray white paint along the desired lines of survey, so that the fnest discoctinuities are more easiiy visible. Good lighting is essential. 4.2 Fine apertures can be measured approximately with feeler gauges, while the larger apertures can be measured with a rule graduated in mm. The apertures of all discontinuit'es interesecting the survey line wi 1 be reccrdcd. Alternatively the variat'on in aperture of a major discon'.ir:uity can be measured along the trace of the discontinuity.
NOTE I - The apertures visible in a rock exporure are inherently dis!urbed apertures, due either to lccalizcd surface weathering or to the mode of excavaticn. For those reasons measured apertures are likely to be larger than those existing within the rock mass. Tunnels That are machine bored ( and bore hole walls ) should give a mtich more reliable indication of the undisturbed apertures. Borehole walls can be surveyed by means of periscopes, borehcle cameras, ;ndTV equipment, and by means of pressure sensitive packers.

NOTE 2 - The borehcle periscope is recommended when the depth from surface does not exceed 30 metreP. Greater depths result in distortion of optical path uhich consists of a series cf rigid tubes supporting a system lenses and prisms. A millimetre calibrated scale, differently coloured from reek, Lhould be located on the outside of the periscope in such a position that apparent apertures can be recorded. These readings must be corrected orientation if the borehole does net intersect the disconticuities approximately right angles.

the the of the the for at

6

IS : 11315 ( Part 6 ) - 1987
sampling method NOTE 3 - The core recovery method known as the integral The is recommended for obtaining aperture data in special circumstances. method essentially consists of recovering a core sample which has previously been reinforced with a grouted bar. The reinforcing bar is coaxially overcovered with a larger diameter coring crown.

NOTE 4 - Even undisturbed apertures give a poor indication of their water conducting potential. The wall roughness may reduce the actual conductivity to a fraction of its theoretical smooth-wail equivalent as a result of friction and tortuousity effects. In addition, there is much evidence that flow in joints may be tube-like rather than sheet-like. In situ permeability testing will be much more reliable indicator of the influence of apertures than direct measurement. measured across discontinuities that are displaced by NOTE 5 - Apertures previous sheering ( for example, in an unstable slope ) may vary widely from The `dead areas' caused by asperity contact and undetected point to point. debris will again make aperture measurements rather unreliable as a basis for conductivity estimation.

5. PRESENTATION 5.1 Apertures

OF RESULTS

can be described by means of the terms given in Table 1.
TABLE

1 TERMS

FOR APERTURE

APERTURE <025mm 0.25 - O-5 mm 0.5 - 2.5 mm 2.5 - 10 mm > 10mm 1 -10 cm 10 - lp0 cm >lm

DESCRIPTION Tight `Closed' features Partly open Open 7 M$zrately wide t `Gapped' features Very wide Extremely wide Cavernous : } `Open' features

J

5.2 Model ( most common) discontinuity set.

apertures

should

b: recorded

for

each

5.3 Individual discontinuities having apertures than the modal value should bz carefully location and orientation data. 5.4 Photographs ( 1 m ) apertures of extremely wide ( 10 should be appended.

noticably wider or larger described, together with 100 cm ) and cavernous

7

INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) Base Units Quantity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Units Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units Quantily Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric corductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal Symbol N J W Wb T Hz S V Pa DeJnition IN 1J 1w 1T 1 Hz 1s 1v 1 Pa = 1 kg.m/s* = 1 N.m = 1 J/s = 1 Wb/ma = 1 c,`s(s-1) = 1 A/V = 1 W/A = 1 N/m2 Unit radian steradian Symbol rad
ST

Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Symbol m kg s A K cd mol

1 Wb = 1 V.S

