( Reaffirmed 1999 )

IS : bC51- 1977

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR FLAME PHOTOMETER
Optical and Mathematical
Chairman

Instruments

Sectional

Committee,

EDC 36

Rejwesenting Electra-photonics India Private Ltd, Hyderabad

DR C. S. RAO
Members

SERI A. ALVARES

All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers' Association, Bombay SHRI V. K. VASUDEV~ ( Alternate ) Quaiity Marked Goods Manufacturers' Co-operaSHRI MADHO RAM BHARDWAJ tive Association Ltd, Roorkee SERI SOM PRAKASH SHARMA ( Altewcte ) Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) SHRI A. N. BHATTACHARYYA Survey of India, Dehra Dun SHRIJ.CHATTERJEE SERI R. S. CHnaH ( Alternate ) Naval Headquarters CHIEF HYDROGRAPHER ( NAVY ) Organization DEPUTY DIRECTOR, STANDARDS Research, Designs & Standards ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow (TRACK) INSTRUMENTS -DIRECTOR, SEARCH & DEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHMENT SHRI K. P. SINaH ( Alternate ) SHRI P. F. GHADIALLI SHRI M. M. GUPTA SARI P. C. JAIN
SHRI

ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, STANDARDS (TBACK) (Alterna;~)

Ministry

of Defence

( R&D ), Dehra Dun

The Mechanical Engineers Association ( India ), Bombay Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Directorate Haryana, of Industries, Chandigarh Government of

SHRI RAM PRASAD ( Alternate ) P. K. JAIN

Koh-i-Noor ( India ) Private Limited, Varanasi Development Commissioner, Small Scale IndusSHRI L. M. MATHUR tries, New Delhi Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay * DR M. V. R. K. MURTY . DR K. V. S. R. A~PA RAO (Alternate ) ( Continued onpage 2j

SRRI D. D. KHOSLA (Alternate) MAJ-GEN K. L. KHOSLA COL N. P. MANAKTALA LT-COL H. LAL ( Alternate ) SHRI B. R. MANKHAND

The Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) The

@ copyright1978
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said&Act.

fS : 8651- 1977
( Continuedfrom page1) Members DR 1. PRASAD Representing Central Scientific Instruments ( CSIR ), Chandigarh Organization

SHRI RAM SINGH ( Alternate ) Raj-Der-Kar & Co, Bombay SHBI E. B. RAJDERKAR KUMARI SUBAS RAJDERKAR ( Al ternate ) Ministry of Defence ( EME ) LT-COL P. V. RA~.XANA CAPT S. PAUL ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI K. N. RAMASWAMK New Delhi SHRI P. V. MAMMEN ( Alternate ) The Andhra Scientific Co Ltd, Machilipatnam SHRI C. NARAYANA RAO In personal capacity ( 16.3.5, Oficial Colony, VisakhaDR I. RAMAKRISBNA RAO patnam ) Association of Indian Engineering Industry, New SRRI T. R. SAWHNEY Delhi Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical COL R. C. SHARMA Services, Ministry of Defence The National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta SHRI K. G. TORGAL SHRI A. K. GHOSAL ( Alternate ) Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) SHRI H. C. VERD~A Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI K. G. PURANG ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SRRI S. CKANDRASEKHARAN, Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ) Secretary Deputy SHRI S. P. ABBEY Director ( Mech Engg ), IS1

Optical
Convener

Instruments

Subcommittee,

EDC 36 : 2

SBRI A. N. BHATTACHARYYA Members SHRI C. L. BATRA SHRI R. N. BHARGAVA SHI~I S. R. DAS SHRI RAM PRASAD ( Alternate ) REINSTRUMENTS DIRECTOR, SEARCH & DEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHMENT SHRI M. M. GWPTA SHRI R. C. JAIN &RI S. N. DAS GUPTA ( Alternate SHRI S. K. MAHESHWARI

Ministry

of Defence

( R&D)

Towa Optics ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Delhi U. P. Optical Association, Kanpur National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR Delhi Ministry of Defence ( R&D ), Dehra Dun

),

New

Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) ) Government Precision Instruments Lucknow

Factory,

( Continued on page 11 )

2

h

IS:86519I977

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION
0.
0.1 This

FdR FLAME PHOTOMETER
FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 November 1977, after the draft finalized by the Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Flame photometer is essentially employed for determination of concentration of sodium, potassium, calcium and lithium in body fluids, It is an indispensable tool in the analytical like urine, plasma, etc. laboratory for medicine, biochemistry, soil science, fertilizer industry, glass and ceramic industry and ground water analysis. 0.3 The working principle of the instrument is that a portion of the solution under test is atomized into fine spray and burnt in flame, under controlled conditions, emitting spectral lines or band characteristics of different elements which are present in the solution. A characteristic spectral line for a given element is selected out by a suitable filter and converted into electric current by a photo-electric cell. The current indicated on a meter which is pre-calibrated, is a measure of the concentration This standard covers flame photoof the element present in the solution. Filters meters for the determination of sodium, potassium and calcium. for the estimation of these three elements are necessary. Any other filters/ accessories required for evaluation of other elements shall be by agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 0.4 Flame photometer consists of a pressure regulator, flowmeters for the fueI gases, atomizer, burner, optical system, photoelectric device and instrument for indicating or recording the output. The function of the optical system is to collect the light from the steadiest part of the flame A uniform and pass it through the appropriate filter to the detector. illumination on the detector is essential. It is important to focus the mirrors and lenses so that light is distributed over the entire surface of the A schematic diagram of the flame photometer is shown in detector. Fig. 1. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

*

IS : 8651- 1977

The

number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard flame photometer.
2. TERMINOLOGY some 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 1399-1959* and the following shall apply. of the definitions given in covers the general and functional requirements of the

2.1 Atomizer - It is a device which produces aerosol by dispersion of the liquid sample into very small droplets by means of compressed air, oxygen, etc. 2.2 Narrow-Band Pass Filter - It transmits light over a spectral band of finite width but rejects light over the spectrum on either side of the band. 2.3 Photoelectric Cell It transforms the light flux into electric current.

2.4 Detector photocell to recorded.

Amplifier - It amplifies the a magnitude that can be read

electrical signal from the on an instrument dial or

2.5 Sensitivity ( Limit Concentration ) - It is defined for each element by the smallest quantity of the element that can be identified under certain experimental conditions; and is expressed in units of parts per million. 2.6 Mixing Chamber - It ensures a close and homogeneous the fuel, air and the aerosol before or at the very moment reach the atmosphere to produce the flame. 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS shall be of portable type of minimum dimensions and mixture of when they

3.1 The instrument weight.

3.2 The optical system of flame photometer shall conform ments laid down in IS : 988-1959t and IS : 2754-1964$. 3.3 Housing - The instrument shall be provided with windows components which need frequent

to the require-

cover shall be removable and rigid. It at suitable places for easy access to inner attention.

*Glossary of terms used in optical technology. tGenera1 requirements for optical components. $General requirements for optical instruments.

4

1838651-1977
3.4 Burner - The burner shall be detachable so as to remove all contamination. for cleaning and washing

3.5 Atomizer - The material of construction shall be of non-corrosive All its parts type and it should be easily detachable from the main body. shall be accessible for cleaning. An extra interchangeable atomizer unit is also recommended to accommodate samples of varying viscosity and surface tension to be supplied with the instrument. Interchangeable nozzles with different orifices shall also be supplied with the atomizer. 3.6 Pressure Gauge - The pressure gauge shall be a direct reading dial pattern with graduation in kPa. The scale shall be marked with a single red line showing the maximum pressure beyond which the instrument shall not be worked. This pressure should preferably be 70 kPa. The range of the pressure gauge should preferably be 0 to 140 kPa with suitable sub-divisions marked. The gauge shall be fitted on front side of the panel for convenient reading. 3.7 Detector Amplifier - All the electronic components shall be selected and conservatively rated. The method of mounting these components Values of shall be such as to avoid all possible leakage of current. different components used in the resulting system shall be indicated and a circuit diagram supplied with the instrument. 3.8 Combustion Fuel - Domestic gas cylinder or any other fuel gas system, fitted with arrangement for controlling rate of flow of gas, may be used for the purpose. The gas inlet and air inlet into the instrument shall be properly'marked. 3.9 Compressor - Compressor working on 220 volts ac and fitted with a suitable pressure regulating device shall be used. The compressor shall It be capable of providing oil free air at optimum pressure of 100 kPa. shall be provided with a small buffer reservoir so as to give a steady supply of compressed air at a constant pressure. The mechamcal mounting of the compressor-motor assembly shall be reasonably silent and vibration free. 3.10 The optical glass shall conform to IS : 1400-1960".

3.11 The rotation of knobs for regulating the flow of gas, air and filament ignition system shall be smooth and fine, and the direction of rotation properly indicated.
*Specification for optical glass.

6

IS : 8651- 1977 3.12 The filters shall be clearly marked
3.13 The instrument as Na, K and Ca as applicable. details about the

manufacturer shall furnish the following for the guidance of the purchaser: Optical system employed, of filters supplied, arrd weight of the instrument of extra-filters and accessories.

a) cl

b) Types 4

Dimensions Availability

and air compressor,

and

4. FUNCTIONAL

REQUIREMENTS

4.1 The capillary of atomizer shall be of such diameter that the air while flowing into chamber draws in the liquid and atomizes it into a fine spray. Any amount of excess liquid which remains unsprayed by the atomizer shall drain out from the mixing chamber.
4.1.1 It shall be adjustable adjusted shall introduce the of spray. to permit varying rates of spray and once sample at a stable and reproducible rate

4.2 The flow of gas and air into the mixing chamber with ,fine controls and the mixing shall be thorough.

shall be controllable

4.3 When fitted with an automatic ignition system, the knob for ignition of the filament shall automatically switch off the current when the flame ignites and shall swing out of the field of view. 4.4 The filters used for the analysis of sodium, potassium and calcium shall have a peak transmission at 589 &- 3 nm; 763 & 3 nm; 625 f 3 nm or 423 f 3 nm respectively. The filters supplied for the analysis of calcium may have one of the two values specified depending upon the design and Half band width of the filters shall be 8 to calibration of the instrument. 20 nm and peak transmission shall be more than 35 percent. 4.4.1 The filters shall be suitably mounted on a rotating drum for actuating from outside. An aperture control device shall also be provided in between the condensing system and the filter to control the intensity of light falling on the photocell. Two free apertures shall be provided on the drum to take additional filters. 4.4.2 On rotating the drum fitted with fibers, the filters shall come in correct alignment with the condenser and aperture and the drum shall click at the proper positioning of filters. The motion of the drum shall be smooth,

IS : 8651- 1977 4.5 The photo-electric requirements: b) The resulting calibration. dc amplifier, if provided, shall meet the following and in its

a) The power supply to the amplifier response shall be

shall be stabilized, linear for

simplification and

4.5.1 Arrangement for zero setting of the pointer 100 percent calibration shall be provided. 4.6 Sensitivity - The a wide range as under: Element Na K sensitivity of the insfrument

on the scale

shall be variable

over

Sensitivity Range for Full Scale Dejection ( 100 Division ), in pprn lto 2 to 10 20

Ca

10 to 100 concentration shall

4.7 Accuracy - The measurements of the elements be accurate to within f 5 percent of true value. 5. TESTS

5.1 The instrument shall be tested for the general finish, scratches, loose screws, nuts and bolts, defined lettering and-for the smooth operations of the various knobs. 5.2 It shall be possible to adjust the size and shape of the flame it covers the entire area of the optical path. 5.3 The optical components from dust, grease, scratches including the filters shall be clean and any other foreign matter. such that and free liquid the

5.4 The capillary shall be clean and shall be able continuously. The rate of sucking shall be uniform. 5.5 The spray from the nozzle shall be even liquid immediately after the nozzle. and shall

to suck the

not condense

5.6 The gas pressure regulator shall be such that it is able to maintain and feed the flame which shall remain steady and constant in area ( extent ) during the entire period of operation. 5.7 The liquid shall be sprayed 100 kPa. with a constant pressure of about 70 to the

5.8 With the aid of the set zero knob it shall be possible to bring meter needle to zero when distilled water is injected into the flame.

IS : 86519 1977 5.9 The sensitivity
knob shall function a uniform evenly and uniformly. pressure as desired but not more

5.16 The pump shall deliver than 140 kPa.

5.11 When the instrument is tested with solutions of different ppm in the meter ( meter reading ) shall ( concentrations ), the deflection be related to the ppm ( concentration ) of the solutions, at lower concentrations. 5.11.1 The standard be prepared as under: solution for sodium, potassium and calcium may

a) Sodium

2.542 g of analytical grade of solution - Dissolve This NaCl in one litre of distilled water in a volumetric flask. gives 1 000 ppm solution which may be further diluted to give the desired ppm value. Potassium solution - Dissolve I.909 g of analytical grade of KC1 in one litre of distilled water. This gives 1 000 ppm solution which may be further diluted to give the desired ppm value.

b)

C) Calcium

solution - Dissolve 2.497 g of analytical grade of CaCOs in a small quantity of dilute HCl and dilute it to one litre. This gives 1 000 ppm solution which may be further diluted to give the desired ppm value. the flame, the flame shall be

5.12 When distilled water is injected into blue and shall not exhibit any other colour. 6.

MARKING'
name shall be marked at a suitable or trade-mark, serial/batch number may also be marked with place with the and its year of Certification

6.1 Each flame photometer
manufacturer's manufacture. 6.1.1 Mark.

The instrument

the ISI

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

9

_*-

IS t 8651.1977 7. PACKING 7.1 The flame
dry condition. 7.2 The filters, condenser, photocell and mirror shall be wrapped in a clear, dry and acid-free tissue paper and shall be suitably retained in position. 7.3 Silica gel shall be suitably placed in the packing cases.

AND PACKAGING
photometer shall be delivered in a thoroughly clean and

7.4 The unit shall be supplied with all detachable parts packed in separate These cases shall be screwed with internal stops provided wooden cases. All possible care shall be taken in packing different wherever necessary. parts in cardboard or wooden containers with paddings to absorb shocks in transit. 7.5 Compressor unit shall be packed screwed and provided with handle, 7.6 The attached case along with to the handle. handle separately in a strong wooden and case, keys

shall

be locked

during transit

7.7 The package shall be marked with the description, number of contents, the standard symbol for indicating fragile contents, the symbol ` THIS WAY UP' and the legend ` INSTRUMENT, HANDLE WITH CARE ' in red according to IS : 1260 ( Part II )-1973".

(first rcvlsion ).

*Pictorial

markings for handling and labelling of goods : Part II General goods

10

*-

Jt$ : 8651- 1979
( Continued from page 2 ) Members SHRI P. D. MAYEE SHRI D. R. GOYAL (Alternate) DR M. V. R. K. MURTY DR J. PRASAD SHRI J. L. MATHUR ( Alternate ) LT-COL P. V. RAMANA CAPT S. PAUL ( Alternate ) SHRI K. N. RAMASWAMY Small Industries Industry ) Representing Service Institute ( Ministry of

Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), Chandigarh Ministry of Defence ( EME ) of Technical Development,

Directorate General New Delhi

SHRI P. V. MAMMEN ( Alternate ) The Andhra Scientific Co Ltd, Machilipatnam SHRI C. NARAYANA RAO SHRI A. M. JOSE (Alternate) In personai capacity ( Andhra University, Waltair ) PROF V. RAMAKRISHNA RAO Bharat Ophthalmic Glass Ltd, Durgapur SHRI T. R. SAWHNEY Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical COL R. C. SRARMA Services, Ministry of Defence Central Scientific Instrument Corporation, Agra SHRI V. K. VARSHNEYA The Scientific Instruments Manufacturers & SHRI VED PRAKASH Dealers Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt SHRI KUNDAN LAL SUD ( Alternate )

11

fNbIAN ON
OPTICAL

STANDARDS

INSTRUMENTS

,
IS: 988-1959 1399-1959 1400-1960 2352-1963 2754-1964 3081-1965 3099-1965 3113-1965 3135-1965 3602-1966 3686- 1966 4328-1967 4329-1967 4381-1967 4382-1967 5148-1969 5204-1969 5695-1970 5920-1970 6425-1971 ' 6471-1971 6472-1971 6473-1972 7545-1975 7919-1975 8260 (Part 8260 (Part 8275-1976 General Glossary Optical General Procedure Dimensions Prismatic requirements glass for basic climatic requirements and marking binoculars and durability instruments purposes microscopes test for optical instruments for optical for optical components technology of terms used in optical

of general

Slides and cover slips for microscopes for common use indexes for indicating Cathetometer Recommendations for the design of scales and instruments for scales of 1 to 2 percent resolution Student type microscope dissecting ( travelling microscope ophthalmic microscope lenses for the ) ophthalmic glass preparation of drawings for optical elements glass ) 50 mm, 75 mm and 100 mm ( circular microscope ) microscope Monocular Measuring Pathological Non-tinted Research Spectacle

Hand magnifiers

Recommendations and systems Dioptometer Spectrometer General Trial Optical I )-I976 frames: I )-1976 frames: Binocular spectacle bench

( lcnsometer ( student

type ) for tinted type ) type to ophthalmic to ophthalmic lenses lenses and spectacle

requirements

lens sets ( advanced -Abbe'

Refractrometer

Glossary of terms relating Part I Ophthalmic lenses Glossary of terms relating Part II Spectacle frames eyepieces for microscope

and spectacle

