•••••**••*•**•*• 



i&Sz 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
r Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 9603 (1980) : Glossary of terms pertaining to textile 
processing [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of Test] 



j*rfiiii^AK>fe ¥i i maa.w«fearQASiiTF5 



ZS&W I • ^SS>^^N&^> 



>^xvvfe^ 




• 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge" 



?TR rr^ fnj\ <sMMI | Wf ^ft ^TPTT ^f W ^RTT "f 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



^ *2*~* 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 9603 -1980 
(Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS PERTAINING TO 
TEXTILE PROCESSING 



UDC 677-02 ; 001*4 





© Copyright 1980 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr # 2 December 1980 



IS 39603-1980 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS PERTAINING TO 
TEXTILE PROCESSING 

Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TDC 5 

Chairman Representing 

Dr (Kumari ) M. D. Bhavsar The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 
Members 

Dr V. G.Agnihotrj National Peroxide Limited, Bombay 

Shri P. K. Basu Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

( Inspection Wing), New Delhi 
Shri A. K. Sa^gal ( Alternate) 
Shri R. K. Bhatnagar Silk & Art Silk Mills* Association, Bombay 

Shri B. V. Bhatt Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Co 

Ltd, Ahmadabad 
Shri K. G. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Bhattacharya Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, 

Vadodara 
Shri S. H. Chanekar ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. B. Chakraverti Superintendence Company of India ( Private ) Xtd, 

Calcutta 
Dr D. K. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri M. D. Dixit The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Dr A. S. Dutt Indian Jute Industries* Research Association, 

Bombay 
Shri K. B. Kulkarni Textile Auxiliaries Manufacturers* Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr B. R. Manjunatha Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Dr ( Shrimati ) G. R. Phalgumani ( Alternate) 
Dr S. N. Pandey Cotton Technological Research Laboratory ( ICAR ), 

Bombay 
Kumari I. G. Bhatt ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. K. Phadke Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri K. S. Desikan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Prayag All India Handloom Board, Bombay 

Shri M. L. Rehrani Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri A. K. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. S. Saraiya The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shri S. R. A. Setty Binny Limited, Madras 

DR C. R. RAMACHANDRAN ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Srinivasan Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Limited, Calcutta 

SHRI R. S. Bajekal ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K- Srivastava Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Kumari L. C. Patel ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1980 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act { XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS 1 9603 -1980 I 

( Continued from page |1 ) 

Members 
Shri Jamnadas K. $hah 
Shri K. M. Shah 
Shri R. C. Shah 

Shri S. S. Trivedi 

Shri S. M. Chakraborty, 
Director ( Tex ) 



Representing 

The Arvind Mills Ltd, Ahmadabad 
The Millowners' Association, Bombay 
Ahmadabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

AhmadaJbad 
Ahmadabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmadabad 
Director General, ISI ( Ex*ojjicio Member) 

Secretary 

Shri G. S. Abhyankar 
Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISI 



Glossary of Terms Pertaining to Textile Processing Subcommittee, 

TDC 5 : 16 



Convener 



Cresent Dyes & Chemicals Limited, Calcutta 



Shri K. S. Srinivasan 

Members 
Shri P. C. Aggrawal Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

SHRI P. K. MlNOCHA ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. H. Bengeri The Bombay Dyeing & Mfg Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. D. Dighe The Raja Bahadur Motilal Poona Mills Ltd, Pune 

Shri M. D. Dixit The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shri D. R. Gupta Ministry of Finance ( Central Revenue Control 

Laboratory ), New Delhi 
Shri P. P. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. B. Kulkarni Gandhi Parekh Investment Corporation Private Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri V. B. Mahashabde Empire Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. M. Mistry Association of Merchants & Manufacturers of Textile 

Stores & Machinery, India, Bombay 
Shri S . D. Mohile Ministry of Finance ( Collectorate of Central Excise ), 

New Delhi 
Shri C. K. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. K. Phadke Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri K. S. Desikan( Alternate) 
Shri M. R. Sampath Binny Limited, Madras 

Shri J. K. Shah The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmadabad 

Shri K. M. Shah The Millowners* Association, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Trivedi Ahmadabad Textile Industry's Research Association , 

Ahmadabad 
Shri R. C. Shah (Alternate) 



IS: 9603. 1980 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS PERTAINING TO 
TEXTILE PROCESSING 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 30 September 1980, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Methods of Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 

0.2 This Standard has been prepared with a view to eliminating ambiguity 
or confusion arising from various interpretations of definitions of terms 
relating to different types of textile processes and processed fabrics. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes definitions of terms pertaining to textile 
processing and processed textiles. 

2. DEFINITIONS 

Anti-Shrink Fabric (or Pre-shrnnk, Shr ink-Resistant Stabilized Fabric) — 

A fabric which has dimensional stability of ± 1 percent both in warpway 
and weftway. 

Bleaching — The procedure, other than by scouring only, of improving 
the whiteness of textile material by decolourizing it by chemical treatment 
from the grey state. Treatment with optical whitening agents should 
not be considered as bleaching. 

Bleached Fabric — A fabric which has undergone bleaching treatment. 

Blended Fabric — A fabric made from yarns spun with mixed fibres or 
filament yarn provided the fibre component is 10 percent or more (see 
also union fabric). 

Calendered Fabric — A fabric which has passed through a calender 
normally to smoothen and flatten it, to close the intersections between 
the yarns or to confer surface glaze. Special calenders with an engraved 
heated bowl imprint a pattern in relief or modify the fabric surface to 
high lustre (see also felt calendered fabric ), 

Crease Resistance — A term used to indicate the capacity of a textile 
material to resist and/or recover from, creases incidental to its usage. 



IS: 9603 -1980 

Crease-Resist Finish ( or Easy-Care Finish ) — A finishing process, mainly 
for cellulosic fabrics, that confers the characteristic or increased recovery 
from creasing, a property not inherent. 

Crepe Fabric — A fabric characterized by a crinkled surface. The eifect 
may be produced in a variety of ways, for example, by the use of S- and 
Z-hard-twisted yarns, crepe weave or by chemical or thermal treatment. 

Dyed Fabric — Fabric on which a dye or pigment has been uniformly 
applied and fixed. ^ 

Easy Care Finish — See Crease-Resist Finish. 

Felt Calendered Fabric — A fabric which is processed through a felt 
calender ( see also calendered fabric ). 

Finish — A term used to impart the desired characteristics to textile 
materials. 

Finishing — All operations physical or chemical, to impart desired chara- 
cteristics to textile materials. 

Note — The yarn sizing for weaving should not be considered as finishing. 

Grey Fabric — A woven or knitted fabric as it leaves the loom or knitting 
machine which has received no scouring, bleaching, dyeing or printing 
treatment. 

Note — Any removal of stains or rectifying of weaving faults by dressing the 
goods should not be considered as additional process on grey fabric. 

Mercerization — The treatment of cellulosic textiles and blends in yarn 
or fabric form with caustic soda solution of desired strength whereby 
the yarns or fabrics are swollen, dye affinity and lustre of the materials 
are increased. 

Mercerized Fabric — A fabric which has undergone mercerization treat- 
ment. 

Organdie — A plain-weave translucent fabric o flight weight with a per- 
manently stiff finish. 

Perchmentizing — A finishing treatment predominantly given to cellulosic 
fabrics comprising a short contact with, for example, sulphuric acid of 
high concentration, to produce a variety of effects depending on the type 
of fabric and the conditions used, varying from a linen-like handle to a 
translucent organdie effect ( applied mainly to cotton fabrics). Reagents 
other than sulphuric acid can also produce the effect. 

Pre-Shrink Fabric — ( see anti-shrink fabric). 



IS: 9603 -1980 

Printed Fabric — Fabric on which a colour pattern has been produced 
with or without a definite repeat. 

Scouring — Treatment of textile materials in aqueous or other solutions 
in order to remove natural fats, waxes, proteins and other constituents, 
as well as dirt, oil and other impurities. 

Sh rink-Resistant, Shrink-Resisting, Shrink-Resist Fabric — (see anti- 
shrink fabric). 

Stabilized Fabric — ( see anti-shrink fabric ). 

Union Fabric — A cloth made of warp of one kind of fibre and weft of 
another. 

Waterproofing — Process in which the interstices of the fabric as well as 
the surface of the material are covered with a film or skin in such a 
manner that the treated material is not only water-repellent, but imper- 
meable to air and moisture. 

Water-Repellent — Process whereby the fibres of the material are made 
water-repellent through coating with a hydrophobic substance or by a 
chemical reaction, but the fabric remains porous to air and does not 
allow wetting to take place. 



WTERNATION^L SYSTEM OF UNITS { SI UNITS ) 



Base Units 

Quantity 

Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 
temperature 

Luminous intensity 

Amount of substance 

Supplementary Units 

Quantity 
Plane angle 
Solid angle 

Derived Units 
Quantity 

Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 



Unit 


Symbol 


metre 


m 


kilogram 


kg 


second 


s 


ampere 


A 


kelvin 


K 


candela 


cd 


mole 


mof 


Unit 


Symbol 


radian 


rad 


steradian 


sr 


Unit 


Symbof 


newton 


N 


joule 


J 


watt 


W 


weber 


Wb 


tesla 


T 


hertz 


Hz 


Siemens 


S 


vort 


V 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 

N = 1 H<g.m/s2 
J = 1 N.m 

W = U/s 
Wb = 1 V.s 
T = 1 Wtym2 

Hz = 1 c/s (s-1) 
S = 1 A/V 
V = 1 W/A 

Pa = 1 N/m2 



