IS 4092 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

(Reaffirmed 2003)

(

yTT

qwml )

Indian Standard

CENTRIFUGES OF THE BASKET AND BOWL AND VIBRATING TYPE FOR USE IN INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

(Second Revision )

UDC

62 1.928-3

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

November 1992
i

Price Group 10

Chemical Engineering

Plants and Related Equipment

Sectional Committee,

HMD 17

FOREWORD The Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard was originally issued in 1971, and revised in 1984. The title has been altered and the scope has been extended to include all machines using centrifugal action to separate two or more substances, excepting high speed gas centrifuges used for the enrichment of fissile material. Centrifuges used in the processing of nuclear fuel should in general conform to this standard. There may be other specific requirements relating to the radiation efiect open nonmetals and lubricants, criticality and remote control. The aim of this standard is procedures and accessories sufficient information is made authority to determine the duty. to specify the materials and methods of manufacture, operating required for the safe operation of centrifuges and also to ensure available from the manufacturer and user to enable an inspection degree of safety and hence the suitability of the equipment for the general use. The allowable stresses have been

Materials of construction listed are in current `brought in line with current practice.

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: BS 767 : 1983 Centrifuges of the basket and bowl type for use in the industrial and commercial applications issued by the British Standards Institution. BS 5304 : 1988 Code, of practice for safety of machinery issued by the British Standards Institution. The standard is likely to be issued in several parts. This Part I of the standard covers general requirements of the basket and bowl type ( Vibrating type ) centrifuges, the other parts are expected to cover design and performance requirements.

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

Indian Standard
CENTRIFUGES OF THE BASKET AND BOWL AND VIBRATING TYPE FOR USE IN INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS
PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ) Title

(Second Revision
1 SCOPE Standard ( Part 1 ) specifies design, materials, methods of construction, inspection and testing of centrifuges of the basket and bowl and vibrating types for use in industrial and commercial applications. To assist manufacturers and users to fulfil their obligations towards Health and Safety, information is included covering safe access and safe working. Additional provisions necessary for handling highly flammable and/or toxic substances are also included. 1.2 Tube and bottle type centrifuges as used in laboratories are excluded from this standard. High speed gas centrifuges used for the enrichment of fissile material are also excluded. of explosive or biologically hazardous materials and also the use of non; metallic material for stressed parts of rotating assemblies is outside the scope of this standard. 2 REFERENCES
2.1 The 1.3 The handling IS No.

1.1This Indian

4682 ( Part 3 ) : 1969 4682 ( Part 4 ) : 1969 4682 (Part 5 ) : 1970

Part 3 Lead lining Part 4. Plasticized PVC

Part 5 Epoxide resin lining resin lining and heat

4682 Part 6 Phenolic ( Part 6 ) : 1970 4682 ( Part 7 ) : 1974 4682 ( Part 8 ) : 1974 Part 7 Corrosion resistant metals Part 8 Precious

metals

4682 Part 9 Titanium ( Part 9 ) : 1974 46g2 Part 10 Brick and tile. ( Part 10 ) : 1974 10988 : 1984 Method of measuring noise from machine tools ( excluding testing in anechoic chambers ) Balance quality rigid bodies of rotating

following Indian standards sary adjuct to this standard:
IS No. Title

are neces11723 : 1985 3 DEFINITIONS

554 : 1985

Dimensions for pipe threads where pressure-tight joints are made on threads ( third
revision )

For the purpose of this standard definitions shall apply. 3.1 Centrifuge

the following

2825 : 1969 4682 ( Part 1 ) : 1968

4682 ( Part 2 ) : 1969

Code for unfired pressure vessels Code of practice for lining of vessels and equipment for chemical processes: Part 1 Rubber lining Part 2 Glass enamel lining

A machine in which extraction or separation of a liquid from a solid and/or separation of immiscible fluids is achieved by centrifugal action.
NOTE - Illustrations of some centrifuges are given in Annex A. basic types of

1

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992 3.2 Batch Centrifuge A machine that processes a discrete batch of feed material. It may be automated to go through a sequence of feeding, washing, and spinning. Solids discharge may be either automatic, the solids being removed either at full speed or at a low speed, or the machine may be stopped for manual removal of the material, solid waste or product. 3.3 Continuous Centrifuge A machine that takes a continuous feed of material, giving a continuous discharge of liquor. Solids are removed either continuously or intermittently 3.4 Pusher Centrifuge A continuous filtering machine with an oscillating mechanism for discharge of solids. 3.5 Decanter Centrifuge A continuous sedimentation internal screw mechanism settled solids from a rotating 3.6 Disc Bowl Centrifuge 3.6.1 A continuously fed sedimentation machine provided with a number of equally spaced conical discs between which the feed passes. SoIids are removed from the bowl either manually, or as a slurry via nozzles or by a bowl opening mechanism. 3.7 Textile Centrifuge A machine used in dry cleaning, laundering and textile processes to extract liquid from textile materials or articles. 3.8 Basket That part. of a centrifuge, arranged to rotate about its axis, having a perforate shell in which the liquid is separated from the solid component. 3.9 Bowl That part of a centrifuge arranged to rotate about its axis, having an imperforate shell for the separation of immiscible liquids and/or the sedimentation of solids. 3.10 Spindle The shaft or shafts bowl is carried. on which the basket or machine with an for removal of bowl. 3.11 Rotor The part of the centrifuge that rotates, comprising basket or bowl and spindle together with attachments. 3.12 Casing The stationary casing surrounding the basket or bowl, adapted to receive the separated products and having means for their discharge. 3.13 Plough A device for the removal of centrifuged from the rotating basket or bowl. 3.14 Screw Conveyor A helical screw device mounted either within the bowl or basket and rotating concentrically with it or statically mounted as part of the casing so as to feed or discharge solids. 3.15 Hoops Rings secured to the outer periphery centrifuge basket to give extra strength. 3.16 Bumping Ring A device to limit radial movement of the rotor. The bowl or shaft will normally run freely within the bumping ring. 3.17 Screen A medium, usually metallic, used as an alternative to a cloth within the rotating assembly for the purpose of solids retention or as a support for a filter cloth. 3.18 Cover or Closure for Basket A detachable cover fitted in a centrifuge basket that holds the contents in position during rotating and is used to facilitate manual loading of the basket or lifting out of a filter bag. 3.19 Inspection Cover or Port An integral part of the centrifuge casing that is bolted, clamped or otherwise secured before the rotor is set in motion. It may be removed or opened for maintenance, inspection, lubrication or cleaning purposes. 3.20 Cover ( or Lid ) A plate or door forming part of the casing that, when closed or secured, prevents persons from coming into contact with moving parts, 2 of a solids

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992 from becoming entangled with any material motion within and from being splashed affected by fumes from the machine. 3.21 Interlock A device using mechanical, electrical, pneumatic or hydraulic components, or any combination of these, that prevents an action or motion taking place until some specified safe or predetermined condition has been In addition, its;:! normally established. situation continue to prevent an occurring. 3.22 Classification of Hazardous Areas in or at which the rotor is expected to revolve either continuously or at each part of a multi-speed programme. 3.30 Permissible Speed of a Centrifuge The maximum allowable speed of the rotor determined from stress considerations allowing the appropriate factor of safety. 3.31 Frame The major stationary part that supports the rotor. The centrifuge casing is normally mounted on the frame. 3.32 Highly Stressed Parts Those parts where the calculated equal to or above 75 percent of the permitted stress. 3.33 Medium Stressed Parts Those parts where the calculated stress is below 75 percent and above 50 percent of the maximum permitted stress. 3.34 Low Stressed Parts parts where the calculated stress is to or below 50 percent of the maximum permitted stress.
equal

An international system that recognizes three orders of probability of fire explosion associated with the possible presence of flammable gases or vapours in a geographical area, namely Zone 0, Zone 1 and Zone 2 in decreasing order of severity. 3.23 Combustion Consumption by oxidation, with the production of heat,`usually with incandescence or flame or both. 3.24 Flammable Capable of burning in air with a flame. 3.25 Highly Flammable Any substance that gives off a flammable vapour at a temperature of less than 32�C and when tested in the specified way for combustibility, supports combustion. 3.26 Flash Point The lowest temperature at which a liquid gives off sufficient flammable vapour in air to produce a flash on the application of a small flame. 3.27 Inert Gas A gas that cannot practical purposes, flue gas or carbon when suitable and support combustion. ( For usually nitrogen, but argon, dioxide are occasionally used available ).

stress is maximum

Those

4 MATERIALS 4.1 General

OF CONSTRUCTION

Materials shall conform to appropriate Indian lhe manufacturer and user shall standards. agree a specification including chemical anaysis and mechanical properties required when materials chosen are other than those specified in Indian Standards. They shall also agree the amount and type of testing needed to demonstrate that the agreed specifications are met.
upon NOTE - Safety is dependent of the rotating assembly. No level ment is specified. the of integrity contain-

4.2 Major Parts 4.2.1 Rotating
Parts

3.28 Inert Gas Blanket A system where the oxygen content within an enclosure is reduced by the use of an inert gas to a concentration at which an explosive atmosphere cannot form. 3.29 Operating Speed of a Centrifuge The speed measured in revolution per unit time 3

Major parts of centrifuges subject to stress due to speed of rotation shall be manufactured from a ductile material having an elongation of not less than I2 percent and an impact test value of not less than 25 J at 20�C. Any heat treatment to which the unit has been subjected shall be recorded by the machine manufacturer and made available to the user on request.

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992
to Corrosion, Abrasion, 4.2.2 Parts Subject Erosion or Low Temperature Conditions

example abrasive, low temperature. 5 METHODS

corrosive,

erosive,

high or

Shall be manufactured fied in Indian Standard

from a material where available.

speci-

OF CONSTRUCTION

4.2.2.1 Materials for use at sub-zero temperatures shall meet the design requirements at the minimum operating temperature.
of stressed Parts NOTE - The manufacture rotating assemblies in non-metallic materials is covered by this standard.

5.1 Casting, Forging Rolling or Welding Basket and bowl cylindrical and conical sections shall be made from castings, forgings or rolled and welded fabrications. 5.2 Bolting and Riveting Where basket or bowl cylindrical and conical shells are joined to the ends by bolting or riveting, the manufacturer shall state the design stress to be applied to bolts or rivets during assembly.
NOTE? - The means by which this stress may be determined should be agreed between the manufacturer and the user.

not

of

4.2.3

Testing of Materials

Test shall be made on the materials for major items of construction to establish that the specified property requirements are fulfilled and that the materials comply with the relevant standard.
NOTE -The values given in 4.2.1 refer to tests on separately cast or forged test pieces.

Calculations of the bowl/basket strength and the certificates of physical properties and chemical analysis shall be made available to the customer upon request. The request shall be made at the time of enquiry. 4.3 Protective Coverings Lining Materials and Surface

5.3 Fabrication

by Welding

4.3.1 Testing of Lining Inspection and test procedures specified in IS : 4682 ( Parts 1 to 10 ) shall be used, or in the case of a thick lined basket or bowl with non-conductive lining the procedure given in 4.3.2 shall be adopted.
NOTE - Lining materials and surface coverings arc not specified but for guidance general requirements are listed in Appendix B.

5.3.1 Welding for highly stressed parts and welder's approval shall be done in accordance with 6.7 aud 7.2 of IS 2825 : 1969. Welded joints shall comply with 6.2 of IS 2825 : 1969. If pre or post-heat-treatment is necessary it shall be as per 6.12 of IS 2825 : 1969. There shall be 100 percent NDT in accordance with 8.7 of IS 2825 : 1969 after all heat treatment is completed. Defects shall be assessed as per 8 of IS 2825 : 1969. On completion of heat treatment, radiographic or ultransonic examination shall be carried out, as given in either ( a ) or ( b ). (a) A minimum of 10 percent of the weld length shall be subject to radiographic or ultrasonic examination; this examination shall be carried out at all welded joint intersections and on part of every seam. Where an opening occurs in any welded seam or within a distance equal to the metal thickness, radiographic or ultrasonic examination shall be carried out at each side of the opening over a length of approximately 100 mm. (b) A 10: percent radiographic or ultrasonic examination shall be carried out on a random 10 percent of any batch. 5.3.2 The welding of low stressed parts shall be in accordance with written procedures and shall be subject to visual inspection. The acceptance criteria for defects shall form part of or be appended to the written procedure. 4

4.3.2 Procedure Partially submerge the basket, with its spindle in a horizontal position, in water containing less than O-1 percent of sulphuric acid! the spindle being above the Ievel of the hquid. Apply a voltage of not less than 1000 V a.c. between the spindle ( which is electrically connected to the metal of which the basket is composed ) and the liquid, and rotate the basket slowly through one revolution. No defect in the covering shall become visible during the test. 4.4 Materials Components for Casings and Other Wetted

Material for casings and other wetted components shall be chosen to suit the duty, for

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

5.3.3 Visual examination shall accompany all non-destructive testing and the examination result shall be recorded. A non-destructive testing specification shall be provided by the manufacturer for each centrifuge type. 5.4 Repair of Defects unacceptable reveals examination Where defects 100 percent examination shall be made. The rectification of unacceptable defects shall be carried out using a written approved method and shall be subjected to the same examination as the original work using the same acceptance criteria. 6 STRENGTH
6.1 Cylindrical OF BASKETS Baskets OR BOWLS

Each type of basket or bowl designed in accordance with this subclause shall be tested to demonstrate the integrity of the type and this test shall include a test at a speed and load sufficient to produce 125 percent of the design stress for 30 min. 7 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 7.1 Casing The casing including doors, covers, lids and their fixings shaI1 be secured either to the frame of the machine or the foundation and shall be sufficient to robust and of a suitable thickness to meet the duties specified and other predicted conditions. The thickness of any lining shaIl A bumpbe in addition to the case thickness. ing ring shall be fitted to the casing of any centrifuge if the basket is liable to oscillate relative to the casing. The casing shall provide adequate sealing against leakage of process fluid, gas or vapour. 7.2 Basket or Bowl Construction
7.2.1 Hoops

or Bowls

The strength of cylindrical baskets or bowls shall be determined using the methods of stress analysis specified in Annex C. The shells shall be of uniform thickness and shall be either unperforated or have round perforations. The ratio of shell thickness/basket be not greater than 0.1. radius shall

The maximum permitted stress ( ft ) shall not exceed the smaller of the following two values :
ft < 0'5fy

The basket or bowl shall be either unhooped or hooped. When hooped the spacing shall be symmetrical. 7.2.2 Joins in Basket or Bowl Material The manufacturer shall provide to the user evidence that the method of joining shell material is adequate for the proposed duty. 7.2.3 Perforations and Holes Perforations and holes shall be drilled or shall be produced by a method that induces stresses no higher than those caused by drilling.
NOTE is below punched. If the calculated circumferential 60 N/mm3 holes or perforations stress may be

ft <
where
fy the

@33fR

fR the ultimate tensile strength (in N/mm2);
yield point stress for steels with marked yield point ( in N/mm8 ), 01 0.2 y0 proof stress for steels without marked yield points ( in N/mm2 ), or I.0 y0 proof stress for austenitic steel ( in N/mm2 ).

6.2 Other Baskets or Bowls The criteria to be used in assessing calculated stresses shall be in accordance with Annex A of IS 2825 : 1969.
NOTES

7.3 Spindle and Couplings The spindle and couplings shall be shown to be adequate for the maximum driving and braking torque and for the manufacturer's specified out-of-balance loads. 7.4 Drives For batch centrifuges, the duty cycle and rating of the machine shall be agreed to between the centrifuge manufacturer, motor manufacturer and user. 5

1 A finite element technique is considered to be the most suitable for stress analysis of a rotating basket or bowl. 2 The purchaser and the manufacturer should agree at the time of the order the fatigue design conditions, if any, to be evaluated having regard to the service experience and experimental available information.

The maximum permitted mined from the equations

stress shall be detergiven in 6.1.

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992 7.5 Balancing and Limits of Vibration 7.5.1 Rotor Balance The centrifuge manufacturer shall state the balance quality of a rotor in accordance with IS 11723 : 1985 in the new condition and, if different, the permissible value to which a used rotor should be balanced. The method of achieving balance shall be clearly visible on an assembled rotor and shall be recorded at the time it is applied. The manufacturer shall balancing indicate zones where corrective action may be applied and state his recommended method of achieving balance. 7.5.2 Vibration Intensity The limits of vibration intensity as specified in Indian Standard for vibration levels for machine tools ( under preparation ) approthe priate, vibration amplitude at which machine may be allowed to operate, shall be stated by the centrifuge manufacturer. 7.6 Locking and Fatigue Strength of Bolted Parts 7.6.1 Rotating Piu-ts Bolted connections on all rotating parts shall be locked, by tab washer, spring washers, locking wire, or upsetting ( peening ), double nuts shall not be used. All bolting on rotors shall be to an agreed fatigue resistant design. The manufacturer shall state the required torque loading or necessary bolt extension in the maintenance manual. 7.6.2 Stationary Parts Bolts fitted to stationary parts which, if they should loosen, could come into contact with the rotor, shall be to a fatigue resistant design and shall be locked. 7.7 Direction and Speed of Rotation 7.7.1 General The direction of rotation, and the permissible speed shall be marked on the machine in a permanent manner ( see 15 ). 7.7.2 Measurement Suitable provision shall be made measurement of the speed of rotation. 7.8 Accessories All accessories required for the safe operation of the centrifuge at the required duty shall be specified by the centrifuge manufacturer and 6 for the shall include information on gearboxes, solids removal equipment, lubrication and sealing systems. 7.9 Screw Threads Screw threads shall be consistent the machine and to IS 554 : 1985. 7.10 Connections The centrifuge manufacturer shall state the maximum force and movement to which connections may be subjected in compression, tension, bending and torque. Centrifuges located on anti-vibrational mountings or vibration isolators require all connections to the machine to be sufficiently flexible to accommodate predicted movements. 7.11 Foundations The machine manufacturer shall provide, on request by the user, recommendations in the form of drawings showing forces on foundations and the recommended methods of attaching machines to the foundations. In particular manufacturers shall give information on the forcing frequencies to which the foundation will be subjected. 7.12 Over-Pressure Protection throughout

Where required by the user the maximum allowable operating pressure for the centrifuge casing shalI be stated by the manufacturer. The design contractor and user shall ensure that the centrifuge casing is provided with an over-pressure protection device. Sources of possible over-pressure from associated equipment, for example feed systems, product discharge systems dryers and wash supplies, shall be considered. The manufacturer shall also provide over-pressure protection for any other pressurised system on the centrifuge such as an oil lubrication system where appropriate. 8 GUARDS, INTERLOCKS AND SAFE WORKING 8.0 Principles to be used and the methods that may be applied in safeguarding the machinery shall be according to relevent Indian Standards wherever available. A person may be injured at centrifuges as a result of for example :

4 Corning

b)

into contact with, or being trapped by the machinery; being struck, trapped or entangled in or by any materia1 in motion in the machinery;

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

Cl being struck by parts of the machinery
ejected from it;

d) being struck e)

by material ejected from the machinery; being scalded, burned or splashed by liquids being fed to or ejected from the machine; by gas or fumes from the machine.

b) prevent feed valves opening on the first or subsequent cycles until the basket is rotating at its normal feed speed, and the plough is in the parked position. 8.2.6 A centrifuge provided with an independent oil lubrication supply shall have an interlock to prevent the main drive starting until the lubrication system is functional. Failure of the lubrication system shall trip the centrifuge drive and stop the feeds. 8.3 Other Safety Features 8.3.1 Any centrifuge operating on a duty likely to give excessive out-of-balance forces shall be fitted with a vibration alarm and a high vibration trip which will initiate appropriate action to reduce the out-of-balance forces.
NOTE - Consideration should vibration monitoring equipment be given to fitting to all centrifuges.

f ) being affected
8.1 Guards

8.1.1 All doors, inspection covers, lids and guards shall be secured by means which necessitate the use of a tool for temoval unless interIocks are provided in accordance with 8.2. 8.1.2 When the process conditions allow and when it is necessary to wash down, feed pr inspect whilst the machine is in motion, suitable guarding shall be fitted to prevent persons coming into contact with moving parts.
NOTE - Fixed practicable. guards should be used whenever

8.3.2 Centrifuge installations shall be effectively earthed and any non-conducting sections of pipework shall be bridged with an earth

conductor. 8.2 Interlocks 8.2.1 Interlocks shall be designed to ensure that the centrifuge remains in a safe condition if the interlock or its power supply fails. 8.2.2 Any centrifuge not protected as specified in 8.1.1 shall be equipped with devices designed to ensure that it cannot be started until doors, covers, lids and/or guards have been closed and secured and that access cannot subsequently be gained until linear and rotational motion have ceased. Machines fitted with rotational sensing devices shall be considered stopped at speeds below 9 rev/min. 8.2.3 If a drive mechanism is employed which is capable of driving the centrifuge at a speed higher than its permissible speed, a speed control and an overspeed prevention device shall be provided. 8.2.4 When a basket type centrifuge is fitted with a low speed plough discharge device, an interlock shall be fitted to avoid the possibility of the plough operating at a basket speed higher than that for which it was designed. 8.2.5 For a ploughing type centrifuge, lock shaI1 be fitted which will : inter;XFe.Drive belts of anti-static material should

8.3.3 A rigid mechanical back-up stop shaIl be provided for a ploughing type centrifuge to prevent the pIough blade tearing into the cloth or basket unless the design of the plough geometry inherently prevents this occurrence. 8.3.4 Electrical heaters fitted in the centrifuge oil systems shall be rated at not more than 30 kW/ma and fitted with a high temperature trip device. 8.3.5 A centrifuge drive shall be so designed that in the event of a trip it can only be manually re-started. 8.3.6 The application of any brake shall automatically isolate the main drive mechanism unless the drive system is used as a brake. 8.3.7 Centrifuges incorporating a lift-out basket and/or a lift-out basket lid arrangement shall have devices to prevent start-up until the basket and/or lid have been correctly located and locked into position.
NOTE - Consideration provision of adequately should be given to the
sized inspection windows, fixed light with internal wash or scraper facility and the provision of internal casing flush facilities to obviate the necessity of opening up the machine for process reasons.

a) prevent the starting of the main drive of the centrifuge unless the plough unit is in the parked ( that is, withdrawn ) position. 7

IS 4092 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 9 NOISE LEVEL 9.1 Installation, Maintenance and Operation The supplier shall provide information, on the correct method of installation, maintenance, and use to control noise and details of noise levels measured in accordance with IS 10988 : 1984.
constructed NOTE - Machines should be designed, installed and maintained so as to perform their function as quietly as is reasonably practicable.

10.2 Oxygen Concentrations Blanket Systems

for

Inert

Gas

The following upper limits of concentration shall not be exceeded ( see 10.1 ) : Start-up of centrifuge drive Automatic shut-off of feed and/or wash supplies, with alarm Automatic trip of machine drive 10.3 Other Safety Features Flammable Materials for Handling 2% 5% 8%

10 PROCESSING FLAMMABLE MATERIALS 10.0 This clause deals with the processing of flammable materials. The processing of explosive materials is cutside the scope of this standard. Levels of risk are detailed in Annex D. 10.1 General 10.1.1 Where a high level of risk exists an inert gas blanket system shall be provided together with an interlock system designed to prevent the machine being started until the oxygen within the machine has been reduced to a safe concentration. The oxgen content shall be monitored continually unless a pressure and flow controlled purging system is used. A pressure and flow controlled system shall be monitored by external means at specified intervals. The system shall provide an extra flow of inert gas the oxygen content increases above the alarm condition given in 10.4. Automatic isolation of feeds and machine drive shall be provided if the oxygen concentration exceeds a specified level or the purging system faiIs.
NOTE - Vibration sensing, a vibration alarm and high vibration trip should be fitted. It is essential to ensure that the trip initiates appropriate action to reduce the vibration.

10.3.1 Inert gas feed points shall be located to avoid stagnant vapour pockets during the initial purge.
NOTES 1 Separate lines may be necessary to feed inside the basket, product chute, casing and bearing housing. _ 2 It is essential to ensure that precautions are taken to prevent air entering the centrifuge system during operation, for example, through feed or wash routes, inspection ports, sampling points labyrinth seals etc. 3 It is essential to ensure that gas sample points are sited to ensure that representative samples are obtained and short circuiting from inert gas supply points is avoided. 4 Provision should be made to prevent overpressurizing the centrifuge or its oil system by the inert gas supply.

10.3.2 An atmosphere which is safe to breathe shall be provided inside a machine having an inert gas system whenever internal access is required. An interlock shall be provided to prevent the flow of inert gas when a machine is opened as part of its normal operation. Other machines shall have provision to prevent the flow of inert gas whenever they are open. 10.3.3 Machines provided with friction brakes or clutches shall be designed to minimize the risk of process fluid ingress to the clutch/brake housing which shall be purged with solvent free air provided by an independent ventilating fan interlocked electrically with the main drive. A friction clutch or brake shall be contained in a housing sealed from the process fluid and supplied with a purge gas flow. The purged condition shall be maintained when the machine is in operation.
NOTE -Friction brakes and clutches should be avoided where possible to reduce the risk of sparking and overheating.

10.1.2 Where a moderate level of risk exists an inert gas blanket system shaI1 be provided.
NOTES 1 Precautions should be taken at start-up ( for example, by use of a portable oxygen analyser ) to ensure that the oxyen has been reduced to a safe concentration. During operation the oxygen content of the machine should be monitored once every working shift. 2 Vibration sensing should be fitted (see Note to
10.1.1 ).

10.1.3 Where a low level of risk exists precautions shall be taken to avoid any temperature which could produce a flammable atmosphere.
NOTE vibration Consideration should monitoring equipment. be given to fitting

10.3.4 Where a centrifuge is fitted with a friction brake, an interlock shall be provided to prevent the centrifuge from being set in motion until the brake is released. The
8

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992
application of matically isolate any such brake shall autothe main drive mechanism. radiographic ( or equivalent ) examinations stressed welds in bowls or baskets where weld factor greater than 0.8 has been used the stress calculations given in C-3.2.2. of a in

11 PROCESSING TOXIC MATERIALS 11.1 The centrifuge system shall be designed to prevent the release of materials harmful to health into the work area and to allow the machine to be maintained safely. The degree of containment shall be related to the potential hazard including the toxicity of the material and to any relevant threshold limit values or other hygiene standards.
NOTES 1 The main areas where leaks occur are : a) joints and seals;

The manufacturer shall provide evidence that all linings meet the test requirements of 4.3.1.

12.1.3 Centrifuge
Casing system cable. pressure, lubrication tests shall be carried system and seals out where appli-

b) flexible connections; c) feed and discharge conveying

equipment.

2 The main areas where hazards to maintenance operators accur are:

Dynamic tests shall be carried permissible speed to ensure that meets the mechanical design These test shall include the the results shall be available request: a) starting b) stopping c) vibration d) noise time; time; severity;

out up to the the centrifuge specifications. following and to the user on

d) crevices and inaccessible e) poor surface finish; f) trapped toxic material.

locations;

Leaks may be reduced by operating below inside the machine. atmospheric pressure Any pressure relief device or extraction system shall vent to a safe place. 11.2 There shall be provision to decontaminate a machine and check that a safe condition has been achieved before maintenance work starts. If both toxic and flammable conditions exist in the machine then the provisions of clause 10 shall apply in addition to the requirements specified in 11. NOTES
1 In order to comply with 11 it is essential to ensure the system operates above atmospheric pressure. 2 The provision of secondary enclosures ( for example, special rooms or ventilated cabinets ) or siting in well ventilated areas may be necessary. Regular monitoring of the work area is essential to check that the permissible concentration of the toxic material is not higher than expected.

level; of controls, instruments.

e) the correct functioning interlocks and monitoring
NOTES

1 The manufacturer should afford the purchaser or his representative all reasonable facilities, including access to the works during manufacture to verify that the centrifuge is in accordance with this Indian Standard. 2 Manufacturers should supply the labour and appliances for such testing as may be carried out on their premises to satisfy the purchaser that the materials used for the construction of the basket comply with the relevant specifications. In the absence of facilities at their own works for making the prescribed tests, the manufacturer shall arrage for the tests to be carried out elsewhere. The certificate of tests supplied by the manufacturer of the materials may be used as evidence that the materials used comply with the relevant specifications. 3 The manufacturer should make available all facilities for any additional inspection and test required by the purchaser as given in F-l.6 ( c ) provided the purchaser indicated, at the time the order is placed, that he wished to avail himself of the provisions contained in this clause.

12 INSPECTION AND TESTING 12.1 Test at Manufacturer's Work 12.1.1 Materials
The manufdcturer shall provide evidence, when requested at the time of enquiry, the materials used in the construction of the centrifuge comply with the property requirements of 4. 12.1.2 The Assemblies manufacturer shall provide evidence of

12.2 Site Tests
The manufacturer and user shall agree tests to be carried out to verify that centrifuge meets design performance. NOTE - Recommendations for periodic tion and testing are listed in Annex E. the the

examina-

9

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

ANNEX A ( Clause 3.1 )
ILLUSTRATIONS OF SOME BASIC TYPES OF CENTRIFUGE Table 1 List of Figures Illustrating Basic Types of Centrifuge ( Clause A-l )
Types of Centrifuges Figure 1

A-l Centrifuges may be used to separate solids from liquids by filtration or sedimentation. They may also be used, to separate immiscible fluids with or without mass transfer between the phases, and possibly with facilities for solids removal as an added variant. Centrifuges used in the laundry, textile and dry cleaning industries separate solids ( fabric ) from liquid ( wash water or solvent ) by centrifugal filtration. Figure 1 is an illustration of a textile centrifuge. Subsequent illustrations show filtration and sedimentation machines, each category subdivided into batch and continuous versions. The list of illustrations is not exclusive; most of the common forms of machine are shown, but each type can usually be provided with several variations in detailed design to suit the intended process application. A list of figures illustrating basic types of centrifuges is given in Table 1.

Textile centrifuge
Filtration machines : a) Batch centrifuges 1) Three point suspension manual discharge 2) Automatic discharge i) Pendulum ii) Horizontal spindle iii) Three point suspension b) Continuous centrifuges 1) Basket centrifuges with extraction screw conveyor 2) Pusher 3) Self discharge conical Sedimentation machines : a) Batch centrifuges 1) Three point suspension 2) Tubular bowl 3) Chamber bowl 4) Disc bowl b) Continuous centrifuges 1) Nozzle discharge disc 2) Opening bowl 3) Solid bowl decanter Combined sedimentation and filtration machine, screen bowl decanter

2 : 5

7" 8

9 :: 12 13 ::: 16

11

I8 4092(Part1):1992
(32) (33)

Drive mozoi Basket Securmg and locking device to: 33 33 Cover for bcrket top 24 Liquid outlet

1 4 5 8 9 11 15 32

Baseplate or stand Casing Cover or lid

Spindle

FIG. 1

TEXTILECENTRIFUGE (5) (2?) (21) (7) (16) ri,

1 Baseplate of stend 2 Bearing support 3 Suspension column 4 5 7 9 10 11 1L Casmg Cover or lid lnspectlon port Spindle Driven pulley Drive motor Drwing pulley

15 Basket 16 gasket lip 21 22 24 Feed pipe Wash pipe Liquid outlet

PIG. 2

THRBB POINTSUSPENSION, MANUALDISCHARGE, BATCHCENTRIFUGE, FILTRATION MACHINE

12

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

4 6 8 9 11 13 15 21 23 24 26

Casing Cover or lid Suspension Spindle Drive motor Brake Basket Feed pipe Solids outlet Liquid outlet Plough

PIG. 3 PaNnllr TIM. AUTOMATIC DISCHARGE, BATCH CENTRIFUGB, FILTRATION MACHm

2. Bearing

su~por

4 Casing 5 Cover or lid 9 Spindle 10 Driven pulley 13 Brake 16 Basket 21 Feed pipe 22 Wash pipa 23 Solids outlet 24 Liquid outlet 26 Plough

FIG. 4

HORIZONTAL SPINDLE, AUTOMATIC DISCHARGE, BATCH CENTRIFUGE, FILTRATION MACHINE

13

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992
(26) (5) (21) (22) (7) (16)

1 3 4 5 7 9 10 11 12 15 16 21 22 23 24 26

Baseplate or stand Suspension column Casing Cover or lid Inspection port Spindle Driven pulley Drive motor Driving pulley Basket Basket lip Feed pipe Wash pope Solids outlet Llqwd outler Plough

FIG. 5

\ (lb, (i3) (5 (i2) ti) THREE POINTSUSPENSION, AUTOMATEDISCHARGE, BATCH CENTRIFUGE, FILTRATION MACHINE

I

I'

I

I \

(i&I

1 4 11 14 15 21 22 23 24 25

Baseplate Casing Drive motor Reducer Basket Feed pipe Wash pipe Sollds outlet Liquid outlet Extraction screw 1 conveyor

FIG. 6

ri) Ii31 1241 CENTRIFUGE WITHEXTRACTION SCREW CONVEYOR, CONTINUOUS CENTRIFUGE, BASKET FILTRATION MACHINE

14

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

D)
I

(15) \

(4) \

(21) \

(10)
(32) \ \

:
4

Baseplate Bearing support Casing

Casing door 95 Spindle 10 Driven pulley 15 Basket 21 Feed pipe 22 Wash pipe 23 Solids outlet 24 Liquid outlet 27 Pusher 28 Pusher shaft 32 Pusher mechanism 33 Motor base plate oil chamber Filtering element Feed cone

(34)

(11

FIG. 7

PUSHER, CONTINUOUS CENTRIFUGE, FILTRATION MACHINE

3 Suspension column 4 Casing 5 Cover or lid 7 lnspecrlon porr 8 Susoenslon 9 SpIndie 10 Driven pulley 11 Drive motor 15 Basket 21 Feed pipe 22 Wash pipa 23. Solids outlet 24 Liquid outlet

(24) . , 110) SELF DISCHARGE CONICAL, CONTINUOUS CENTRIFUGE, FILTRATION MACHINE 15 I I \;)r

(231

J

FIG. 8

Is 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

1 2 3 4 5 7 9 10 11 12 16 17 21 24 36

Baseplate or stand Bearing support Suspension column Casing Cover or lid Inspection pot-t Spindle Driwn pulley Driw motor Driving pulley Lip Bowl Feed pipe Liquid outlet Skimmer pipe FIG.

9

THREEPOINT SUSPENSION, BATCHCENTRIFUGE, SEDIMENTATION MACHINE (10) (12)

i24)

2 Bearing support
4 5 9 10 11 12 17 21 24 Casing Lid Spindle Driven pulley Drive motor Drive pulley Bowl Feed pipe Liquid outlet

FIG 10 TUBULARBOWL, BATCHCJNTRIFUGE, SEDIMENTATION MACHINE 16

Is 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

(24)

2
4 9 17 19 20 21 24

Bowing support CarinQ Spindle Bowl BowI hood Main IockrinQ Feedpipr Liquid outbt FIG.

1t

CHAMBER BOWL,BATCHCBNTRIPUGE, SEDIMENTATION MACHINE

17

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

I'll/
I

(21)

(17I-

2
4 9 17 19 20 21 24

Bearing support Casing Spindle Bowl Bowl hood Main lockring

Feudpipe
Liquid outlet

FIG. 12 Drsc BOWL, BATCH CENTRIFUGE, SEDIMENTATIONMACHINE

18

IS 4092 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

(20)

2 Bearing support Casing 9 Spindle 17 Bowl 19 Bowl hood 20 Main lockring 21 Feed pip 23 Solids outlet 24 Liquid outlet 37 Bowl casing draw

4

(231 OPENINGBOWL CONTINUOUS CENTRIFUGE, SEDIMENTATION MACHINE

FIG. 14

20

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

2
4 10 14 17 21 22 23 24 25

Bearing support Cising Driven pulley Reducer Bowl Feed pipe Wash pipe Solids outlet Liquid outlet Screw conveyor

(23) PIG. 15

(24) SOHD BOWL DECANTER

(21

2 4 10 14 17 21 22 23 24 25 35 37

Bearing support Casing Driven pulley Reducer Bowl Feed pipe Wash pipe Solids outlet Liquid outlet Screw conveyor Filtering screen Wash liquw outlet

r3ir

( 241

(211

FIG. 16 COMBINED SEDIMENTATION AND FILTRATION MECHINB,SCREENBOWL DECANTER

21

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

ANNEX

B

( Clause 4.3.1 )
PROTECTIVE LINING MATERIALS AND SURFACE COVERING

B-l The conditions for which linings have to be considered fall into the following four basic categories:

(a> To protect
corrosive handled;

the centrifuge attack by the

parts from substances

B-2 The choice of the protective lining should be governed by its compatibility with the substances handled, by its adhesive bond to the parent material ( particularly on baskets and bowls ) and by its resistance to erosion/ abrasion and mechanical damage.

(b)

To protect the product from contamination by the centrifuge materials; (cl To protect the centrifuge parts from damage by abrasion, erosion, scuffing, seizing, wear, etc; ((-9 To prevent the generation of sparks. The first of these categories is the more common. However, the severity of the corrosive effect of products varies widely and this has a bearing on the minimum qualities required of the lining.

B-3 The manufacturer and the user should agree the lining material to be used, the standard to which it shall be applied and the inspection to be carried out. The edges of perforations are particularly vulnerable and it is essential that the choice of lining materials and application method take this into account. Similarly, careful arrangements should be made at edges and other discontinuities ( for example, basket lip ). B-4 Further guidance on the lining of vessels and equipment is given in IS 4682 ( Parts 1 to IO)

ANNEX

C

( Clause 6.1 )
METHODS C-l SYMBOLS ( See FIGURES OF STRESS ANALYSIS FOR CYLINDRICAL BASKETS OR BOWLS

AND ABBREVIATIONS 17 AND 18 ).

The following symbols are used: b,, b, is the centre distance bety ween adjacent perforations d is the diameter of perforations M is the maximum load at the permissible angular velocity h is the internal axial length of basket or bowl k is the lowest of coefficients k,, k,, k,, k, and k5 is the weld coefficient appli4 cable to joints not subjected to inspection and testing is the weld coefficient applik2 cable to joints subjected to approved inspection and testing

k,, k, are the stress coefficient due to perforations k,
n

-

( in mm ) ( in mm )

4

is the number of circumferential rows of perforations is the coefficient of reduction of the apparent density due to perforations is the internal radius of shell is the arithmetic mean radius of shell is the internal radius of load is the shell thickness is the reinforcing coefficient ring ( hoop)

-

(inmm) ( in mm ) (in mm) ( in mm ) -

( in kg ) ( in mm )
-

a

is the angle between staggered perforations is the density of material of constructron of shell

( in degrees ) ( in kg/dm3 )

22

IS
P2

Part 1 ) : 1992

is the density of wet cake ( or load ) at the permissible angular velocity

C-2 SHELL STRESSES OF ROTATING BASKET OR BOWL ( in kg/dm3 ) C-2.1 Circumferential stress The circumferential stress ( fi) shall be determined by the following equation.

fi

is the tensile stress in shell due to unloaded drum rotation (in

N/mm2)

j-2

f2

is the tensile shell stress due to centrifugal force acting on a homogeneous ( in N/mm2 ) load is the tensile shell stress due to centrifugal force acting on a non-homogeneous ( for ( in N/mm2 ) example, textile ) load is the sum of tensile stresses ( in N/mm2 ) acting on the shell is the ultimate tensile ( in N/mm2 ) strength is the yield point stress for steels with marked yield point, or ( in N/mm2 ) 0.2% proof stress for steels without marked yield points, or ( in N/mm' ) 1.0% proof stress for austenitic steels ( in N/mm2 ) ( in rad/s )

fi= (ZppJv; x 10-9
The coefficient q ( see C-3.3 ) has been used to compensate for reduction in density due to perforations. C-2.2 Stress Due to Centrifugal Load Force Exerted by

ft fR fy

If the basket or bowl has a lining ( for example, gauze, filter cloth ), the load shali be increased by the mass of such lining. stress due to centrifugal a) The tensile force acting on a homogeneous mass loading ( fi) ( for example, liquids, fluid slurries where the load density is known ) shall be determined by the following equation.

b) The

w

is the permissible velocity

angular

tensile stress due to centrifugal force acting on a non-homogeneous load ( f3) (for example, textiles, furs where the load mass is known ) shall be determined by the following equation. l03x3nhs

f3=

W2M $1 ;I: )
(

C-2.3 Stress Summation C-2.3.1 Homogeneous Mass Loading The sum of tensile stresses acting on the shell (ft ) for homogeneous mass loading shell be determined using the following equation.

1
h NOTE - This sketch is diagrammatic only and does not purport to show a standard form of basket construction. FIG. 17 TYPICAL BASKET 23

f&f1
ii

+

f2)

k

Where the load density is known, the sum of tensile stresses acting on the shell ( ft) for homogeneous mass loading shall be determined using the following equation.

Where the load mass is known the sum of tensile stresses acting on the shell (ft )for homogeneous mass loading shall be determined using the following equation. 106 x Mr,
ft= 10�xk

A-

4Ply22

+

2rrhzs

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

d

4

+ II---FIG. 18
Load

-9

+=+
Axial I

+* w

Circumferential

PATTERNOF PERFORATIONS

C-2.3.2 Non-homogeneous
( ft ) for

The sum of tensile stresses acting on the shell load shall be a non-homogeneous determined using the following equation.
ft=

construction of the shell, the following coefficients shall be used to allow for the reduction in strength at the welded joint. a) Welded joints not subjected or testing k, = 0.8 to inspection

(f,3-f3) k

Where the load mass is known the sum of tensile stresses acting on the shell ( ft ) for a load shall be determined non-homogeneous using the following equation.
ft = C-3 COEFFICIENTS

b) Welded

joints subjected to 100% radiographic examination or other recognized methods of inspection
k, = 0.95

C-3.2.3 Perforation Coeficient In case of uniformly distributed perforations, the smaller of the following values of k shall be used ( see Figure 18 ):
k 3

C-3.1 Reinforcing Hoop Allowance If hoops are used to reinforce the basket shell, the effect shall be a!lowed for by the use of the coefficient z. This coefficient shall be determined from stress calculations using methods applicable to such a configuration. NOTE - z = 1 if no hoops
hoops are fitted. are fitted z > 1 when

_bl-d -----or
h

k,=y(b2bd) 2

1 + tan2 a ' = %/( 1 + 3 tan2 CL ) The value v is dependent K < 90" on angle tc, where

C-3.2 Coefficients for Welded Joints and Perforations

If the inclined centreline distance b, and the angle M. are different, depending on what is taken as the axial position, then k, shall be calculated for both vslues of b, and a. The smaller value of k4 is to be used. In baskets with a single row of perforations close to the bottom and/or to the top, the following value of k shall be used:
k, = 1 -

C-3.2.1 Genera I The coefficient k to be used in the stress calculation of C-2.2 is the smallest value obtained from the coefficients kl, k,, ks, k,, k, as given in C-3.2.2 and C-3.2.3. C-3.2.2 Welded Joint Coeflcient Provided that the mechanical properties of the weld match those of the material used in the 24

`$

should be made within 9 mm of the weld material but if this is unavoidable, the smallest of the coefficients ksr k,, ks shall be multiplied by the appropriate welded joint coefficient.

NOTE - No perforations

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992 C-3.3 coefficient for the reduction in the apparent density of the shell due to perforations. The coefficient for the reduction in the apparent density of the shell due to perforations using shall be determined the following equation. 4 = 1 r& 4b,b,sina C-4 ABNORMAL LOAD DUTY

Should the duty for which the basket is used involve abnormal load distribution, for exampIe, a heavy load concentration in a small area of the basket, the basket will require to be of greater strength than the above equations imply.

ANNEX D ( Clause 10.0 )
FLAMMABLE D-l FIRE AND EXPLOSION
D-l.1

MATERIALS flammable atmosphere is likely to occur in normal operation and where machines are opened to the atmosphere on a regular basis for product discharge.

CONDITIONS

For a fire or explosion to occur within a centrifuge system, there has to be a combination of the following three factors:

4 flammable

b)

c>

gas or vapour present in sufficient concentration ( between the lower and upper explosive limits ); oxygen present in sufficient concentration usually above 10 vol. oh ); a source of ignition.

b)

Moderate-A

moderate level of risk exists:

(1) where a flammable

D-l.2 At a temperature above the flash point a flammable condition is likely to occur. Sources of ignition within a centrifuge may be hot spots caused by mechanical friction or the discharge of static electricity. At a sufficiently high temperature auto-ignition of a bydrocarbon could occur. D-2 LEVELS Three broad follows. a) High-A OF RISK levels of risk are defined as

atmosphere is likely to occur in normal operation and where machines are provided either with bolted covers or with interlocks to prevent covers being opened while the machine is in motion, or

(2) where any duty known by experience

to give rise to the possibility of metal to metal contact including metallic debris in the feed and either operating close to or above the flash point or when a flammable atmosphere could occur under predictable abnormal circumstances.

high level of risk exists where a

c) Low-A low level of risk exists where a flammable atmosphere is unlikely to occur.

25

IS 4092 ( Part 1) : 1992

ANNEX E ( Clause 12.2 )
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PERIODIC EXAMINATION AND TESTING

E-l The user should, in consultation with the manufacturer, define the examination period based on the process parameters. The interval between examinations should not exceed 12 months and should be carried out by a person with sufficient practical and theoretical knowledge and actual experience of the type of machinery to be examined. Such persons have to be able to examine the machine in all of the ways stipulated in order to detect faults and weaknesses and assess their importance in relation to safe operation of the machinery. The results of examinations are to be recorded by the examiners and then countersigned and filed by the user. Particular care should be taken in the examination of perforations, at changes of section and other areas of high stress and those parts used to attach the basket or bowl to the spindle. It shall be shown that shell thickness and other important dimensions are within the allowable Values given by the manufacturer ( see Annex F ). On completion of examination, the tests red to in 12.1.3 shall be carried out. E-2 An examination and testing of the referitems

listed in ( a ) to ( c ) should be carried out. basket or bowl should be examined tested for: general condition; mechanical erosion and corrosion damage, shell thickness; (3) condition of welds; (4) conditions of where linings applicable b) The controls and interlocks should be examined and tested for : 1) correct functioning; 2) wear of mechanical parts; 3) braking and emergency stop. c) The foundation and principal fasteners should be examined and tested for : 1) corrosion, wear and security of fastners relating to basket/bowl, bearings, machine mountings and suspension; 2) corrosion and soundness of foundation. E-3 No modification of repair such as welding which may impair mechanical properties should be carried out on the highly stressed parts of a centrifuge without prior consultation with the manufacturer. a) The and (1) (2)

ANNEX F ( Clause 13 )
INFORMATION F-l INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED WITH ENQUIRY OR ORDER The information listed in F-l.1 to F-1.6 shall be supplied with an enquiry or order. F-l.1 General The following information shall be given : to be handled; c) continuous or batch operation, automatic or non-automatic; d) toxicity, and other known health risks; e) flammability; f ) corrosive properties; properties g) abrasion/erosion F-l.2 Type of Machine The type of machine preferred shall be stated ( for example, decanter, pusher, etc. ) 26

a) details of materials b) purpose or duty;

IS 4092 ( Part 1 ) : 1992
F-l.3 Machine Requirements

enquiry or order : examples ments are as follows : a) b) c) d) out of balance monitors; inert gas system; inspection and testing; noise.

of such requirc-

The following information

shall be given :

a) materials of construction; b) internal pressure; C>inert gas blanket requirement; 4 zone classification; 9 availabIe services: 1) electrical : full details of supply;

F-2 INFORMATION WITH TENDER

TO BE SUPPLIED

voltage ( in V ); number of phases; wires; and frequency number of ( in Hz ); 2) air pressure ( in N/mm3 ); 3) cooling water pressure ( in N/mm2 ); temperature ( in "C ); : type and pressure ( in inert gas 4) N/mm2 ); 5) others; feed system ( preceding unit operation ); f) h) discharge system of each phase ( succeeding unit operation ); i) washing : liquor and rate:

The information listed in F-2.1 to F-2.4 shall be supplied with a tender. F-2.1 Machine Offered The manufacturer shall provide full details of the machine which is offered, including the following information :
a) machine type and size; b) installed and full load power requirements and operating speeds of all drives; c) weight; d) installation specification.

F-2.2 Materials F- 1.4 Process Information The inputs and outputs of the machine shall be stated separately in the following details where appropriate : a) mass flow rate; b) specific gravities of liquors and particulate solids; c) volume flow rate; d) pressure; e) temperature; f) viscosity; g) pH vaIue; h) particle size ( distribution ) and shape; j) maximum density of feed and of its constituents. F-l.5 Process Tolerances The following given : a) percentage b) percentage liquors; process tolerances shall be

of Construction

The manufacturer shall provide details of the materials used in the construction of the following : a) b) c) d) e) f) g) basket or bowl; plough or coveyor; casing; spindle; seals; filter elements; bearings.

F-2.3 Ancillaries The manufacturer shall provide details of the following ancillaries : a) b) c) d) e) f) interlocks and other safety equipment; lubrication system details; seal system details; flocculant dosage system; controls and instrumentation; sampling arrangements.

of retained liquor in solids; of solids in centrifuged

F-2.4 Performance The manufacturer shall provide details of expected performance related to the required machine duty, including the following where 27

F-l.6 Purchaser's Special Requirements Any special requirements specific to the purneeds shall be supplied with an chaser's

IS 4092 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 applicable and shall state if this performance is guaranteed : a) percentage of retained liquor in solids; b) percentage of solids in centrifuged liquors; c) cycle times; d) noise level; e) power consumption. F-3 INFORMATION AFTER ORDER TO BE SUPPLIED F-3.2 Operation To enable the user to operate following shall be supplied; data a> the machine the

sheet; b) operating manual; C>interlocks and safety procedures; 4 testing instructions; e) commissioning instructions.

F-3.3 Maintenance To enable the operator to maintain machine the following shall be supplied : maintenance a> the

The information listed in F-3.1 to F-3.3 shall be supplied to enable the user to install, operate and maintain the unit effectively and safely : P-3.1 Installation The following installation details shall be supplied : 4 general arrangement drawings; b) civil engineering requirements in accordance with 6.11; 4 electrical requirements; 4 circuit and control diagrams; assembly and erection instructions; drive details; !a heaviest lift for assembly/mainteaance.

e> f>

schedule; b) inspection schedule: C>lubrication schedule; d) dismantling and assembly instructions; 4 special tools; f 1 fault finding charts; 8) servicing facilities; drawings including h) parts list/detailed details of allowable dimension; j> schedule of accessories and ancillaries; k) recommended spares.

28

Standard Mark
Stundurds Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Burcuu of h&n made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standurds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. BIS Copyright BIS has the copyright

of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BTS.
Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from trme to time. Users `of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. HMD 17 ( 5261 )

Amendments

lssued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

110002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstha

to all Offices ) Telephone ( 331 01 31 331 13 75

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH 160036 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 53 38 43,

37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16 40, 235 04 42, 235 23 15 632 78 58, 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, TV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya,

235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andberi ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COTMBATORE FARTDABAD, GHAZTABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM .
Printed at Printwell Printen. Aliparb, India

