( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 7496- 1974

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR DIRECTION OF' TRAVEL-CONTROLS FOR INDUSTRIAL TRACTORS AND POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS
Industrial
Chairman
SHRI K. C. UNNITHAN

Trucks

Sectional

Committee,

MCPD

22

Representing Macneill & Barry Ltd, Calcutta

SHRI S. GUPTA (Alternate to SHRI K. K. BHATTACHARYYA SHRI A. K. BISWAS SRRI` M. S. EKB~TE SHRI S. SEN (Alternate) SHRI R. K. JAIN SHRI L. MANDONSA SHRI G. D. h$ODI SHKI A. G. MODI (Alternate) SHRI L). N.' PESTOXGI SHRI M. K. MEHTA (A[tcmate) SHRI K. R. PRASAD SHRI T. T. GAI.A (Alternate) SHRI K. 1.. RAJAGOPAL SHRI K. RA~,~AKRISHNA RAO SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR SHRI B. J. RAMRAKHIANI

Shri K. C. Unnithan)

Garden Reach Workshop Ltd, Calcutta Ports Consultative Organization, New Delhi Indian Airlines, New Delhi Research, Designs 8s Standards Organization (Ministry of Railways), Lucknow Metal Box Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta Gujarat Industrial Trucks Ltd, Bombay Godrej & Boyce Mfg Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay Jest's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay (Railway Board) of Technical Development, Service &

Ministry of Railways Directorate General New Delhi

(Alternate)

SHRI K. C. GUPTA (Alternate) Tata Engineering & Locomotive SHRI K. G. K. RAO \ SHRI C. J. NACABHUSANA (Alternate) Escorts Ltd, Faridabad SHRI RIPDAMAN SINGH SHRI KARAMBIR SINCH (Akvnate) Voltas Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. F. SETHNA SHRI V. K. TALWAR (Alternate)

Directorate General, Factory Advice Labour Institute, Bombay

Co Ltd,

Poona

(Continued on page 2)

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the

publisher

shall be deemed to be an infringement

of copyright

under the said Act.

iucmbus

RgnJcn%
I-Iindustan +A (dW) Dira$J~tcG~ of
supplies & DiqKds, standarda~tta.ica,Bombay

Sanr B. R SINQH
smu s. CHxTrwAN SERX C. R. Sxmxt

Ltc&Ranchi

SHRxv.TEIR~ &RI~ik.bAYNBE(~Usnotr)

Saar T. PURNANANDAM, -TV Dirmtor (M=`D)

Dimctor Gamd,

IS1 (i%&cio Member)

S_ Smtt A. C. GDPTA Assistant Director (MCPD), IS1

2

ls

: 7496-1974

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR DIRECTION OF TRAVEL-CONTROLS FOR INDUSTRIAL TRACTORS AND POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 21 June 1974, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 The best controls are those which most clo$ely agree with natural human instinct. Such controls are sometimes called `directional' -where control movement is in the same direction as desired movement of truck or Some controls such as `forward' and `reverse' are obvious and accessory. easy to make `directional'. 0.2.1 Other control movements are less ob,viously `directional' and call for a thorough study and/or testing to determine the most natural human reaction. .Recommendations for preferred motions and placement of controls are intended to establish uniform practices in this area. 0.3 This standard is based on Dot : ISO/TC 1 lo/SC 2(Sec-39) 104 (revised) `Direction of travel-controls', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO).

1. SCOPE .I.1 This standard covers direction of travel-control symbols industrial tractors and various types of industrial trucks. 2. TERMINOLOGY i.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions as given in IS : 4660-1974* alongwith the following shall apply. 2.1 Sit-On (Rider) truck while sitting. Trucks Trucks where the operator
tmclrs (first revision).

for use on

operates the

*Glossary of terms relating to powered industriaI 3

Is : 7496-1974
2.2 Stand-On (Rider) Trucks Control -

Trucks where the operator operates the controls provided at the centre of the

truck while standing. 2.3 Central truck. Operating

2.4 End Control-Operating truck. 2.5 Pedestrian Controlled along with the truck. 3. FRONT

controls provided at the either end of the
Trucks -

Trucks where the operator waiks

END AND FORWARD

DIRECTIONS

OF TRAVEL

3.1 Front End of Trucks

- The front end of a truck is the end indicated by an arrow in the sketches given under 3.4.

3.2 Rear End, Left-Hand and Right-Hand Side of Trucks are in conformity with the definition given in 3.1.

-

These

3.3 Forward Direction of Travel - The forward direction of travel is when the truck travels in the direction indicated by the arrow. 3.4 Nomenclature
3.4.1 of Trucks

Sit-On (Rider)

Trucks

3.4.1.1 Trucks where the load is leading when the truck travels in the forward direction as given below : a) Counterbalanced forklift truck (see Fig. 1). mast or fork) truck (see Fig. 2). b) Straddle or reach (with retractable c) Shunting tractor (see Fig. 3).

IclI
\
I

I

I

V

FIG. 1

FIG. 2

FIG. 3

ls

: 7496-1974

3.4.1.2 Trucks where the load is trailing when the truck travels in the forward direction as given below : a) Straddle or reach (with retractable mast or fork) truck where the driver is seated side-ways (see Fig. 4). b) Towing tractor-front
C)

end control (see Fig. 5). end control (see Fig. 6).

Towing

tractor-rear

d) Fixed or elevating platform truck (see Fig. 7).

FIG. 4

FIG. 5

FIG. 6 3.4.2 Stand- On Trucks

FIG. 7

3.4i2.1 Centre control -Trucks where the load is leading truck travels in the forward direction as given below: a) Counterbalanced 3.4.2.2 End control forklift truck (see Fig. 8).

when the

a) Trucks where the load is leading when the truck travels in the forward direction as given below : 1) Counterbalanced forklift truck (see Fig. 9). mast or fork) truck (see Fig. 10). 2) Straddle or reach (with retractable

b) Trucks where the load is trailing when the truck travels in the forward direction as given below: 1) Straddle or reach truck (with retractable-mast standing sideways (see Fig. 11). 2) Fixed or elevating platform 5 or fork) with driver

truck (see Fig. 12).

FIG. 8

FIG. 9

._ FIG. 10

FIG. 11

FIG. 12
3.4.3 Pedestrian Controlled Truks - Trucks where. the load is trailing when the truck travels in the forward direction as given below : a) Pallet truck, (see Fig. 13). b) Fixed or elevating platform truck (see Fig. 14). c) Counterbalanced forklift truck (see Fig. 15). d) Tractor (see Fig. 16).

FIG. 13

FIG. 14

L3#??
FIG. 15 `_. 6

FIG. 16

4.2,1 On all trucks, where the operator faces in the norma! line of travei, which are Steered by means of steering wheels (horizontal, in.clined or vertical); a clockwise rotation of the steering,wheel shall steer the truck to the right in the forward direction of travel* (see Fig. 17A and % 73).

FIG.

17A

FIG.

17B

On all trucks where the operator faces at a right angle to the normal of travel which are steered by means of a steering wheel (horizontal, inclined or vertical) ; a clockwise rotation of the steering wheel shall steer the truck clockwise when the truck is travelling with the load trailing* (see Fig. 18A and 18B).
direction,

4.2.2

8

NORMAL , DIRECTION OF TRAVEL

FIG. 18A

FIG.

18B

*Considerable numbers of trucks of models given under 3.4.1.2 and 3.4.2.2 have been built with a steering reverse of the above standard. Such trucks may still be manufactured, provided that on the truck an arrow indicates in which direction the steering control shall be moved to steer the truck to the right in the fonrord direction of travel.

7

IS : 7496 - 1974 4.3 Tillers 4.3.1 Tillers Operating in a Horizontal Plane - On trucks steered by a tiller moving in the horizontal plane and which in the neutral position is parallel to the longitudinal axis of the truck, or steered by a tiller rotating on a shaft parallel to the longitudinal axis of the truck and which in the neutral position stands upright (see Fig. 19A). 4.3.1.1 When the driver is facing in the direction of travel, movement of the tiller to his right shall steer the truck to his right (see Fig. I Sfij .

FIG. 4.3.2 trucks means plane, in the

19.~

FIG. 19B

Tillers Opera&g in a Vertical Plane - On stand-on lift platform [see 3.4.2.2 (b)] and fixed platform trucks I\-hich are steered bv of a tiller situated on the right of the driver and operating in a vertica'l raising the tiller (clockwise rotating shall steer the truck to the right) forward direction of travel* (see Fig. 20).

FIG. 20 *Considerable nhmbers of trucks of models given under 3.4.1.2 and 3.4.2.2 have been built with a steering reverse of the above standard. Such trucks may still be manufactured, provided that on the truck an arrow indicates in which direction the steering control shall be moved to steer the truck to the right in the forward direction of travel. 8

IS : 7496 - 1974 4.4 Steering Handle Motorized Hand/Rider Trudks

4.4.X Steering handle shall be provided with suitable means to protect operator's hands a,gainst injury from swinging doors, walls, columns, etc. 4.4.2 Motorized hand/rider trucks employing a steering tongue control which extends beyond the confines of the truck shall steer as follows : a) With the walking operator facing in the direction of travel, with load trailing, clockwise movement of the steering tongue shall steer the truck clockwise; and b) With the riding operator facing in the direction of travel, with the load trailing, clockwise movement of the steering tongue shall steer the truck clockwise. 4.5 Pivotirig Steering Controls - On trucks which are steered by means of a pivoting control operated by foot (see Fig. 21), or by hand (see Fig. 22), a clockwise rotationof this control, looking in the forward direction of travel, shall steer the truck to the right. 5. DRMNG AND BRAKING CONTROLS

5.1 Sit-Down Rider Trucks brake and clutch pedals 5.1 .l Pedals Arrangement - The accelerator, (when fitted) of internal combustion engine and electric powered trucks shall be arranged according to Fig. 23A and 23B respectively.

FIG. 21

FIG. 22

ls : 7496-1974

CLUTCH

BRAKE

ACCELERATOR

FIG. 23A

BRAKE

ACCELERATOR

FIG. 23B 5.1.1.1 Where the pedal control system differs from Fig. 23A and 23B, its function shall be clearly indicated both in the driving instructions and on truck itself. 5.1.2 Gear Change Lever clearly indicated. The positions for gear engagement shall be

5.1.3 Direction Change Levers-The direction control levers on interna combustion engined trucks and the controller levers on electric trucks shall be arranged in such a way that their operation corresponds to the required direction of travel (See Fig. 24). 5.1.4 Safety Control and Brakes - Electric Powered Jndasfrial Trucks-Means shall be provided t.o open the travel circuit when the operator leaves the truck.

FIG, 24

I6 : 7496- 1974 5.1.4.1 Travel contrrll having a neutral position in the direction control shall be so arranged that the truck moves only when the direction control is actuated and shall not move at a speed greater than inching speed unless control has been actuated for both speed and direction. Where no neutral position is provided, the truck shall not move unless the speed control is activated. 5.1.4.2 Accelerator, if foot operated, shall increase speed when depressed with the right foot. 5.1.4.3 Service brakes, if foot operated, shall be energized by depressing the control bv the right foot. Where the pedal control system differs from this, its function shall be clearly indicated both in the driving instructions and on the truck itself. 5.1.4.4 If a single pedal controls both acceleration and .braking, depressing pedal shall increase speed and releasing pedal shall apply brakes, when the pedal is being operated by the right foot. 5.1.4.5 The parking brake (or mechanism) shall be manually or automatically applied and shall remain applied until released by the operator. 5.1.5 Safe9 Control and Brakes - Internal Combustion Engine Powered Industrial Trucks - Travel control, having a neutral position in the direction control shall be so arranged that the truck moves only when the direction control actuated and shall not move at a speed greater than inching speed, unless, Where no neutral control has been actuated for both speed and direction. position is provided, the truck shall not move unless the speed control is activated. 5.1.5.1 Service brakes, if foot operated, shall be energized by depressing the control. 5.1.5.2 If a combination clutch and brake pedal is used, the initial pedal movement shall disengage the clutch and the final pedal movement shall apply the brakes and the pedal shall be operated by the left foot. 5.1.5.3 Accelerator, if foot operated, shall increase speed when depressed with the right foot. 5.1.5.4 If a combination pedal controls both acceleration and brakes depressing the accelerator portion shall increase speed and depressing the brake portion shall apply the brakes, and the combination pedal shall be operated by the right foot. 5.1.5.5 Clutch pedal, if used, shall release clutch by depressing with left foot. 5.1.5.6 The parking brake (or mechanism) shah be manually or automatically applied and shall remain applied until released by the operator. 5.2 Stand-On (Rider) Trucks 5.2.1 Pedals - When the truck is in motion, operator's foot shall remain on the pedal and by releasing the pedal, the brakes are applied (see Fig. 25). 11

IS : 7496 - 1974
5.2.2 L.et'ers on trucks. The provisions of5.1.2 and 5.1.3 shall also apply to stand-

5.2.2.1 Where a lever is provided, depressing the lever shall release the brakes. When the truck is in motion, operator's hand shall remain on the lever. Releasing the lever shall apply the brakes (see Fig. 26).

b*BRAKES

RELEASED

a - BRAKES b - BRAKES

APPLIED RELEASED

FIG. 25 5.2.3 Push-Buttons

FIG. 26

5.2.3.1 When direction of travel is selected by push-buttons arranged vertically one above the other, pressing the upper button shall drive the truck in the forward direction of travel as defined in 3.3 (see Fig. 27).

FIG. 27 12

IS : 7496 - 1974 5.2.3.2 When direction of travel is selected by push-buttons

horizontally, indicated.

the direction

controlled

by each

button shall

shall

arranged be clearly to neutral

5.2.3.3 All direction position when released. 5.2.4

control, push-buttons

return

Safety'Conlrol and Brakes -

Electric Powered Industrial Trucks

5.2.4.X Means shall be provided to automatically open the travel circuit when the parking brake (or mechanism) is applied.

5.2.4.2 Means shall he provided so that the travel circuit may be activated only by releasing the parking brake and resetting the speed and/or direction control(s) when the operator assumes the driving position. 5.2.4.3 The parking brake (or mechanism) shall be manually or automatically applied and shall remain applied until released by the operator. 5.2.4.4 Means shall be provided for mechanical locking for the forward and reverse motion. 5.2.5 Safety
Control aud Brakes Internal hzdustrial Trucks 5.2.5.1 Accelerator, if foot depressed with the right foot.

or electrical
Engine

interPowered

Combustion

operated,

shall

increase

speed

when

5.2.5.2 Travel control shall be so arranged that the truck does not move until the direction control has been actuated and shall not move, at a speed greater than inching speed, unless control has been actuated for both speed and direction. 5.2.5.3 The'parking mechanism shall be manually or automatically applied. It shall remain applied until released by the operator. 5.3 Pedestrian
Controlled Trucks

.

5.3.1 Electric Trucks - Forward and reverse motion of the truck shall be controlled or selected by means of a control device readily accessible when grasping handle grip on steering tongue. This control device shall operate directionally in one of the following manners :

a)

The control shall have a forward motion for forward travel and a rearward motion for reverse travel; or

b) The control shall consist of two buttons located at top of control handle when steering tongue is approximately vertically arranged so that the forward one is for forward travel and vice-versa (see Fig. 23) ; I, or C) The control shall have rotary motion, the rotation being in thesame direction as drive wheel rotation (see Fig. 29A). 13

IS t 7496 - 1974

FIG. 28

Fro. 29A

5.3.1.2 The travel control shall be clearly and durably identified to indicate the function and direction of motion. 5.3.1.3 On electric trucks, the tongue shall be movable jn a vertical pla?e. When the brake is mechanically operated in the vertical (B) and horizontal (B') positions, the brake shall be applied and the power switched off,unless it has already been switched off by the operation of the travel control switch (see Fig. 29B).

A -

BRAKE OFF, RANGE

OPERATING

B-B' -BRAKE

ON, POWER

OFF

FIG. 29B 5.3.1.4 When the brake is electrically operated, the release of the tongue or of the travel control switch shall automatically cut off the power and shall apply the brake, whatever be thi position of the handle.
Nom - The requirements of 5.3.1.3 the power is off. do not preclude controlled `free-wheeling' when

5.3.2 Internal Combustion Engine Powered Trucks-The tiller shall be movable in vertical plane. When the brake is operated in vertical (B) and horizontal (B') positions, the brake shall be applied and the power switched off, unless it has already been switched off by the operation of the travel control switch or clutch (see Fig. 30). 14

ls

: 749611974

B-B' A-

BRAKE ON,

CLUTCH IN

OUT

BRAKE OFF, CLUTCH

FIG. 30 5.4 High Lift Order Picker Trucks 5.4.1 Safe& Control and Brakes 5.4.1.1 Controls shall be provided which de-activate travel controls when the operator leaves the truck. 5.4.1.2 ,Means shall be provided to render inoperative all operating controls other than those on the elevatable platform when the controls on the elevatable platform have been selected for use. Only one location of controls shall be capable of being operated at one time. 5.4.1.3 Means shall be provided for an operator on the elevatable platform to shut off the power to the truck. 5.4.1.4 Travel controls shall be so arranged that the truck may move Travel only when the direction and speed controls have been actuated. speed shall be such that at all operating platform heights the stability requirements of the relevant Indian Standards are complied with. 5.4.1.5 The pa&ing mechanism shall be manually or automatically applied and sball remain applied until released by the operator. 6. CONTROLS FOR THE~MOVEMENT OF LOADS

S.1 Coritrol by Levers*~ 6.1.1 Location - The levers shall preferably be located so as to be operated by the driver's right hand, and clearly separated from the drive controls. 6.1.1.1 Control symbols shall be applied on or in close proximity to the control levers.
*If it is not possible to comply with the requirementsof 6.1.1 to 6.1.4, the function ami mode of operationof the levers shall be clearly indicated.

15

Is : 7496- 1974 6.1.2
Vertical Levers*

6.1.2.1 When the control levers are operated in a vertical plane the nearest to the driver (A) shall be for lifting and lowering the load, the next one (B) for tilting the load forward and backward. Other lever (C), if necessary, shall be used for controlling auxiliary devices (see Fig. 3 I). 6.1.2.2 In the event of a single lever and gate being used, its sequence of operation shall be as indicated in 6.1.2.1. 6.1.2.3 On fork trucks with retractable mast or fork, the second lever (B') shall be used for the displacement of the mast or fork. The third lever (B) shall be used for tilting if provided and the other (C) for auxiliary devices (see Fig. 32). 6.1.3
Horizontal Levers*

6.1.3.1 When the control levers are operated in a horizontal?plane (under the steering wheel, for instance), the highest (A) shall be for lifting and lowering the load, that immediately below (B) for tilting mast, and the other under this (C) for controlling auxiliary devices (see Fig. 33). 6.1.3.2 In the event of a single lever and gate being used, its sequence of operation shall be as indicated in 6.1.3.1.

ti : B&
"C

A

0c

FIG. 31

FIG. 32

*If it is not possibleto comply with the requirements of 6.1.1 to 6.1.4, the functions and mode of operation of the leversshall be clearly indicated.

16

Is : 7496 - 1974

FIG. 33 6.1.3.3 On fork trucks with retractable mast or fork, the second lever (B') shall be used for the displacement of the mast or fork. The third lever (B) shall be used foi tilting if provided and the other (C) for auxiliary devices (see Fig. 34). 6.1.4

Mo&ent*

6.1.4.1 In the case of levers located as prescribed in 6.1.2 and 6.1.3, lifting shall be effected by pulling the lever (A) and lowering by pushing it. Backward tilt shall be effected by pulling the lever (B) and forward tilt by pushing it (see Fig. 35). 6.1.4.2 In the case of a single lever located and working in a `type-selector gate' its operation be for lifting [up (H) for lifting and down (II) horizontal plane for tilting [pull (E) for backward tilting] (see Fig. 36). under the steering wheel. in the vertical plane shall for lowering] and in the and push (F) for forward

6.1.4.3 On fork trucks with retractable mast or fork, retracting shall be effected by pulling the lever (B') and extending by pushing it (see Fig. 37). r" _- ^___ _ *

.I

~iic

L,F;;@;iw;;;y

FIG; 34

FIG. 35 functionsand:

*If it is not possibleto complywith the requirements of 6.1.1 to 6.1.4, the mode of operation of the levers shall be clearly indicated. 17

EXTENSION

R~lRACTIOil
FIG.

36

FIG. 37

6.1.5 Auxiliary Devices - The operation of control levers for auxiliary devices shall be as far as possible instinctive as explained below :
Examples :

1) ClampsFig. 38).

Pull 1ever to close arms, push lever to open arms (see

2) Rotating Hand - Pull lever to see the head rotate clockwise, push lever to see it rotate anti-clockwise (see Fig. 39). 3)
Tipping Scoop (see Fig. 40).

Pull lever to return scoop, push Iever to tip scoop

4) Side-Shifter (see Fig. 41).

Pull I ever to see fork shift to the right of the driver

Fro. 38 18.

FIG. 39

Fro. 40

FIG; 41

IS : 7496 - 1974 6.1.6 ZdcntiJicotion - When there are several leyers, each lever shall be clearly and durably marked to indicate the indc\*>.<iual function. 6.1.7 Self-Centring Ail levers shall be self-cerierinp. .-'

6.2 Control by Push Buttoms - Where the operation of lifting, lowering, tilting and auxiliary devices is controlled by push-buttons, these shall be arranged in such a way that they may be operated by the hand which is not The function of each button being used to operate the steering control. shall be clearly and durably indicated. 6.2.1 Where the operation of liftirig, lowering, tilting and/or auxiliar) devices is controlled by a pair of push-buttons, they shall operate in the same sense as described in 6.2. For example, actuation of the button that is located to the rear (relative to the operator's position) shall serve the same function as motion of a control lever to the rear. 6.3 Rotary Controls - The upper surface of a rotary control device shall move in the same sense direction as levers. 6.4 Special Controls - Special controls (such as for preselective ?r automatic devices) shall be identified easily and shall preferably be in acco?dance with the above recommendations.

20

