**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 3600-9 (1985) : Method of Testing Fusion Welded Joints 
and Weld Metal in Steel, Part 9: Macro and micro 
examination [MTD 11: Welding General] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 671*791-55*052 : 669*14 : 620-178"1 52-341*2/4 



IS : 3600 ( Part 9 ) - 1985 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 




METHOD OF TESTING 
FUSION WELDED JOINTS AND WELD METAL IN STEEL 

PART 9 MACRO AND MICRO EXAMINATION 



1. Scope — Specifies the procedure for macro and micro examination of welded joints to check the 
soundness of the joint. 

1.1 The macro examination is conducted for revealing certain aspects of the quality of the joint by 
subjecting it to the corrosive action of an etchant and examining visually or sometimes at a low 
magnification (usually 10 diameters or less ). The micro examination is conducted to study the micro 
structure at different zones at a magnification generally not less 100 diameters. 

2. Separation of Test Specimens — The method employed for cutting and cleaning of the test 
specimens shall be as given in IS : 7739 (Part 1 )-1975 'Code of practice for preparation of 
metallographic specimen: Part 1 General features'. 

3. Size of Test Specimen 

3.1 Macro Test Specimen — The specimen shall be the full thickness of the material at the welded joint 
and the excess weld metal and penetration bead shall be left intact. The specimen shall contain a 
length of the joint of at least 100 mm and shall extend on each side of the weld for a distance that 
includes the heat-affected zone and some parent metal ( see Fig. 1 ). 



J2 



THIS DISTANCE, 10 mm min-JO INCLUDE 

THE HEAT-AFFECTED ZONE AND SOME 
PARENT METAL -i 




-THIS FACE TO BE 
POLISHED* AND ETCHED 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

FIG. 1 TEST SPECIMEN FOR MACRO EXAMINATION 

3.2 Micro Test Specimen — Suitable micro test specimen containing weld, heat affected zone and 
parent metal shall be extracted from the wefd cross section. 

4. Surface Preparation — The specimen shall be prepared, polished and etched in accordance with 
IS : 7739 ( Part 1 )-1975 and IS : 7739 ( Part 5 )-1976 'Code of practice for preparation of metallographic 
specimen: Part 5 Iron and steel and their examination 1 . 

5. Reporting of Results — After examination (see 1.1 ) a full description of the appearance of the 
surface under examination and the type and location of any weld flaws in case of macro examination 
and weld Haws and microstructure in case of micro examination shall be reported. 

Note — The standard of defecfs permissible as a result of examination shall be as specified in the appropriate 
application standard or as agreed to between the contracting parties. 



Adopted 14 February 1985 



January 1986, ISI 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 3600 (Part 9) -1985 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first published in 1966 and subsequently revised in 1973 coveiing various 
tests on fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel. In view of the experience gained and in order to 
bring the test and test requirements in line with other international standards published so far, it has 
been decided to revise the standard in the following parts: 

Part 1 Cruciform fillet weld tensile test 

Part 2 Beam impact ( Charpy V-notch ) test 

Part 3 Transverse tensile test on butt welds 

Part 4 Longitudinal tensile test on cylindrical weld metal test pieces on butt welds 

Part 5 Transverse root and face bend test on butt welds ( corresponding to ISO 5173-1981 ) 

Part 6 Transverse side bend test on butt welds ( corresponding to ISO 5177-1981 ) 

Part 7 Longitudinal root and face bend test on butt welds 

Part 8 Nick break test and fillet weld fracture test 

Part 9 Macro and micro examination. 

In this revision free-bend test has been deleted as the ductility of the weid zone is being 
assessed more and more by other bend tests. Special tests such as tests for the susceptibility to 
lamellar tearing, reheat cracking, brittle fracture and creep fatigte will be covered in separate 
standards. 

The main purpose of this standard is to recommend test procedures and test specimens that 
should be quoted or incorporated in engineering application standards that deal with welded 
constructions primarily for the qualification of welding procedures and operators. Where differences 
still exist between application standards, the methods of test given in this standard should be preferred. 

A general indication is given of the purpose served by the tests specified in this standard but 
this standard does not indicate the choice of test method nor a particular application nor the number of 
specimens to be tested or the repeat tests to be allowed in the event of failure. Such requirements are 
matters to be dealt with in the particular application standards where they exist or to be agreed between 
the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

It should be realized that variations in welding procedure and the preparation of test specimens 
can give rise to variations in the test results. 

In preparing this part of the standard assistance has been derived from BS : 709-1983 
Destructive testing fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel' issued by British Standards 
Institution. 

In reporting the result of a test on analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated,is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



