Waa HTA IS 16511 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


Management Systems for 
Eco-Friendly Non-Coal Mining 
Operations — Requirements 


ICS 73.100.40 


© BIS 2017 


ma AM AR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM FA, 9 ae VHC HM, as feect-110002 
aie cet > MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2017 Price Group 6 


Mining Techniques and Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 8 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Mining 
Techniques and Equipment Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This Indian Standard prescribes requirements for the establishment, implementation, maintenance and improvement 
of Eco-friendly Non-coal Mining Operations Management System. 


The requirements given in this Indian Standard are applicable to any organization engaged in the field of non-coal 
mining operations, regardless of its size, type, location or level of maturity. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this code is complied with the final value, observed 
or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard 


IS 16511 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS FOR ECO-FRIENDLY NON- 
COAL MINING OPERATIONS — REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard prescribes requirements for 
the establishment, implementation, maintenance and 
improvement of Eco-friendly Non-coal Mining 
Operations Management System. 


1.2 The requirements given in this Indian Standard are 
applicable to any organization engaged in the field of 
non-coal mining operations, regardless of its size, type, 
location or level of maturity. 


2 REFERENCES 


2.1 The following normative documents contain 
provision, which through reference in this text 
constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard is encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No Title 
IS/ISO 14001: Environmental management systems 
2004 — Requirements with guidance for 


use 
Quality management systems — 
Fundamentals and vocabulary 


IS/ISO 9000 : 
2005 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions, in addition to that given in IS/ISO 
14001 and IS/ISO 9000 shall apply: 


3.1 Corrective action — Action to eliminate the cause 
of a detected nonconformity. 


3.2 Document — Information and its supporting 
medium 


NOTE — The medium can be paper, magnetic, electronic or 
optical computer disc, photograph or master sample, or a 
combination thereof. 


3.3 Environment — Surroundings in which an 
organization operates, including air, water, land, natural 
resources, flora, fauna, humans, and their interrelation. 


NOTE — Surroundings in this context extend from within an 
organization to the global system. 


3.4 Environmental aspect — Element of an 
organization’s activities or products or services that can 
interact with the environment. 


NOTE — A significant environmental aspect has or can have a 
significant environmental impact. 


3.5 Environmental impact — Any change to the 
environment, whether adverse or beneficial, wholly or 
partially resulting from an organization’s environmental 
aspects. 


3.6 Eco-friendly Mining Operation Management 
System — Overall intentions and direction of a mining 
organization related to its environmental performance 
as formally expressed by top management. 


NOTE — The environmental policy provides a framework for 
action and for the setting of environmental objectives and 
environmental targets. 


3.7 Environmental target — Detailed performance 
requirement, applicable to the organization or parts 
thereof, that arises from the environmental objectives 
and that needs to be set and met in order to achieve 
those objectives. 


3.8 Eco-friendly mining operations management 
system — Part of a mining organization’s management 
system used to develop and implement its 
environmental policy and manage its environmental 
aspects. 


NOTE 


1 A management system is a set of interrelated elements used 
to establish policy and objectives and to achieve those 
objectives. 


2 A management system includes organizational structure, 
planning activities, responsibilities, practices, procedures, 
processes and resources. 


3.9 Environmental objective — Overall 
environmental goal, consistent with the environmental 
policy, that an organization sets itself to achieve. 


3.10 Environmental performance — Measurable 
results of an organization’s management of its 
environmental aspects. 


NOTE — In the context of environmental management systems, 
results can be measured against the organization’s 
environmental policy, environmental objectives, environmental 
targets and other environmental performance requirements. 


3.11 Interested party — Person or group concerned 
with or affected by the environmental performance of 
an organization. 


3.12 Mine closure plan — Closure plan for the 
purpose of decommissioning, reclamation and 
rehabilitation in the mine or part thereof after cessation 


IS 16511 : 2017 


of mining and mineral processing operations that has 
been prepared in the manner prescribed in the standard 
format and guidelines issued by the Indian Bureau of 
Mines. 


3.13 Nonconformity — Non-fulfillment of a 
requirement. 


3.14 Preventive action — Action to eliminate the 
cause of a potential nonconformity. 


3.15 Prevention of pollution — Use of processes, 
practices, techniques, materials, products, services or 
energy to avoid, reduce or control (separately or in 
combination) the creation, emission or discharge of any 
type of pollutant or waste, in order to reduce adverse 
environmental impacts. 

NOTE — Prevention of pollution can include source reduction 

or elimination, process, product or service changes, efficient 


use of resources, material and energy substitution, reuse, 
recovery, recycling, reclamation and treatment. 


3.16 Procedure — Specified way to carry out an 
activity or a process 


NOTE: Procedures can be documented or not 


3.17 Record — Document stating results achieved or 
providing evidence of activities performed. 


4 MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR ECO- 
FRIENDLY MINING OPERATIONS 


4.1 Eco-friendly Mine Plan 


4.1.1 The organization, before any mining operations 
are permitted, shall establish, document and implement 
requirements of environment impact assessment study 
as laid down under the applicable statutory and 
regulatory requirements. 


4.1.2 The organization shall, after clearance from 
concemed authority for environment impact assessment 
study, consider the following and collect relevant data 
for them for formulating the eco-friendly mine plan: 


a) Contour plan of the area; 

b) Existing vegetation both in terms of species 
and groupings; 

c) Existing water bodies like channels, streams, 
river lets and ponds etc; 

d) Surface water flow pattern existing in the 
proposed mining area; 

e) Water table mapping; 


f) Locations where water harvesting structures 
could be constructed; 


g) Existing levels of water and air pollution; 

h) Habitations in the area surrounding the 
proposed mining site; 

j) Estimated impact of mining activities on the 


flora, fauna and water table of the mining area; 
and 


k) Thickness and quality of top soil cover. 


m) Area where overburden and top soil could be 
stored for future use 


The data collected shall be traced on the site map of 
the mining area and various protection measures in 
physical terms shall be worked out. 


4.1.3 The mining plan shall be prepared taking into 
account, as appropriate, the following environmental 
concerns: 


a) Afforestation before commencing mining 
operations; 

b) Plantation during the mining operations; 

c) Management of top soil ; 

d) Management of overburden; 

e) Management of underground water; 

f) Management of surface water; and 

g) Mine closure plan. 


4.2 General 


4.2.1 The organization after commencement of mining 
operations shall establish, document, implement and 
maintain an eco-friendly management systems in 
accordance with the requirements given in this standard. 
The organization shall also continually improve the eco- 
friendly management system as established. 


NOTE — An organization which is establishing a Management 
System for Eco-friendly mining operations should begin where 
there is obvious benefit, for example by focusing on immediate 
cost savings or regulatory compliance mainly related to 
significant eco-friendly aspects. By and by as the management 
system for eco-friendly operations takes shape, procedures, 
technologies and programme should be established for further 
improvement of the performance of management system. 


4.2.2 The organization shall also define and document 
the scope of its eco-friendly management system. The 
organization shall determine the functions/processes and 
their boundaries to which the eco-friendly management 
systems applies. All activities and services of the 
organization that are within the defined scope shall be 
included in the eco-friendly management system. 


4.3 Management System Policy for Eco-Friendly 
Mining Operations 


4.3.1 The organization’s management system policies 
related to environment, including an environment policy 
statement, shall be defined. 


NOTES 


1 The management system policy of an organization engaged 
in eco-friendly mining, forms the basis upon which the 
organization sets its objectives and targets. The policy is guiding 
force which leads the employees of the organization towards a 
common set of goals and objectives. 


2 The policy establishes the guiding principles for action for 
an organization and it should be sufficiently clear to be able to 
be understood by internal and external interested parties. 


4.3.2 The policy shall be periodically reviewed and 
revised to reflect changes condition and information. 


4.3.3 Management system policy for eco-friendly 
mining operations shall cover all activities, services 
within the defined scope of the organization that can 
cause impact on the environment. The policy shall, as 
appropriate, state commitments to: 


a) Comply with applicable legal and statutory 
requirements and other requirements which 
relate to its environmental aspects 

b) Prevention of pollution and minimizing 
adverse environmental impact due to mining 
operations 

c) Design services taking into account 
environmental aspects 


d) Set an example of leadership in the field of 
eco-friendly mining operations 

e) Achievement of continual improvement 
through enhancing of environmental 
performance achievements 

f) Setting and reviewing environmental 
objectives and targets 


4.3.4 The Management System Policy for eco-friendly 
mining operations shall be documented, implemented 
and maintained. It shall be communicated to all persons 
working for or on behalf of the organization and shall 
be available to the public. 


4.4 Eco-Friendly Mining Operations Aspects & 
Impacts 


4.4.1 The organization shall address the identification 
of environmental aspects of its activities, products and 
services within the defined scope of eco-friendly mining 
operations that it can control and those it can influence. 


NOTES 


1 The organization’s planning should provide a framework for 
the identification of environmental aspects related to its 
activities and services that it can control and influence. Planning 
also includes determination of aspects that can have significant 
impact on the environment. 


2 An emission, generation of noise, ground vibrations, a 
discharge are some of the environmental aspects of an 
organization engaged in mining operations. 
4.4.2 The organization shall establish criteria and a 
method to determine those aspects and impacts that it 
consider significant. This information shall be 
documented and updated from time to time. 


4.4.3 The organization shall determine those aspects 
that have or can have significant impact(s) on the 
environment. 


IS 16511 : 2017 


4.4.4 A procedure shall be established, implemented 
and maintained for identifying aspects that have 
significant impacts. 


NOTES 


1 The relationship between environmental aspects and 
associated impacts is one of cause and effect. There are many 
environmental aspects and associated impacts. 

2 The typical examples of activities involved in mining 
operations and their associated environmental aspects and 
impacts are given in Annex A. 

3 When establishing criteria for significance, an organization 
should consider probability of occurrence, duration of 
occurrence, area of influence and severity. A typical example 
of the criteria for determination of significant aspect is given 
in Annex B. 


4.5 Legal and Other Requirements for Eco- 
Friendly Mining Operations 


4.5.1 The organization shall establish and maintain 
procedure to identify, have access to and understand 
all legal and other requirements to which organizations 
subscribe and that are directly attributable to aspects 
of its activities, products and services. 


4.5.2 The organization shall also keep track of legal 
and other requirements as well as the changes to these 
to maintain regulatory compliance. It shall ensure 
communication of relevant information on legal and 
other requirements to its employees at all times. 


NOTES 


1 Legal requirements refer broadly to any requirement or 
authorization that is related to an organization’s environmental 
aspects as issued by a government authority (including state, 
local, central government authorities). Typical examples of acts, 
tules and regulations as applicable to the mining operations 
are given in Annex C. The list is comprehensive not exhaustive. 


2 An example of legal requirements to be complied with under 
various rules and regulations is given at Annex D. 


3 Legal requirements may also include permits, licenses or 
other forms of authorization; Judgement of courts or 
administrative tribunals; Treaties, conventions and protocols. 


4 The organization should comply voluntarily with other 
requirements as applicable for example, Corporate/Company 
requirements; Agreement with customers; Guiding principles 
or codes of practice; Requirements of mining associations; 
Agreement with local community or non-governmental 
organization; and Commitment to the society and public at large. 


4.5.3 The organization shall identify, maintain and 
keep a record of legal and other requirements to which 
it subscribes. 


NOTES — In addition to legal and other requirements the 
organization should develop and implement internal 
performance criteria to meet its need for example internal 
performance criteria may include limitations on air emissions 
that go beyond legal compliance requirements and quantity and 
type of fuels or hazards substances that are more eco-friendly 
than those specified in legal requirements. 


4.5.4 Objectives, targets and programmes — The 
organizations shall establish and maintain documented 
objectives and targets for management system for eco- 


IS 16511 : 2017 


friendly mining operations at its each relevant function 
and level. 


The objectives and targets shall be measurable, where 
practical, and consistent with the policy of management 
system of eco-friendly mining operations including the 
commitment to prevention of pollution. 


When establishing and reviewing its objectives an 
organization shall consider the legal and other 
requirements, its significant aspects and impacts, its 
technological options and its financial, operational and 
business requirements and views of the interested 
parties. 


Objectives and targets shall be regularly reviewed and 
revised based on past performance and in consultation 
with workplace personnel, eco-friendly mining 
operations professionals and other appropriate persons 
or groups. 


The organization shall establish, implement and 
maintain programmes for achieving its objectives and 
targets. These programmes shall mention designation 
of personnel responsible for achieving objectives and 
targets; the resources required, if any, and the time 
frame by which these are to be achieved. 


NOTE — Typical examples of programmes which are generally 
undertaken by an organization engaged in mining are given in 
Annex E. 


4.6 Implementation and Operation in Mining 
4.6.1 Resources, roles, responsibility and authority 


The appropriate human (including specialized skills), 
physical (including technology) and financial resources 
essential to implement and control organization’s 
management system of eco-friendly mining operations 
and for achievement of its objectives, shall be defined 
and be made available. 


NOTE — Resources should include Infrastructure, Information 
systems, Training, Technology, and Financial, human and other 
resources specific to operation of the organization 


Roles, responsibilities and authorities for 
implementation and operation of the Eco-friendly 
Mining Operations Management Systems shall be 
defined, documented and communicated. 


NOTE — Roles, responsibilities and authorities are generally 
described in the form of matrix. 


The organization’s top management shall appoint an 
appropriately senior level officer at apex level who, 
irrespective of other responsibilities, shall have 
responsibilities and authority, which include: 


a) Ensuring that Eco-friendly Mining Operations 
Management System is established, 
implemented and maintained in accordance 
with the requirements of this standard. 


b) Regularly reporting to the Top management 
on the performance of Eco-friendly Mining 
Operations Management System with 
recommendations for improvement. 


4.6.2 Training, awareness and competence — The 
organization shall establish and maintain documented 
procedures to identify the training needs. The 
organization shall also establish and maintain 
procedures to identify competency standards and to 
meet them through a training programme. It shall ensure 
that all personnel, whose work/workplace involves 
significant impact(s), receive appropriate training. The 
organization shall establish and maintain procedures 
to document any training provided to its employees and 
to evaluate its effectiveness. Competencies required for 
Eco-friendly mining operations and its management 
systems shall be integrated into the organization’s 
business cycle through recruitment, selection and 
performance appraisal and training among others. 


The organization shall establish and maintain 
procedures to make its employees or members at each 
relevant function and level aware of: 


a) the importance of conformance to the eco- 
friendly and mining operations management 
system, its policy and procedures; 

b) the significant environmental aspects and 
related impact associated with their work and 
the benefits of improved eco-friendly mining 
operations performance; 


c) their roles and responsibilities in achieving 
conformance with eco-friendly mining 
operations management system, its policy and 
procedures; and 


d) the potential consequences of departure from 
specified operating procedures. Personnel 
performing the tasks which involve eco- 
friendly mining operations and its 
management system shall be competent on the 
basis of appropriate education, training and/ 
or experience. 


The records of training of employees should be 
maintained. 


NOTE 


1 An organization engaged in mining operation should build 
awareness and motivate its employers by explaining its 
environmental values, commitment to the eco-friendly 
management system policy and importance of achieving 
environmental objectives and targets. 


2 Competence is based on appropriate education, training, skills 
and/or experience. Competence requirements should be 
considered in recruiting, training and developing future skills 
and abilities of persons working for the organization. 
Competence should also be considered in selecting contractors 
and others working for on behalf of the organization. 


4.6.3 Communication 
4.6.3.1 Internal Communication 


Organization shall establish and maintain procedures 
to ensure that pertinent eco-friendly mining operations 
management system information including 
environmental aspects and impacts are communicated 
to all the people in the organization as well as to the 
external interested parties. 


The organization shall thereby ensure the following 
means: 


a) Communicating the results from eco-friendly 
mining operations management systems 
monitoring, audit and management reviews to 
those within the organization who are 
responsible for and have a stake in the 
organization’s performance; 

b) Identifying and receiving relevant eco-friendly 
mining operations information from outside 
the organization; and 

c) Ensuring that the relevant information is 
communicated to external interested parties. 


NOTE — Communication with external interested parties and 
other authorities as given below should generally be recorded 
and actions should be taken in case of relevant and significant 
communication from external parties. 


a) Communication with State Environment 
Control Board for renewal of air and water 
consent 


b) Monthly, quarterly and annual reports to State 
Environment Control Board with respect to 
the mining operations 

c) Communication with Forest department for 
forestry and environmental clearance 


d) Communication with Indian Bureau of mines 


e) Communication with local community like 
Gram Panchayat, Zilla Centres, Welfare 
Organizations with respect to pollution related 
parameters and aspects. 


4.6.4 Documentation 
The organization shall document the following: 


a) Manual for Eco-friendly mining operations 
management systems; 

b) Any other document needed by the 
organization for effective planning, operation 
and control of its eco-friendly mining 
operations management systems activities; 
and 

c) Records required for providing evidence of 
effective implementation and maintenance of 
Eco-friendly Mining Operations Management 
System 


IS 16511 : 2017 


The organization shall establish and maintain a manual 
which includes: 


a) Scope of Eco-friendly Mining Operations 
Management System; 

b) eco-friendly Mining Operations Management 
System policy; 

c) eco-friendly Mining Operations Management 
System objectives; 


d) responsibility and authority of personnel at 
relevant levels within the scope of Eco- 
friendly Mining Operations Management 
System; 

e) documented procedures required by Eco- 
friendly Mining Operations Management 
System or reference to them; 


f) other documents, needed by the organization 
for effective planning, operation and control 
of its Eco-friendly Mining Operations 
Management System or reference to them; and 


g) description of elements of Eco-friendly 
Mining Operations Management System as 
required by this standard or by the 
organization. 


NOTE 


1 The records required to be maintained as covered in procedure 
and Eco-friendly Mining Operations Management System 
manual and as required by the standard should be covered under 
the Eco-friendly Mining Operations Management System 
documentation. 


2 An organization should determine which records are required 
to be kept relating to its environmental matters. Records should 
generally include: 


a) Information on compliance with applicable legal 
requirement and other requirements 


b) Details of non-conformities, corrective and preventive 
actions 


c) Results on Environmental Management Audit and 
Management Reviews 


d) Evidence of fulfillment of objectives/targets 

e) Information on participation in training 

f) Permits/licenses or other forms of legal authorization 

g) Results of operational control 

h) Complaint record 

j) Records of tests for emergency preparedness (mock drills) 


4.6.5 Control of Documents 


The organization shall establish and maintain 
procedures for controlling all documents required by 
this Indian Standard and by the organization to ensure 
that: 


a) they can be located; 

b) they are periodically reviewed, revised as and 
when necessary and approved for adequacy 
by authorized personnel; 

c) the current versions of relevant documents are 
available at all locations where operations 


IS 16511 : 2017 


essential to the effective functioning of the 
Eco-friendly Mining Operations Management 
System are performed; 

d) obsolete documents are promptly removed 
from all points of issue and points of use, or 
otherwise assured against unintended use; and 


e) any obsolete documents retained for legal and/ 
or knowledge preservation purposes are 
suitably identified. 


Documentation shall be legible, dated (with dates of 
revision) and readily identifiable maintained in an 
orderly manner and retained for a specified period. 
Procedures and responsibility shall be established and 
maintained concerning the creation and modification 
of the various types of documents. 


The organization shall establish, implement and 
maintain a procedure(s) for the identification, storage, 
protection, retrieval, retention and disposal of records. 


Records shall be and remain legible, identifiable and 
traceable. 


The documents of external origin like regulations, rules 
and laws/statutory requirements issued by the regulatory 
and government bodies and standards, codes and 
specifications shall also be identified and their 
distribution controlled. 


Note — The documents are generally managed electronically 
which facilitate updating, controlling access and ensuring that 
all users are using the valid versions of documents. However, 
documents can be managed in other medium like paper, photos 
and posters. 


4.6.6 Operational control 
4.6.6.1 Identifying needs for operational controls 


The organization shall identify those operations and 
activities that are associated with the identified 
significant environmental aspects in line with policy, 
objectives and targets of Eco-friendly Mining 
Operations Management System. The organization shall 
plan these activities, including their maintenance in 
order to ensure that they are carried out under specified 
conditions by: 


a) establishing and maintaining documented 
procedures to cover situations where their 
absence could lead to deviations from the Eco- 
friendly Mining Operations Management 
System policy and its objectives and targets; 

b) stipulating operating criteria in the procedures; 
and 

c) establishing and maintaining procedures 
related to the identified significant 
environmental aspects of goods and services 
used by the organization and communicating 
relevant procedures and requirements to 


suppliers and subcontractors. 


NOTES 


1 The organization should identify need for operational control 
as required for prevention of pollution and for achieving 
objectives and targets as laid down for Eco-friendly Mining 
Operations Management System. 


2 The organization should establish operational control through 
procedures, work instructions, physical controls and through 
deployment of trained personnel or any combination of these. 
Operational control required for ensuring compliance with legal 
and other requirements should also be identified and 
established. 


3 Some of the examples procedures for operational control in 
an organization engaged in mining, are: 


a) Procedure for waste dumping at Quarry 

b) Procedure for dust suppression of haul roads 

c) Procedure for wet drilling operations 

d) Procedure for conservation of electricity 

e) Procedure for waste management 

f) Procedure for handling and use of oils 

g) Procedure for reduction of dust, fumes and noise 


h) Procedure for sludge cleaning slimes, pump operation, 
maintenance of pipe line. 


ce 


4.6.7 Contingency preparedness and response 
Contingency preparedness and response procedures 
shall be established, implemented and maintained with 
respect to potential emergency situations and accidents 
related to mining operations that can have an impact(s) 
on environment. 


The organization shall also establish, implement and 
maintain the procedures, methods, processes, resources 
on how it will respond to them. 


The procedures shall be reviewed and revised at least 
once in a year and shall also be tested for application 
through mock drills at regular intervals. 


NOTE 

1 The following situations may require emergency preparedness 
and response: 

a) Accidental emissions to the atmosphere 

b) Accidental uncontrolled blasts 

c) Accidental discharges to water and land 

2 Generally, potential accident and emergency situations are 
identified in disaster management plan prepared by the 
organization. The plan identifies actions to be taken in dealing 
with emergency alongwith unique responsibilities for the same. 
Such disaster management plan should be reviewed for its 
effectiveness at regular intervals and accordingly the same 
should be modified. The disaster Management plan should 
include evacuation routes and assembly points, mutual 
assistance from neighbouring organizations, a list of key 
personnel and aid agencies, including contact details (for 
example, Fire Department, Hospitals, etc.). 


4.7 Checking 


4.7.1 Monitoring and measurement — The 
organization shall establish, implement and maintain 
procedure for monitoring and measurement of its 
environmental performance on regular basis. 


Monitoring shall involve collecting information 
including measurements and observations in quantative 
or qualitative terms or a combination of both for 
activities related to performance of Eco-friendly Mining 
Operations Management System and its objectives and 
targets. The information collected shall be documented. 


Equipments used for monitoring and measurement shall 
be calibrated or verified and maintained and records 
of this shall be retained. 


NOTE — The monitoring and measurement may include the 
following: 


a) Performance of significant environmental aspects 


b) Monitoring emissions and discharges viz-a-viz legal and 
other requirements 


c) Monitoring consumption of water, energy or raw materials 
to meet objectives and targets 


4.7.2 Evaluation of compliance — An organization 
shall establish, implement and maintain a procedure 
for periodically evaluating the compliance of its eco- 
friendly mining operations with the legal requirements. 
Records of results of the evaluation of the compliance 
shall be maintained. 


Note — In order to assess compliance, the various methods 
which can be used include audits, document and/or records 
review, interviews, observations, etc. The organization should 
establish frequency and methodology for evaluation of 
compliance which can be integrated with other assessment 
activities. 


4.7.3 Nonconformity, corrective action, preventive 
action and continual improvement — An organization 
shall have a documented systematic method for 
identifying actual and potential non-conformity (ies). 
The method shall also include provision for making 
corrections and taking corrective and preventive 
actions. 


Once a non-conformity is identified, it shall be 
investigated to determine the cause of non-conformity. 
Accordingly, corrective actions shall be undertaken for 
the appropriate part of the system. Ifa potential problem 
is identified but no actual non-conformity exists, 
preventive action shall be taken using a similar 
approach. Identification of potential problem shall be 
achieved using methods such as, trend analysis, 
extrapolating corrective actions of actual non- 
conformities to other applicable areas where similar 
activities occur. 


The opportunities for improvement shall be identified 
based on root cause analysis of non-conformity(ies). 
The actions for improvement shall be planned, and 
changes to the environmental management system shall 
be implemented in accordance with these plans. 

NOTE — Non-conformity may occur in system performance 


and/or environmental performance. For example, environmental 
objectives and targets not met with; failure to evaluate 


IS 16511 : 2017 


compliance to legal requirements; operating criteria are not met 
with; energy conservation target not achieved; etc. 


4.7.4 Internal audit — The organization shall conduct 
internal audits at planned intervals to determine whether 
the Eco-friendly Mining Operations Management 
System conforms to the laid down requirements of this 
standard and to the documents established by the 
organization. An audit plan shall be documented 
indicating the scope, frequency of audit, auditor(s), 
auditee and audit date(s)/time. Selection of auditors and 
conduct of audits shall ensure objectivity and 
impartiality of the audit process. Auditors shall not audit 
their own work. The auditee shall ensure that actions 
are taken without undue delay to eliminate detected 
non-conformities and their causes. Follow-up activities 
shall include the verification of the actions taken and 
reporting of verification results. Records of the audits 
shall be maintained. 


NOTE — Internal audits should be conducted periodically. 
There could be variations in the frequency of audits of different 
departments. For example, the frequency of internal audits could 
be more for such departments, which have direct bearing on 
environment, or to whom higher number of complaints have 
been attributed or where previous audit results show larger 
deficiencies. While for other departments frequency of audits 
could be less. Not withstanding this, each department should 
be audited at a fixed interval, say, once in 3 or 6 months. 


4.7.5 Management review 


4.7.5.1 Review of the Eco-friendly Mining Operations 
“The organization shall review at appropriate intervals 
the Eco-friendly Mining Operations Management 
System so as to ensure continuing suitability, adequacy 
and effectiveness. The results of such review shall be 
documented as well as published if the organization 
has a commitment to do so. 


Management review shall generally include but not 
limited to: 


a) assessment of the internal audit results and 
evaluations of compliance with legal and other 
requirements; 

b) communication from external interested 
parties, including complaints; 

c) monitoring of the systems and environmental 
performance of the organization; 

d) review of corrective actions; 


e) review of suggested changes and any 
developments/changes in legal and other 
requirements; 


f) review of policy, objectives and targets; 


g) follow-up actions from previous management 
reviews; and 


h) recommendations for improvement. 


The outputs from management reviews shall include 


IS 16511 : 2017 


any decisions and actions related to possible changes 
to policy, objectives, targets and other elements of the 
Eco-friendly Mining Operations Management System. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.4.4) 


NOTE — Records can be maintained in the form of Minutes of 
meeting, which will contain the subjects discussed, actions to 
be taken, time frame, responsibility for the action etc. 


EXAMPLES OF ACTIVITIES AND THEIR ASSOCIATED ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS AND 


A-1 Only Blasting and Drilling operations have been 


IMPACTS 


(Informative) 


mentioned, for other activities, aspects and impacts 


should be identified on the same lines as given below: 


Section Activity Aspects Impact 
Quarry Blasting Generation of dust Air pollution 
Quarry Blasting Generation of fumes Air pollution 
Quarry Blasting Air Blast Noise pollution 
Quarry Blasting Ground vibration Damage to property 
Quarry Blasting Fly rock Damage to property 
Quarry Diesel filling Spillage of diesel Land contamination 
Quarry Drilling operation Generation of dust Air pollution 
Quarry Drilling operation Leakage of oil Land & water contamination 
Quarry Drilling operation Generation of fumes Air pollution 
Quarry Drilling operation Generation of noise Noise pollution 
Quarry Drilling operation Vibration Nuisance 


IS 16511 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.4.4) 
CRITERIA FOR DETERMIINING SIGNIFICANT ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS 


(Informative) 


B-1 Criteria for rating the environmental aspect and 
their associated impact for determining the significant 
environmental aspects is based on the following four 
factors: 


1) Probability of Occurrence (P), 

2) Duration of Occurrence (D), 

3) Area of Influence (A) and 

4) Severity expressed as Effect on Receptors (S). 


B-2 Probability of Occurrence (P) — The impact 
shall be rated for Probability of Occurrence (P) as per 
Table 1 below, for normal, occasional and emergency 
situations. 


Table 1 


Rating Normal Occasional Emergency 


Once in 6 months 
or less 


5 Continuous or Once in a week 


more than 4 
times in a day 


4timesinaday Once ina fortnight Once ina year 


Twiceinaday Once ina month Once in 2 years 


Twiceinaday Oncein6months Once in 4 years 


FP N U A 


Once in a day Once in a yearor Once in more than 


more 4 years 


B-3 Duration of Occurrence (D) — The impact shall 
be rated for Duration of Occurrence (D) as per Table 2 
below: 


Table 2 
Rating Duration 
1. Up to 2 hours 
2. 4 Hours 
3. 8 Hours 
3. 16 Hours 
4. 24 Hours or more (continuous) 


B-4 Area of Influence (A) — The impact shall be rated 
on Area of Influence (A) as per Table 3 below: 


Table 3 


Rating Area of influence 

5 Beyond the Core Zone (5 Km. radius) 
Beyond the Mine Control Boundary (MCB) 
Within the Mine Control Boundary (MCB) 
Within the section 
Within work station 


re N U A 


B-5 Severity expressed as Effect on Receptors (S) 
— The impact shall be rated for Severity expressed as 
Effect on Receptors (S) as per Table 4 below: 


Table 4 
Rating Receptor affected 
2 Human 
2 Air 
2 Water 
2 Land 


B-6 The identification of environmental aspects and 
associated impacts for each section together with their 
ratings of four factors as given above should be 
tabulated. 


The total score of the environmental aspect and 
associated impact shall be calculated as follows: 


i) The scores for Probability of Occurrence (P), 
Duration of Occurrence (D) and Area of 
influence (A) shall be added together. 

ii) The score for all the receptors i.e., Effect on 
Human (HU), Effect on Air (AP), Effect on 
Water (WP) and Effect on Land (LC) shall be 
added together to arrive at the total Effect on 
Receptors or Severity (S). 

iii) The total score shall be calculated by 
multiplying the sum of (P), (D) and (A) by 
(S) as follows 


Total Score = (P +D +A) x S 


B-7 A cut off total score should be decided and the 
environmental aspects having total score above the cut 
off should be taken as significant environmental aspect. 


IS 16511 : 2017 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.5.2) 
LIST OF ACTS RULES AND REGULATIONS 


(Informative) 
a) The Mines Rules 1955, q) The Air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) 
b) Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961 Act 1981 
c) Mineral Concession Rules 1960 r) The Hazardous Waste (Management and 
d) Minor Mineral Concession Rules 1986 Pending) Smendipent Rules 2002 
e) Mineral Conservation & Development Rules, s) The Indian Electricity Rule, 1956 
1988 t) Noise Pollution & Control Rules, 2000 
f) Granite Conservation & Development Rules u) Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules, 
1999 2001 
g) Marble Development & Conservation Rules v) The Gas Cylinder Rules, 1984 
2002 w) The Petroleum Act 1934 and Rule 1975 
h) Marble Policy 2002 x) The Central Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 & Rule 
j) Granite Policy 2002 1989 
k) The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 y) The Indian Explosives Act, 1884 and Rule 
m) The Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 ee 
n) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) z) Static and Mobile Pressure Vessels (Unfired) 
Act. 1974 Rules, 1981 
p) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) aa) MSIH Chemical Rules, 1989/1994/2000 
Cess Rules 1977 
ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.5.2) 
EXAMPLES OF LEGAL REQUIREMENTS 
(Informative) 
SI No. Rules Legal Requirements 
1. Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961 Fugitive emission monitoring results 
2. Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 Status of Mining lease 
3. | Mineral Conservation & Development Rules, - Storage of overburden waste rock 
1988 - Reclamation & rehabilitation 
- Precaution against dust 
- Noise protection 
- Restoration of flora 
4. _ Environmental (Protection) Act 1986 & Environmental Monitoring results 


Rules and Noise Pollution regulation and 
control Rules 2000 


- Ambient Air Quality 

- Ambient Noise 

- Effluent Quality 

- Environment statement 


10 


SI No. Rules 
5. Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution 
Act) 1974 
6. Air (Prevention & Control of Pollution Act) Status of Air Consent 
1981 - Air quality 
- Monthly result 


IS 16511 : 2017 


Legal Requirements 


Status of water consent Effluent quality Monthly result 


- Furnishing of returns 


7. Battery (Management & Handling Rules Records & Return 


2001) 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 4.5.4) 
EXAMPLES OF OBJECTIVES, TARGETS AND ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT PROGRAMMES 
(Informative) 
Objectives Targets Environment Management 
Programme 

Control of contaminated Reduce suspended solids in run off water Desiltation of check dams. 

surface run off from waste by 20% in downstream than inflow in 

dump monsoon 


Prevention of slope failure of Set up slope retention system by March 


the active waste dump 2007 
Conserve fresh water at Reduction of fresh water consumption by 
washing unit 30% in the year 2007 


Recover of fines from slime, 0.12 MT per 
year 


Conservation of mineral 


(natural resource) 


Construction of stabilization 
walls at the toe of the waste. 
Raising of Dam height by 2.0 
meters 

Provision of facilities of 
recirculation of water from 
Dam 

Construction of FBC & Hydro 
cyclone. 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 08 (1250). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


