**************** 



* i&$z 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9951 (1981) : Scissors, Blunt End, Nelson Pattern [MHD 6: 
Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



?&&IiII}g&*±2te 



^llll^V!^^> 



\\\«KTv 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR V^ T^TT <sMHI | 3ft ^ft ^FT\ ^f W *T^?TT )f 
Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




• 



• 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



^ *g», 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 9951 - 1931 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SCISSORS, BLUNT END, NELSON PATTERN 



UDC 615 472 4 : 616-136 08 4 J — 72 




© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BIJAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAKG 

NEW DtLHI 110U02 

_5 "j3r * January 1^82 



IS : 9951 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SCISSORS, BLUNT END, NELSON PATTERN 

Thoracic and Cardio-Vascular Surgery Instruments Sectional 
Committee, CPDC 28 

Chairman Representing 

Dr P. S. Narayanan G. B. Pant Hospital, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri P. N. Bajaj South India Surgical Co, Madras 

Shri S. Pari as amy ( Alternate ) 
Dr J. V. Bhatt T. N. Medical College & B. Y. L. Nair Charitable 

Hospital, Bombay 

Dr (Smt) Ratna MAGOTRA ( Alternate ) 
Shri Bhupinder Singh Punjab Surgical Instruments Manufacturer's and 

Suppliers Association, Jullundur 
Shri Ved Prakash M. Chadda Bharat Surgical, Bombay 

Smt Mohini V. Chadda ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Ghai Ministry of Defence (DG1), New Delhi 

_ Shri J. N. Vishwakarma ( Alternate ) 

ur M. K. uirinath Railway Board, Ministry of Kaiiways, New ueihi 

Dr N. Gopinath Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Dr B. L. Gupta Dr Balabhai Nanavati Hospital, Bombay 

Dr S. Gupta Department of Health & Family Planning, Calcutta 

Shri P. Y. Kalelkar Kaieikar Surgical Industries, Bombay 

Shri Y. P. Kalelkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Khandpur Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 

New Delhi 

Shri P. S. Malhotra ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Mitra J. Mitra & Bros, New Delhi 

Dr Sandip Mukerjee Inpersonal capacity ( 32 ', Shaheed Bhagat Singh Marg, 

New Delhi ) 
Shri B. L. Fahwa The Surgical Manufacturers & Traders Association, 

New Delhi 

Shri H. L. Grover ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Prabhakar Surgical Instruments Plant, Indian Drugs & 

Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Madras 

Shri B. Dhanasekaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, Sengupta Baruipur Surgical Instruments Centre, Calcutta 

Shri S. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Col R. N. Thareja Ministry of Defence (DGAFMS), New Delhi 

Lt-Col M. K. Bagchi ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page!) 



© Copyright 1982 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9951 - 1981 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Dr M. S. Valiathan 
Dr Solomon Victor 
Dr A. S. Sethi, 
Director (Consr Prod 
& Med Instrs) 



Representing 

Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre. Trivandrum 
Health and Family Planning Department, Madras 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri B. K. Mahata 
Deputy Director ( Consr Prod & Med Instrs), ISI 



IS : 9951 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SCISSORS, BLUNT END, NELSON PATTERN 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 19 October 1981, after the draft finalized by Thoracic and 
Cardio-Vascular Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division 
Council. 

0.2 This standard specifies the optimum, requirement for material, 
dimension and performance requirements for Nelson pattern scissors. 

0.3 The Nelson pattern scissors is made with a specific ratio between the 
handle length and blade length which would allow strong cutting near 
the joint and fine cutting near the tip. The tip is made blunt to avoid 
accidental perforation of nearby vital organs in the chest. This is an all 
purpose scissors. 

0.4 At present only 225 mm size Nelson scissors is specified in this 
standard. However other sizes will also be gradually included after 
collection of further data. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers dimensional and other requirements for Nelson 
pattern, blunt end scissors used in cardio-vascular surgery. 

2. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

2.1 The clamp shall be made to shape and dimensions as shown in 
Fig. 1. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



1-75 



EH 



ENLARGED 
SECTION XX 




ENLARGED 
SECTION YY 




ENLARGED 
SECTION ZZ 



$ 
til 



8 




1-5 



50 



r"*" i- 



225 



f- 50 — ■■ — •» 



FINGER LOOP, No, 2 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Scissors Blunt End Nelson Pattern 



IS : 9951 - 1981 

2.2 A deviation of ± 2"5 percent shall be allowed on all dimensions. 
However, the two halves of the instrument shall not differ at any 
specified dimension and shall match with each other perfectly. 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The scissors shall be manufactured from stainless steel conforming 
to Designation 30Cr 13 of IS : 6603-1972*. 

4. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

4.1 The scissors shall be free from pits, burrs, cracks, scales and other 
surface defects. 

4.2 All edges shall be rounded and tips shall be blunt; the cutting 
edges shall be sharp and uniform. The cutting edges shall not have 
nicks, jags and waviness when examined under a magnification of X 10. 

4.3 The scissors shall be finished smooth, polished bright and passivated. 

4.4 The scissors shall be symmetrical. 

4.5 The cutting edges shall coincide along their lengths and tips when 
the scissors are fully closed. 

4.6 The blades of the scissors shall open and close without stiffness and 
shall have a slight crossover action to give a continuous pinch. 

4.7 The screw joint shall be in accordance with the relevant requirements 
of* of IS : 3642-1978t 

4.8 The finger loops shall conform to the relevant requirements of 12 of 
IS : 3642-1978f. 

5. HEAT TREATMENT 

5.1 The scissors shall be evenly hardened and tempered to give a 
hardness of 450 to 500 HV. 

6. TESTS 

6.1 Performance Test — The scissors shall be used to cut 05 mm thick 
chamois leather 100 times. The scissors shall cut the leather accurately 
and cleanly and shall not show any sign of damage after the test. 



•Specification for stainless steel bars and flats. 

fGeneral requirements for surgical instruments (first revision ). 



IS : 9951 - 1981 

6.2 Corrosion Resistance Test — The scissors shall be tested in accord- 
ance with IS : 7531-1975*. The scissors shall show no sign of corrosion 
after the test. 

7. MARKING 

7.1 The scissors shall be clearly and indelibly marked with the following: 

a) Manufacturer's name initials or recognized trademark; 

b) Size; and 

c) The words 'Stainless Steel'. 

7.2 The scissors may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a 
licence for the use of ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

8. PACKING 

8.1 The scissors shall be wrapped in moisture-proof paper or packed in 
polyethylene bags, and then packed in individual cartons; or shall be 
packed as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



♦Method for boiling and autoclaviag test for corrosion resistance of stainless steel 
surgical instruments. 



